1. Biochemistry. 2001 Nov 20;40(46):13753-9. doi: 10.1021/bi011449n.

Visual detection of specific, native interactions between soluble and 
microbead-tethered alpha-helices from membrane proteins.

Ashish(1), Wimley WC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, SL43, Tulane University Health Sciences Center, 
New Orleans, Louisiana 70112-2699, USA.

Using peptides tethered to polymer microbeads, we have developed a technique for 
measuring the interactions between the transmembrane alpha-helices of membrane 
proteins and for screening combinatorial libraries of peptides for members that 
interact with specific helices from membrane proteins. The method was developed 
using the well-characterized homodimerization sequence of the membrane-spanning 
alpha-helix from the erythrocyte membrane protein glycophorin A (GPA). As a 
control, we also tested a variant with a dimer-disrupting alteration of a 
critical glycine residue to leucine. To test for detectable, native interactions 
between detergent-solubilized and microbead-tethered alpha-helices, we incubated 
fluorescent dye-labeled GPA analogues in sodium dodecyl sulfate solution with 
microbeads that contained covalently attached GPA analogues. When the 
dye-labeled peptide in solution and the bead-tethered peptide both contained the 
native glycophorin A sequence, the microbeads readily accumulated the dye 
through lateral peptide-peptide interactions and were visibly fluorescent under 
UV light. When either the peptide in solution or the peptide attached to the 
beads contained the glycine to leucine change, the beads did not accumulate any 
dye. The usefulness of this method for screening tethered peptide libraries was 
tested by incubating dye-labeled, native sequence peptides in detergent solution 
with a few native sequence beads plus an excess of beads containing the variant 
glycine to leucine sequence. When the dye-labeled peptide in solution was 
present at a concentration of > or =2 microM, the few native sequence beads were 
visually distinguishable from the others because of their bright fluorescence. 
Using this model system, we have shown that it is possible to visually detect 
specific, native interactions between alpha-helices from membrane proteins using 
peptides tethered to polymer microbeads. It will thus be possible to use this 
method to measure the specific lateral interactions that drive the folding and 
organization of membrane proteins and to screen combinatorial libraries of 
peptides for members that interact with them.

DOI: 10.1021/bi011449n
PMID: 11705363 [Indexed for MEDLINE]