1. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2004 Jun;13(6):989-96.

Manganese superoxide dismutase polymorphism, plasma antioxidants, cigarette 
smoking, and risk of breast cancer.

Tamimi RM(1), Hankinson SE, Spiegelman D, Colditz GA, Hunter DJ.

Author information:
(1)Department ofEpidemiology, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA. 
rulla.tamimi@channing.harvard.edu

Oxidative stress may be involved in the development of breast cancer. Manganese 
superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) is one of the primary enzymes that directly 
scavenge potential harmful oxidizing species. A valine (Val) to alanine (Ala) 
substitution at amino acid 16, occurring in the mitochondrial targeting sequence 
of the MnSOD gene, has been associated with an increase in breast cancer risk. 
We conducted a nested case-control study within the Nurses' Health Study cohort 
to examine the role of this polymorphism and its interaction with environmental 
factors with breast cancer risk. MnSOD genotype data are available from 968 
incident cases of breast cancer diagnosed after blood collection in 1989 and 
1990, but before June 1, 1998 and 1,205 matched controls. Compared with women 
homozygous for the Val allele, women homozygous for the Ala allele were not at 
an increased risk of breast cancer (multivariate odds ratio, 0.96; 95% 
confidence interval, 0.74-1.24). We did not observe any significant interactions 
between MnSOD genotype with alcohol consumption, postmenopausal hormone use, 
plasma antioxidant levels, or dietary sources of antioxidants. We did observe 
evidence that the MnSOD Ala allele may modify the relation of cigarette smoking 
with breast cancer risk. A nonsignificant increased risk of breast cancer among 
current smokers was limited to women homozygous for the Ala alleles compared 
with Val/Val never smokers (multivariate odds ratio, 1.41; 95% confidence 
interval 0.77-2.60; P for interaction = 0.03). These data suggest that the Ala 
allele of MnSOD may modify breast cancer risk among current smokers, but is not 
an independent risk factor for breast cancer.

PMID: 15184255 [Indexed for MEDLINE]