1. Ophthalmology. 2005 Sep;112(9):1592-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2005.04.004.

Cone-rod dystrophy, intrafamilial variability, and incomplete penetrance 
associated with the R172W mutation in the peripherin/RDS gene.

Michaelides M(1), Holder GE, Bradshaw K, Hunt DM, Moore AT.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London, London, United 
Kingdom.

PURPOSE: To determine the underlying molecular genetic basis of a retinal 
dystrophy identified in a 5-generation family, and to examine the phenotype and 
degree of intrafamilial variability.
DESIGN: Family genetic study.
PARTICIPANTS: Nine affected individuals from a nonconsanguineous British family.
METHODS: Ophthalmologic examination, color vision testing, fundus photography, 
autofluorescence imaging, and electrophysiological assessment were performed. 
The clinical notes of 2 additional deceased affected family members were also 
reviewed. Blood samples were taken for DNA extraction, with linkage analysis 
being performed, and subsequent mutation screening of the peripherin/RDS gene.
RESULTS: Linkage analysis established a disease interval on chromosome 6p, which 
harbored the retinal candidate gene, peripherin/RDS. The 3 coding exons of the 
peripherin/RDS gene were subsequently screened for mutations in affected and 
unaffected family members. A nonconservative missense substitution, Arg172Trp 
(R172W), segregated uniquely in all affected subjects. The majority of subjects 
carrying the R172W peripherin/RDS mutation complained of reduced central vision 
starting in the second or third decade, with subsequent gradual deterioration of 
visual acuity and color vision. Three affected individuals complained of 
nyctalopia. A range of macular appearances were seen, varying from a typical 
granular appearance to extensive macular atrophy. Autofluorescence imaging in 
the majority of individuals identified a highly characteristic speckled macular 
appearance. All affected subjects had abnormal pattern electroretinograms (ERGs) 
consistent with macular dysfunction and 4 subjects showed additional full-field 
ERG abnormalities, providing evidence of generalized retinal dysfunction. There 
was marked variation in the clinical phenotype in those individuals who carried 
the R172W peripherin/RDS mutation, ranging from severe cone-rod dystrophy to 
asymptomatic individuals with normal retinal function.
CONCLUSIONS: The Arg172Trp (R172W) peripherin/RDS mutation has been previously 
reported to cause a fully penetrant progressive macular dystrophy with high 
intrafamilial and interfamilial consistency of phenotype. This is the first 
report describing marked intrafamilial variation associated with this mutation, 
including nonpenetrance. These findings are clinically important in relation to 
advice on prognosis and accurate genetic counseling.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2005.04.004
PMID: 16019073 [Indexed for MEDLINE]