1. BMC Evol Biol. 2008 May 16;8:148. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-8-148.

The Xenopus FcR family demonstrates continually high diversification of paired 
receptors in vertebrate evolution.

Guselnikov SV(1), Ramanayake T, Erilova AY, Mechetina LV, Najakshin AM, Robert 
J, Taranin AV.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Novosibirsk, Russia. sgus@bionet.nsc.ru

BACKGROUND: Recent studies have revealed an unexpected diversity of domain 
architecture among FcR-like receptors that presumably fulfill regulatory 
functions in the immune system. Different species of mammals, as well as chicken 
and catfish have been found to possess strikingly different sets of these 
receptors. To better understand the evolutionary history of paired receptors, we 
extended the study of FcR-like genes in amphibian representatives Xenopus 
tropicalis and Xenopus laevis.
RESULTS: The diploid genome of X. tropicalis contains at least 75 genes encoding 
paired FcR-related receptors designated XFLs. The allotetraploid X. laevis 
displays many similar genes primarily expressed in lymphoid tissues. Up to 35 
domain architectures generated by combinatorial joining of six Ig-domain 
subtypes and two subtypes of the transmembrane regions were found in XFLs. None 
of these variants are shared by FcR-related proteins from other studied species. 
Putative activating XFLs associate with the FcRgamma subunit, and their 
transmembrane domains are highly similar to those of activating mammalian 
KIR-related receptors. This argues in favor of a common origin for the FcR and 
the KIR families. Phylogenetic analysis shows that the entire repertoires of the 
Xenopus and mammalian FcR-related proteins have emerged after the 
amphibian-amniotes split.
CONCLUSION: FcR- and KIR-related receptors evolved through continual 
species-specific diversification, most likely by extensive domain shuffling and 
birth-and-death processes. This mode of evolution raises the possibility that 
the ancestral function of these paired receptors was a direct interaction with 
pathogens and that many physiological functions found in the mammalian receptors 
were secondary acquisitions or specializations.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2148-8-148
PMCID: PMC2413239
PMID: 18485190 [Indexed for MEDLINE]