1. Mol Pharm. 2009 Jan-Feb;6(1):134-43. doi: 10.1021/mp800100e.

Knocking down breast cancer resistance protein (Bcrp) by adenoviral 
vector-mediated RNA interference (RNAi) in sandwich-cultured rat hepatocytes: a 
novel tool to assess the contribution of Bcrp to drug biliary excretion.

Yue W(1), Abe K, Brouwer KL.

Author information:
(1)The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 
27599-7360, USA.

BCRP transports numerous drugs/derived metabolites and toxins, and exhibits 
overlapping substrate specificity with P-glycoprotein (P-gp) and multidrug 
resistance-associated protein 2 (MRP2). Assessing the contribution of BCRP to 
drug/metabolite biliary excretion in intact hepatocytes remains a challenge. 
Current studies were designed to develop a novel in vitro tool to specifically 
assess the contribution of Bcrp to drug biliary excretion. Adenoviral vectors 
expressing short hairpin (sh) RNA targeting Bcrp (Ad-si01Bcrp) or a nontarget 
control (Ad-siNT) were packaged and infected into sandwich-cultured rat 
hepatocytes (SCRH). Protein levels were detected by immunoblot. Biliary 
excretion index (BEI) and in vitro biliary clearance (Cl(biliary)) of 
nitrofurantoin (BCRP substrate) and digoxin (P-gp substrate) were compared among 
noninfected, Ad-siNT- and Ad-si01Bcrp-infected SCRH. shRNA targeting Bcrp 
efficiently knocked down Bcrp in SCRH, while levels of other transport proteins 
(P-gp, Mrp2, Bsep, Mrp4 and Oatp1a1) were unaffected. In SCRH exhibiting Bcrp 
knockdown, cellular accumulation of nitrofurantoin was increased markedly and 
nitrofurantoin BEI and in vitro Cl(biliary) were decreased to 11% and 14% of 
control, respectively. Digoxin values were unaffected by knockdown of Bcrp. 
Results indicated that Bcrp in SCRH contributed predominantly to nitrofurantoin 
biliary excretion, but played a negligible role in digoxin biliary excretion. In 
summary, Bcrp knockdown in SCRH is the first in vitro model utilizing intact 
hepatocytes to assess the contribution of Bcrp to the biliary excretion of 
drugs. This approach may be useful in predicting drug-drug interactions in 
biliary excretion and the consequence of impaired BCRP function on the hepatic 
exposure of drugs/derived metabolites.

DOI: 10.1021/mp800100e
PMCID: PMC3135650
PMID: 19105722 [Indexed for MEDLINE]