1. Mol Biol Evol. 2009 Oct;26(10):2245-59. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msp147. Epub 2009 
Jul 14.

The unique Morgue ubiquitination protein is conserved in a diverse but 
restricted set of invertebrates.

Zhou Y(1), Carpenter ZW, Brennan G, Nambu JR.

Author information:
(1)Biology Department, University of Massachusetts, MA, USA.

Drosophila Morgue is a unique ubiquitination protein that facilitates programmed 
cell death and associates with DIAP1, a critical cell death inhibitor with E3 
ubiquitin ligase activity. Morgue possesses a unique combination of functional 
domains typically associated with distinct types of ubiquitination enzymes. This 
includes an F box characteristic of the substrate-binding subunit in Skp, 
Cullin, and F box (SCF)-type ubiquitin E3 ligase complexes and a variant 
ubiquitin E2 conjugase domain where the active site cysteine is replaced by a 
glycine. Morgue also contains a single C4-type zinc finger motif. This 
architecture suggests potentially novel ubiquitination activities for Morgue. In 
this study, we address the evolutionary origins of this distinctive protein 
utilizing a combination of bioinformatics and molecular biology approaches. We 
find that Morgue exhibits widespread but restricted phylogenetic distribution 
among metazoans. Morgue proteins were identified in a wide range of Protostome 
phyla, including Arthropoda, Annelida, Mollusca, Nematoda, and Platyhelminthes. 
However, with one potential exception, Morgue was not detected in Deuterostomes, 
including Chordates, Hemichordates, or Echinoderms. Morgue was also not found in 
Ctenophora, Cnidaria, Placozoa, or Porifera. Characterization of Morgue 
sequences within specific animal lineages suggests that gene deletion or 
acquisition has occurred during divergence of nematodes and that at least one 
arachnid expresses an atypical form of Morgue consisting only of the variant E2 
conjugase domain. Analysis of the organization of several morgue genes suggests 
that exon-shuffling events have contributed to the evolution of the Morgue 
protein. These results suggest that Morgue mediates conserved and distinctive 
ubiquitination functions in specific cell death pathways.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msp147
PMCID: PMC2766937
PMID: 19602541 [Indexed for MEDLINE]