1. PLoS Pathog. 2010 Jan 15;6(1):e1000730. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000730.

The M/GP(5) glycoprotein complex of porcine reproductive and respiratory 
syndrome virus binds the sialoadhesin receptor in a sialic acid-dependent 
manner.

Van Breedam W(1), Van Gorp H, Zhang JQ, Crocker PR, Delputte PL, Nauwynck HJ.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Virology, Department of Virology, Parasitology and Immunology, 
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Ghent University, Merelbeke, Belgium. 
wander.vanbreedam@UGent.be

The porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV) is a major 
threat to swine health worldwide and is considered the most significant viral 
disease in the swine industry today. In past years, studies on the entry of the 
virus into its host cell have led to the identification of a number of essential 
virus receptors and entry mediators. However, viral counterparts for these 
molecules have remained elusive and this has made rational development of new 
generation vaccines impossible. The main objective of this study was to identify 
the viral counterparts for sialoadhesin, a crucial PRRSV receptor on 
macrophages. For this purpose, a soluble form of sialoadhesin was constructed 
and validated. The soluble sialoadhesin could bind PRRSV in a sialic 
acid-dependent manner and could neutralize PRRSV infection of macrophages, 
thereby confirming the role of sialoadhesin as an essential PRRSV receptor on 
macrophages. Although sialic acids are present on the GP(3), GP(4) and GP(5) 
envelope glycoproteins, only the M/GP(5) glycoprotein complex of PRRSV was 
identified as a ligand for sialoadhesin. The interaction was found to be 
dependent on the sialic acid binding capacity of sialoadhesin and on the 
presence of sialic acids on GP(5). These findings not only contribute to a 
better understanding of PRRSV biology, but the knowledge and tools generated in 
this study also hold the key to the development of a new generation of PRRSV 
vaccines.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000730
PMCID: PMC2799551
PMID: 20084110 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.