1. Hum Reprod. 2010 Jun;25(6):1581-7. doi: 10.1093/humrep/deq073. Epub 2010 Apr
3.

Variants of the BMP15 gene in a cohort of patients with premature ovarian 
failure.

Tiotiu D(1), Alvaro Mercadal B, Imbert R, Verbist J, Demeestere I, De Leener A, 
Englert Y, Vassart G, Costagliola S, Delbaere A.

Author information:
(1)Institut de Recherche Interdisciplinaire en Biologie Humaine et Moléculaire 
(IRIBHM), Faculté de Médecine, Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB), 1070 
Brussels, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: Bone morphogenetic protein 15 (BMP15) is an oocyte-derived growth 
factor acting as a major player in follicle differentiation in mammals. 
Mutations in the BMP15 gene, some of which lead to defective secretion of 
bioactive dimers, have been associated with premature ovarian failure (POF) in 
humans.
METHODS: Fifty patients diagnosed with POF with a normal karyotype were included 
in the study. After DNA extraction and amplification by PCR, the entire coding 
sequence and intron-exon junctions of BMP15 gene were analysed in the cohort of 
POF patients and in a control group of 214 patients.
RESULTS: Nine variants of the BMP15 gene including six missense substitutions 
and one insertion of three nucleotides were identified in the POF group. Three 
of them were previously described as single nucleotide polymorphisms and were 
also found in the control group. Two variants (H81R and G199R) have not been 
previously described and were not identified among controls but were not 
predicted to be deleterious. One variant (A180T) was identified among two POF 
cases, and also in two controls. One variant (F194S), predicted as potentially 
deleterious, was identified for the first time in a POF patient but also 
identified in one control. One variant (L148P), potentially deleterious, 
previously reported in POF patients, was identified for the first time among 
controls. The variant 788insTCT, previously identified among POF patients, 
probably has a low biological impact as it was also found in control patients 
and is a common polymorphism in sub-Saharan African populations.
CONCLUSIONS: Various missense variants of the BMP15 gene were identified among 
patients with POF. For most variants, the impact of the amino-acid substitution 
on the protein structure and function was predicted to be low. The two variants 
predicted as potentially deleterious were also identified among controls and 
could be considered as rare polymorphisms. Although some of these variants could 
contribute to the development of POF in a complex manner, the demonstration of 
their role in the pathogenesis of POF requires additional functional studies.

DOI: 10.1093/humrep/deq073
PMID: 20364024 [Indexed for MEDLINE]