1. Eye Contact Lens. 2010 Sep;36(5):269-81. doi: 10.1097/ICL.0b013e3181ee8971.

Ocular surface inflammation mediated by innate immunity.

Ueta M(1), Kinoshita S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, 
Kamigyoku, Kyoto, Japan. mueta@koto.kpu-m.ac.jp

This review addresses three subjects: the innate immunity of the ocular surface 
epithelium, innate immunity and ocular surface inflammation, and Stevens-Johnson 
syndrome (SJS) and abnormality of innate immunity. In innate immunity of the 
ocular surface epithelium, ocular surface epithelial cells respond selectively 
to microbial components and induce limited inflammation, whereas 
immune-competent cells such as macrophages can recognize various microbial 
components through Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and induce inflammation to exclude 
the microbes. The difference between macrophages and ocular surface epithelial 
cells may be caused by the dissimilarity in the degree of coexistence with 
commensal bacteria. The unique innate immune response of ocular surface 
epithelium might contribute to coexistence with commensal bacteria. In innate 
immunity and ocular surface inflammation, we speculate that an abnormality in 
the proper innate immunity of the ocular surface may result in ocular surface 
inflammation. Our investigation shows that TLR3 positively regulates the 
late-phase reaction of experimental allergic conjunctivitis, which causes 
reduced eosinophilic conjunctival inflammation in TLR3KO (knockout) mice and 
pronounced eosinophilic conjunctival inflammation in TLR3Tg mice. We also 
demonstrate that human ocular surface epithelial cells can be induced to express 
many transcripts, including antiviral innate immune response-related genes and 
allergy-related genes, through polyI:C stimulation. Furthermore, we show that 
IkappaBzeta KO mice exhibit severe, spontaneous ocular surface inflammation 
accompanied by the eventual loss of almost all goblet cells and spontaneous 
perioral inflammation. IkappaBzeta is induced by diverse pathogen-associated 
molecular patterns and regulates nuclear factor-kappaB activity, possibly to 
prevent excessive inflammation in the presence of bacterial components. The 
spontaneous ocular surface inflammation observed in IkappaBzeta KO mice 
suggested that dysfunction/abnormality of innate immunity can play a role in 
ocular surface inflammation. In SJS and abnormality of innate immunity, we 
considered the possibility that there may be an association between SJS and a 
disordered innate immune response. In gene expression analysis of CD14 cells, we 
found that IL4R gene expression was different in patients with SJS/toxic 
epidermal necrolysis (TEN) and controls on lipopolysaccharide stimulation, being 
downregulated in patients with SJS/TEN and slightly upregulated in the controls. 
The expression of IkappaBzeta- and interleukin (IL)-1alpha-specific mRNA in 
patients with SJS/TEN was lower than in normal controls after 1-hour culture. 
Although SJS/TEN can be induced by drugs, not all individuals treated with these 
drugs developed SJS/TEN. Because the incidence of SJS/TEN is very low, we 
suspected a genetic predisposition and performed single-nucleotide polymorphism 
(SNP) association analysis using candidate genes associated with innate 
immunity, apoptosis, or allergy. We found that TLR3 SNP rs.3775296 and IL4R SNP 
rs.1801275 (Gln551Arg) were strongly associated (P<0.0005) with SJS/TEN with 
ocular surface complications, FasL rs.3830150 SNP was mildly associated 
(P<0.005), and IL13 rs.20541 (Arg110Gln) and IkappaBzeta SNP rs.595788G/A 
exhibited a weak association (P<0.05). Genetic and environmental factors may 
play a role in an integrated cause of SJS, and there is the possibility of an 
association between SJS and a disordered innate immunity.

DOI: 10.1097/ICL.0b013e3181ee8971
PMID: 20703156 [Indexed for MEDLINE]