1. Chin Med J (Engl). 2010 Jun;123(11):1397-401.

Identification of compound heterozygous mutations in the ITGA2B gene in a 
Chinese patient with Glanzmann thrombasthenia.

Zheng JY(1), Jin YH, Zhu YL, Jin PP, Zhang DT, Jin ZB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Third People's Hospital of Wenzhou, 
Wenzhou, Zhejiang 325000, China.

BACKGROUND: Glanzmann thrombasthenia (GT) is an autosomal recessive bleeding 
disorder characterized by the tendency to hemorrhage and the inability of 
platelets to aggregate in response to agonists. GT is caused by a defect of the 
platelet glycoprotein IIb/IIIa complex. The objective of this study was to 
describe the clinical features and the genetic cause of GT in a 6-year-old girl 
from south China.
METHODS: A three-generation family was studied. The proband patient aged 6 years 
and her parents undertook examinations of platelet counts, blood film, bleeding 
time, platelet aggregation, and flow cytometry. All coding exons of the ITGA2B 
and ITGB3 genes were amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR), and direct 
sequencing was performed for mutational screening on the patient and normal 
controls consisted of 52 healthy blood donors. Reverse transcription PCR was 
conducted to test for exon skipping.
RESULTS: The proposita patient showed dispersing platelets, prolonged bleeding 
time, and severely reduced platelet aggregation in response to the physiological 
agonists adenosine diphosphate (ADP), epinephrine, collagen, and ristocetin. 
Flow cytometric measurements showed that the contents of alphaIIb and beta3 were 
significantly decreased. Sequencing results demonstrated two different types of 
heterozygous mutations existed in the alphaIIb gene (c.2930delG and 
IVS15-1delG). The compound mutations were also confirmed in the patient's mother 
and father separately.
CONCLUSIONS: The alphaIIbbeta3 deficiency of the proband was caused by two 
compound ITGA2B mutations, which were first reported in Chinese GT patients. The 
IVS15-1delG was first confirmed to cause an exon skipping.

PMID: 20819594 [Indexed for MEDLINE]