1. PLoS One. 2010 Dec 31;5(12):e15772. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015772.

Re-evaluation of the action potential upstroke velocity as a measure of the Na+ 
current in cardiac myocytes at physiological conditions.

Berecki G(1), Wilders R, de Jonge B, van Ginneken AC, Verkerk AO.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy, Embryology, and Physiology, Academic Medical Center, 
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: The SCN5A encoded sodium current (I(Na)) generates the action 
potential (AP) upstroke and is a major determinant of AP characteristics and AP 
propagation in cardiac myocytes. Unfortunately, in cardiac myocytes, 
investigation of kinetic properties of I(Na) with near-physiological ion 
concentrations and temperature is technically challenging due to the large 
amplitude and rapidly activating nature of I(Na), which may seriously hamper the 
quality of voltage control over the membrane. We hypothesized that the 
alternating voltage clamp-current clamp (VC/CC) technique might provide an 
alternative to traditional voltage clamp (VC) technique for the determination of 
I(Na) properties under physiological conditions.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We studied I(Na) under close-to-physiological conditions by 
VC technique in SCN5A cDNA-transfected HEK cells or by alternating VC/CC 
technique in both SCN5A cDNA-transfected HEK cells and rabbit left ventricular 
myocytes. In these experiments, peak I(Na) during a depolarizing VC step or 
maximal upstroke velocity, dV/dt(max), during VC/CC served as an indicator of 
available I(Na). In HEK cells, biophysical properties of I(Na), including 
current density, voltage dependent (in)activation, development of inactivation, 
and recovery from inactivation, were highly similar in VC and VC/CC experiments. 
As an application of the VC/CC technique we studied I(Na) in left ventricular 
myocytes isolated from control or failing rabbit hearts.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate that the alternating VC/CC technique is a 
valuable experimental tool for I(Na) measurements under close-to-physiological 
conditions in cardiac myocytes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015772
PMCID: PMC3013114
PMID: 21217835 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.