1. Bioinform Biol Insights. 2010 Dec 12;4:137-46. doi: 10.4137/BBI.S6247.

Computational Analysis of Molecular Interaction Networks Underlying Change of 
HIV-1 Resistance to Selected Reverse Transcriptase Inhibitors.

Kierczak M(1), Dramiński M, Koronacki J, Komorowski J.

Author information:
(1)The Linnaeus Centre for Bioinformatics, Uppsala University, 751-24 Uppsala, 
Sweden.

MOTIVATION: Despite more than two decades of research, HIV resistance to drugs 
remains a serious obstacle in developing efficient AIDS treatments. Several 
computational methods have been developed to predict resistance level from the 
sequence of viral proteins such as reverse transcriptase (RT) or protease. These 
methods, while powerful and accurate, give very little insight into the 
molecular interactions that underly acquisition of drug 
resistance/hypersusceptibility. Here, we attempt at filling this gap by using 
our Monte Carlo feature selection and interdependency discovery method (MCFS-ID) 
to elucidate molecular interaction networks that characterize viral strains with 
altered drug resistance levels.
RESULTS: We analyzed a number of HIV-1 RT sequences annotated with drug 
resistance level using the MCFS-ID method. This let us expound interdependency 
networks that characterize change of drug resistance to six selected RT 
inhibitors: Abacavir, Lamivudine, Stavudine, Zidovudine, Tenofovir and 
Nevirapine. The networks consider interdependencies at the level of 
physicochemical properties of mutating amino acids, eg,: polarity. We mapped 
each network on the 3D structure of RT in attempt to understand the molecular 
meaning of interacting pairs. The discovered interactions describe several known 
drug resistance mechanisms and, importantly, some previously unidentified ones. 
Our approach can be easily applied to a whole range of problems from the domain 
of protein engineering.
AVAILABILITY: A portable Java implementation of our MCFS-ID method is freely 
available for academic users and can be obtained at: 
http://www.ipipan.eu/staff/m.draminski/software.htm.

DOI: 10.4137/BBI.S6247
PMCID: PMC3020081
PMID: 21234299