1. Toxicology. 2012 Feb 26;292(2-3):123-35. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2011.12.002. Epub 
2011 Dec 9.

Curcumin affects cell survival and cell volume regulation in human renal and 
intestinal cells.

Kössler S(1), Nofziger C, Jakab M, Dossena S, Paulmichl M.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Paracelsus Medical University, 
Salzburg, Austria.

Curcumin (1,7-bis(4-hydroxy-3-methoxyphenyl)-1E,6E-heptadiene-3,5-dione or 
diferuloyl methane) is a polyphenol derived from the Curcuma longa plant, 
commonly known as turmeric. This substance has been used extensively in 
Ayurvedic medicine for centuries for its anti-oxidant, analgesic, 
anti-inflammatory and antiseptic activity. More recently curcumin has been found 
to possess anti-cancer properties linked to its pro-apoptotic and 
anti-proliferative actions. The underlying mechanisms of these diverse effects 
are complex, not fully elucidated and subject of intense scientific debate. 
Despite increasing evidence indicating that different cation channels can be a 
molecular target for curcumin, very little is known about the effect of curcumin 
on chloride channels. Since, (i) the molecular structure of curcumin indicates 
that the substance could potentially interact with chloride channels, (ii) 
chloride channels play a role during the apoptotic process and regulation of the 
cell volume, and (iii) apoptosis is a well known effect of curcumin, we set out 
to investigate whether or not curcumin could (i) exert a modulatory effect 
(direct or indirect) on the swelling activated chloride current ICl(swell) in a 
human cell system, therefore (ii) affect cell volume regulation and (iii) 
ultimately modulate cell survival. The ICl(swell) channels, which are essential 
for regulating the cell volume after swelling, are also known to be activated 
under isotonic conditions as an early event in the apoptotic process. Here we 
show that long-term exposure of a human kidney cell line to extracellular 0.1-10 
μM curcumin modulates ICl(swell) in a dose-dependent manner (0.1 μM curcumin is 
ineffective, 0.5-5.0 μM curcumin increase, while 10 μM curcumin decrease the 
current), and short-term exposure to micromolar concentrations of curcumin does 
not affect ICl(swell) neither if applied from the extracellular nor from the 
intracellular side - therefore, a direct effect of curcumin on ICl(swell) can be 
ruled out. Furthermore, we show that curcumin exposure induces apoptosis in 
human kidney cells, and at a concentration of 5.0-10 μM induces the appearance 
of a sub-population of cells with a dramatically increased volume. In these 
cells the regulation of the cell volume seems to be impaired, most likely as a 
consequence of the ICl(swell) blockade. Similarly, 50 μM curcumin induced 
apoptosis, caused cell cycle arrest in G1-phase and increased the volume of 
human colorectal adenocarcinoma HT-29 cells. The cell cycle arrest in G1 phase 
may be the mechanism underlying the volume increase observed in this cell line 
after exposure to curcumin.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tox.2011.12.002
PMCID: PMC3274693
PMID: 22178266 [Indexed for MEDLINE]