1. Int J Oncol. 2012 Aug;41(2):433-40. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2012.1492. Epub 2012 May 
18.

Endothelial protein C receptor expressed by ovarian cancer cells as a possible 
biomarker of cancer onset.

Ducros E(1), Mirshahi S, Azzazene D, Camilleri-Broët S, Mery E, Al Farsi H, 
Althawadi H, Besbess S, Chidiac J, Pujade-Lauraine E, Therwath A, Soria J, 
Mirshahi M.

Author information:
(1)National Institute for Medical Research, University of Pierre and Marie 
Curie, Paris, France.

Coagulation disorders often accompany cancer onset and evolution, which, if not 
properly managed, could have grave consequences. Endothelial protein C is an 
important regulator of homeostasis and acts through its high affinity binding to 
its transmembrane receptor (EPCR). Soluble (sEPCR) which results from the 
proteolytic cleavage of the membrane bound form can trap activated endothelial 
protein C and deprive it of its anti-coagulant function. In this study, the 
expression of EPCR and its soluble form (sEPCR) released into plasma as a result 
of proteolytic cleavage were investigated in ovarian, breast, lung and 
colorectal cancer biopsies, as well as in ascitic cell clusters and peritoneal 
fluid from ovarian cancer samples. In parallel, breast, ovarian, lung and 
colorectal cancer cell lines were investigated for the expression of EPCR. The 
integrity of the EPCR gene sequence as well gene haplotypes were ascertained in 
the established cancer cell lines in order to understand their eventual 
regulatory functions. The results from the present study indicate that in cancer 
patients, the levels of sEPCR are significantly higher than the normal range 
compared to healthy volunteers. The increase in the levels of sEPCR parallels 
the increase in CA125, showing a close correlation. Therefore, the detection of 
sEPCR in cancer and during the post-treatment period could be taken into account 
as an additional marker that could re-inforce the one obtained using CA125 alone 
as a marker of cancer cell mass.

DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2012.1492
PMCID: PMC3582880
PMID: 22614534 [Indexed for MEDLINE]