1. BMC Genomics. 2012 Jun 1;13:216. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-216.

Insights into the evolution of mammalian telomerase: platypus TERT shares 
similarities with genes of birds and other reptiles and localizes on sex 
chromosomes.

Hrdličková R(1), Nehyba J, Lim SL, Grützner F, Bose HR Jr.

Author information:
(1)Section of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, School of Biological Science, 
University of Texas at Austin, 78712-1095, USA.

BACKGROUND: The TERT gene encodes the catalytic subunit of the telomerase 
complex and is responsible for maintaining telomere length. Vertebrate 
telomerase has been studied in eutherian mammals, fish, and the chicken, but 
less attention has been paid to other vertebrates. The platypus occupies an 
important evolutionary position, providing unique insight into the evolution of 
mammalian genes. We report the cloning of a platypus TERT (OanTERT) ortholog, 
and provide a comparison with genes of other vertebrates.
RESULTS: The OanTERT encodes a protein with a high sequence similarity to 
marsupial TERT and avian TERT. Like the TERT of sauropsids and marsupials, as 
well as that of sharks and echinoderms, OanTERT contains extended variable 
linkers in the N-terminal region suggesting that they were present already in 
basal vertebrates and lost independently in ray-finned fish and eutherian 
mammals. Several alternatively spliced OanTERT variants structurally similar to 
avian TERT variants were identified. Telomerase activity is expressed in all 
platypus tissues like that of cold-blooded animals and murine rodents. OanTERT 
was localized on pseudoautosomal regions of sex chromosomes X3/Y2, expanding the 
homology between human chromosome 5 and platypus sex chromosomes. Synteny 
analysis suggests that TERT co-localized with sex-linked genes in the last 
common mammalian ancestor. Interestingly, female platypuses express higher 
levels of telomerase in heart and liver tissues than do males.
CONCLUSIONS: OanTERT shares many features with TERT of the reptilian outgroup, 
suggesting that OanTERT represents the ancestral mammalian TERT. Features 
specific to TERT of eutherian mammals have, therefore, evolved more recently 
after the divergence of monotremes.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-216
PMCID: PMC3546421
PMID: 22655747 [Indexed for MEDLINE]