1. Endocrinology. 1990 Feb;126(2):728-35. doi: 10.1210/endo-126-2-728.

Interactions of dopaminergic and peptidergic factors in the control of prolactin 
release.

Mogg RJ(1), Samson WK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, University of Missouri, School of 
Medicine, Columbia 65212.

Oxytocin (OT) has been shown to play a role in the control of physiological PRL 
release and has been demonstrated to have a direct effect on the pituitary to 
stimulate PRL secretion. Administration of OT into the third ventricle, however, 
lowers PRL levels. This reduction could be mediated by either an inhibition of 
the release of endogenous OT into the hypohysial portal circulation or via an 
alteration in the release of some other PRL releasing (PRF) or PRL 
release-inhibiting (PIF) factor. In order to determine if centrally administered 
OT lowers PRL levels by increasing secretion of dopamine (DA) into the portal 
circulation, endogenous dopaminergic tone was blocked by injection of the DA 
antagonist domperidone (DOM). Subcutaneous administration of DOM resulted in 
elevated PRL levels which could be further augmented by iv infusion of OT (at 
0.01 or 0.1 microgram OT/kg.min) or partially, but significantly, reduced by 
pretreatment with anti-OT antiserum (0.75 ml) indicating that under conditions 
of DA blockade, OT (which has little PRF activity during conditions of normal 
dopaminergic tone) can stimulate PRL secretion by a direct pituitary action. 
Treatment with DOM did not prevent, however, the reduction in PRL levels 
produced by central administration of OT (2 micrograms). This suggests that the 
effect of OT to alter PRL secretion when administered into the third ventricle 
was not mediated via an increase in DA release into the portal circulation. 
Furthermore, central administration of the OT antagonist CAV-259 
(1-deamino-2-D-Trp-4-Val-8-Orn-OT) after DOM treatment resulted in a significant 
increase in PRL secretion indicating that endogenous levels of OT within the 
hypothalamus inhibit PRL secretion through a nondopaminergic mechanism. This 
stimulatory effect of the OT antagonist was not blocked by pretreatment with 
anti-OT antiserum (iv) which had been demonstrated previously to reduce the PRL 
surges in lactating mothers and steroid-primed ovariectomized rats, as well as 
to block the increase in PRL secretion seen after central administration of 
vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP). Thus the central effect of OT to alter PRL 
secretion was probably not due to a change in the release of OT into the portal 
circulation. Intravenous administration of a VIP antagonist 
(D-4-Cl-6-Phe-17-Leu-VIP, previously demonstrated to be capable of reducing the 
PRL surge seen in lactating mothers) into DOM-treated rats does not alter PRL 
levels but blocks the ability of central administration of the OT antagonist 
CAV-259 to increase PRL levels under these conditions.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 
WORDS)

DOI: 10.1210/endo-126-2-728
PMID: 2298169 [Indexed for MEDLINE]