1. Arthritis Res Ther. 2012 Nov 13;14(6):R247. doi: 10.1186/ar4090.

Murine Borrelia arthritis is highly dependent on ASC and caspase-1, but 
independent of NLRP3.

Oosting M, Buffen K, Malireddi SR, Sturm P, Verschueren I, Koenders MI, van de 
Veerdonk FL, van der Meer JW, Netea MG, Kanneganti TD, Joosten LA.

INTRODUCTION: The protein platform called the NOD-like-receptor -family member 
(NLRP)-3 inflammasome needs to be activated to process intracellular caspase-1. 
Active caspase-1 is able to cleave pro-Interleukin (IL)-1β, resulting in 
bioactive IL-1β. IL-1β is a potent proinflammatory cytokine, and thought to play 
a key role in the pathogenesis of Lyme arthritis, a common manifestation of 
Borrelia burgdorferi infection. The precise pathways through which B. 
burgdorferi recognition leads to inflammasome activation and processing of IL-1β 
in Lyme arthritis has not been elucidated. In the present study, we investigated 
the contribution of several pattern recognition receptors and inflammasome 
components in a novel murine model of Lyme arthritis.
METHODS: Lyme arthritis was elicited by live B. burgdorferi, injected 
intra-articularly in knee joints of mice. To identify the relevant pathway 
components, the model was applied to wild-type, NLRP3-/-, ASC-/-, caspase-1-/-, 
NOD1-/-, NOD2-/-, and RICK-/- mice. As a control, TLR2-/-, Myd88-/- and IL-1R-/- 
mice were used. Peritoneal macrophages and bone marrow-derived macrophages were 
used for in vitro cytokine production and inflammasome activation studies. Joint 
inflammation was analyzed in synovial specimens and whole knee joints. 
Mann-Whitney U tests were used to detect statistical differences.
RESULTS: We demonstrate that ASC/caspase-1-driven IL-1β is crucial for induction 
of B. burgdorferi-induced murine Lyme arthritis. In addition, we show that B. 
burgdorferi-induced murine Lyme arthritis is less dependent on NOD1/NOD2/RICK 
pathways while the TLR2-MyD88 pathway is crucial.
CONCLUSIONS: Murine Lyme arthritis is strongly dependent on IL-1 production, and 
B. burgdorferi induces inflammasome-mediated caspase-1 activation. Next to that, 
murine Lyme arthritis is ASC- and caspase-1-dependent, but NLRP3, NOD1, NOD2, 
and RICK independent. Also, caspase-1 activation by B. burgdorferi is dependent 
on TLR2 and MyD88. Based on present results indicating that IL-1 is one of the 
major mediators in Lyme arthritis, there is a rationale to propose that 
neutralizing IL-1 activity may also have beneficial effects in chronic Lyme 
arthritis.

DOI: 10.1186/ar4090
PMCID: PMC3674595
PMID: 23148704 [Indexed for MEDLINE]