1. JAMA Neurol. 2013 Jun;70(6):703-10. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2013.1443.

Understanding neurological disease mechanisms in the era of epigenetics.

Qureshi IA(1), Mehler MF.

Author information:
(1)Roslyn and Leslie Goldstein Laboratory for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative 
Medicine, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, New York 10461, 
USA.

The burgeoning field of epigenetics is making a significant impact on our 
understanding of brain evolution, development, and function. In fact, it is now 
clear that epigenetic mechanisms promote seminal neurobiological processes, 
ranging from neural stem cell maintenance and differentiation to learning and 
memory. At the molecular level, epigenetic mechanisms regulate the structure and 
activity of the genome in response to intracellular and environmental cues, 
including the deployment of cell type-specific gene networks and those 
underlying synaptic plasticity. Pharmacological and genetic manipulation of 
epigenetic factors can, in turn, induce remarkable changes in neural cell 
identity and cognitive and behavioral phenotypes. Not surprisingly, it is also 
becoming apparent that epigenetics is intimately involved in neurological 
disease pathogenesis. Herein, we highlight emerging paradigms for linking 
epigenetic machinery and processes with neurological disease states, including 
how (1) mutations in genes encoding epigenetic factors cause disease, (2) 
genetic variation in genes encoding epigenetic factors modify disease risk, (3) 
abnormalities in epigenetic factor expression, localization, or function are 
involved in disease pathophysiology, (4) epigenetic mechanisms regulate 
disease-associated genomic loci, gene products, and cellular pathways, and (5) 
differential epigenetic profiles are present in patient-derived central and 
peripheral tissues.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2013.1443
PMCID: PMC4465100
PMID: 23571666 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: None reported.