1. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 5;8(8):e71191. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071191. Print
2013.

Prioritizing disease candidate proteins in cardiomyopathy-specific 
protein-protein interaction networks based on "guilt by association" analysis.

Li W(1), Chen L, He W, Li W, Qu X, Liang B, Gao Q, Feng C, Jia X, Lv Y, Zhang S, 
Li X.

Author information:
(1)College of Bioinformatics Science and Technology, Harbin Medical University, 
Harbin, Heilongjiang Province, China.

The cardiomyopathies are a group of heart muscle diseases which can be inherited 
(familial). Identifying potential disease-related proteins is important to 
understand mechanisms of cardiomyopathies. Experimental identification of 
cardiomyophthies is costly and labour-intensive. In contrast, bioinformatics 
approach has a competitive advantage over experimental method. Based on "guilt 
by association" analysis, we prioritized candidate proteins involving in human 
cardiomyopathies. We first built weighted human cardiomyopathy-specific 
protein-protein interaction networks for three subtypes of cardiomyopathies 
using the known disease proteins from Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man as 
seeds. We then developed a method in prioritizing disease candidate proteins to 
rank candidate proteins in the network based on "guilt by association" analysis. 
It was found that most candidate proteins with high scores shared 
disease-related pathways with disease seed proteins. These top ranked candidate 
proteins were related with the corresponding disease subtypes, and were 
potential disease-related proteins. Cross-validation and comparison with other 
methods indicated that our approach could be used for the identification of 
potentially novel disease proteins, which may provide insights into 
cardiomyopathy-related mechanisms in a more comprehensive and integrated way.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071191
PMCID: PMC3733802
PMID: 23940716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.