1. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2014 Jan;23(1):64-72. doi: 
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-13-0327. Epub 2013 Nov 1.

Evaluation of metabolite biomarkers for hepatocellular carcinoma through 
stratified analysis by gender, race, and alcoholic cirrhosis.

Xiao J(1), Zhao Y, Varghese RS, Zhou B, Di Poto C, Zhang L, Tadesse MG, Ziada 
DH, Shetty K, Ressom HW.

Author information:
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Department of Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer 
Center and Georgetown University Medical Center; Department of Mathematics and 
Statistics, Georgetown University; MedStar Georgetown University Hospital and 
Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, District of Columbia; and 
Department of Tropical Medicine and Infectious Diseases, Tanta Faculty of 
Medicine, Tanta University, Tanta, Egypt.

BACKGROUND: The effects of hepatocellular carcinoma on liver metabolism and 
circulating metabolites have been subjected to continuing investigation. This 
study compares the levels of selected metabolites in sera of hepatocellular 
carcinoma cases versus patients with liver cirrhosis and evaluates the influence 
of gender, race, and alcoholic cirrhosis on the performance of the metabolites 
as candidate biomarkers for hepatocellular carcinoma.
METHODS: Targeted quantitation of 15 metabolites is performed by selected 
research monitoring in sera from 89 Egyptian subjects (40 hepatocellular 
carcinoma cases and 49 cirrhotic controls) and 110 U.S. subjects (56 
hepatocellular carcinoma cases and 54 cirrhotic controls). Logistic regression 
models are used to evaluate the ability of these metabolites in distinguishing 
hepatocellular carcinoma cases from cirrhotic controls. The influences of 
gender, race, and alcoholic cirrhosis on the performance of the metabolites are 
analyzed by stratified logistic regression.
RESULTS: Two metabolites are selected on the basis of their significance to both 
cohorts. Although both metabolites discriminate hepatocellular carcinoma cases 
from cirrhotic controls in males and Caucasians, they are insignificant in 
females and African Americans. One metabolite is significant in patients with 
alcoholic cirrhosis and the other in nonalcoholic cirrhosis.
CONCLUSIONS: The study demonstrates the potential of two metabolites as 
candidate biomarkers for hepatocellular carcinoma by combining them with 
α-fetoprotein (AFP) and gender. Stratified statistical analyses reveal that 
gender, race, and alcoholic cirrhosis affect the relative levels of small 
molecules in serum.
IMPACT: The findings of this study contribute to a better understanding of the 
influence of gender, race, and alcoholic cirrhosis in investigating small 
molecules as biomarkers for hepatocellular carcinoma.

DOI: 10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-13-0327
PMCID: PMC3947117
PMID: 24186894 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing financial interests: The authors 
declare no competing financial interests.