1. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 27;8(11):e80423. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080423. 
eCollection 2013.

A novel pulse-chase SILAC strategy measures changes in protein decay and 
synthesis rates induced by perturbation of proteostasis with an Hsp90 inhibitor.

Fierro-Monti I(1), Racle J, Hernandez C, Waridel P, Hatzimanikatis V, Quadroni 
M.

Author information:
(1)Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, 
Switzerland.

Standard proteomics methods allow the relative quantitation of levels of 
thousands of proteins in two or more samples. While such methods are invaluable 
for defining the variations in protein concentrations which follow the 
perturbation of a biological system, they do not offer information on the 
mechanisms underlying such changes. Expanding on previous work [1], we developed 
a pulse-chase (pc) variant of SILAC (stable isotope labeling by amino acids in 
cell culture). pcSILAC can quantitate in one experiment and for two conditions 
the relative levels of proteins newly synthesized in a given time as well as the 
relative levels of remaining preexisting proteins. We validated the method 
studying the drug-mediated inhibition of the Hsp90 molecular chaperone, which is 
known to lead to increased synthesis of stress response proteins as well as the 
increased decay of Hsp90 "clients". We showed that pcSILAC can give information 
on changes in global cellular proteostasis induced by treatment with the 
inhibitor, which are normally not captured by standard relative quantitation 
techniques. Furthermore, we have developed a mathematical model and 
computational framework that uses pcSILAC data to determine degradation 
constants kd and synthesis rates Vs for proteins in both control and 
drug-treated cells. The results show that Hsp90 inhibition induced a generalized 
slowdown of protein synthesis and an increase in protein decay. Treatment with 
the inhibitor also resulted in widespread protein-specific changes in relative 
synthesis rates, together with variations in protein decay rates. The latter 
were more restricted to individual proteins or protein families than the 
variations in synthesis. Our results establish pcSILAC as a viable workflow for 
the mechanistic dissection of changes in the proteome which follow 
perturbations. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000538.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080423
PMCID: PMC3842330
PMID: 24312217 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.