1. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 20;8(12):e82265. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0082265. 
eCollection 2013.

Yet more "weeds" in the garden: fungal novelties from nests of leaf-cutting 
ants.

Augustin JO(1), Groenewald JZ(2), Nascimento RJ(3), Mizubuti ES(3), Barreto 
RW(3), Elliot SL(1), Evans HC(4).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Entomologia, Universidade Federal de Viçosa, Viçosa, Minas 
Gerais, Brazil.
(2)Centraalbureau voor Schimmelcultures-Fungal Biodiversity Centre, Utrecht, The 
Netherlands.
(3)Departamento de Fitopatologia, Universidade Federal de Viçosa, Viçosa, Minas 
Gerais, Brazil.
(4)Departamento de Entomologia, Universidade Federal de Viçosa, Viçosa, Minas 
Gerais, Brazil ; Departamento de Fitopatologia, Universidade Federal de Viçosa, 
Viçosa, Minas Gerais, Brazil ; Centre for Agriculture and Biosciences 
International, Egham, Surrey, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Symbiotic relationships modulate the evolution of living organisms 
in all levels of biological organization. A notable example of symbiosis is that 
of attine ants (Attini; Formicidae: Hymenoptera) and their fungal cultivars 
(Lepiotaceae and Pterulaceae; Agaricales: Basidiomycota). In recent years, this 
mutualism has emerged as a model system for studying coevolution, speciation, 
and multitrophic interactions. Ubiquitous in this ant-fungal symbiosis is the 
"weedy" fungus Escovopsis (Hypocreales: Ascomycota), known only as a 
mycoparasite of attine fungal gardens. Despite interest in its biology, ecology 
and molecular phylogeny--noting, especially, the high genetic diversity 
encountered--which has led to a steady flow of publications over the past 
decade, only two species of Escovopsis have formally been described.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We sampled from fungal gardens and garden waste (middens) 
of nests of the leaf-cutting ant genus Acromyrmex in a remnant of subtropical 
Atlantic rainforest in Minas Gerais, Brazil. In culture, distinct morphotypes of 
Escovopsis sensu lato were recognized. Using both morphological and molecular 
analyses, three new species of Escovopsis were identified. These are described 
and illustrated herein--E. lentecrescens, E. microspora, and E. 
moelleri--together with a re-description of the genus and the type species, E. 
weberi. The new genus Escovopsioides is erected for a fourth morphotype. We 
identify, for the first time, a mechanism for horizontal transmission via 
middens.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study makes a start at assigning names and formal 
descriptions to these specific fungal parasites of attine nests. Based on the 
results of this exploratory and geographically-restricted survey, we expect 
there to be many more species of the genus Escovopsis and its relatives 
associated with nests of both the lower and higher Attini throughout their 
neotropical range, as suggested in previous studies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0082265
PMCID: PMC3869688
PMID: 24376525 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.