1. Front Pharmacol. 2013 Dec 18;4:156. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2013.00156.

Pathobiology of cancer chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy (CIPN).

Han Y(1), Smith MT(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Integrated Preclinical Drug Development, The University of 
Queensland Brisbane, QLD, Australia ; School of Pharmacy, The University of 
Queensland Brisbane, QLD, Australia.

Chemotherapy induced peripheral neuropathy (CIPN) is a type of neuropathic pain 
that is a major dose-limiting side-effect of potentially curative cancer 
chemotherapy treatment regimens that develops in a "stocking and glove" 
distribution. When pain is severe, a change to less effective chemotherapy 
agents may be required, or patients may choose to discontinue treatment. 
Medications used to alleviate CIPN often lack efficacy and/or have unacceptable 
side-effects. Hence the unmet medical need for novel analgesics for relief of 
this painful condition has driven establishment of rodent models of CIPN. New 
insights on the pathobiology of CIPN gained using these models are discussed in 
this review. These include mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress that 
are implicated as key mechanisms in the development of CIPN. Associated 
structural changes in peripheral nerves include neuronopathy, axonopathy and/or 
myelinopathy, especially intra-epidermal nerve fiber (IENF) degeneration. In 
patients with CIPN, loss of heat sensitivity is a hallmark symptom due to 
preferential damage to myelinated primary afferent sensory nerve fibers in the 
presence or absence of demyelination. The pathobiology of CIPN is complex as 
cancer chemotherapy treatment regimens frequently involve drug combinations. 
Adding to this complexity, there are also subtle differences in the 
pathobiological consequences of commonly used cancer chemotherapy drugs, viz 
platinum compounds, taxanes, vincristine, bortezomib, thalidomide and 
ixabepilone, on peripheral nerves.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2013.00156
PMCID: PMC3866393
PMID: 24385965