1. Neurology. 2014 Mar 18;82(11):963-8. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000000219. Epub 
2014 Feb 19.

Peroxisomal D-bifunctional protein deficiency: three adults diagnosed by 
whole-exome sequencing.

Lines MA(1), Jobling R, Brady L, Marshall CR, Scherer SW, Rodriguez AR, Lee L, 
Lang AE, Mestre TA, Wanders RJ, Ferdinandusse S, Tarnopolsky MA; Canadian 
Pediatric Genetic Disorders Sequencing Consortium (FORGE Canada).

Author information:
(1)From Metabolics and Newborn Screening (M.A.L.), University of Ottawa, 
Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario; Clinical and Metabolic Genetics (R.J.), 
and The Centre for Applied Genomics and Program in Genetics and Genome Biology 
(C.R.M., S.W.S.), The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto; Neuromuscular and 
Neuorometabolic Disorders (L.B., M.A.T.), and Department of Ophthalmology 
(A.R.R.), McMaster University, Hamilton; Department of Molecular Genetics, 
McLaughlin Centre (C.R.M., S.W.S.), and Division of Neurology, Sunnybrook Health 
Sciences Centre (L.L.), University of Toronto; Morton and Gloria Shulman 
Movement Disorders Centre and the Edmond J. Safra Program in Parkinson's Disease 
(A.E.L., T.A.M.), Toronto Western Hospital, Canada; and Laboratory Genetic 
Metabolic Diseases (R.J.A.W., S.F.), Academic Medical Center, University of 
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the causative genetic lesion in 3 adult siblings with a 
slowly progressive, juvenile-onset phenotype comprising cerebellar atrophy and 
ataxia, intellectual decline, hearing loss, hypogonadism, hyperreflexia, a 
demyelinating sensorimotor neuropathy, and (in 2 of 3 probands) supratentorial 
white matter changes, in whom numerous prior investigations were nondiagnostic.
METHODS: The patients' initial clinical assessment included history and physical 
examination, cranial MRI, and nerve conduction studies. We performed whole-exome 
sequencing of all 3 probands, followed by variant annotation and selection of 
rare, shared, recessive coding changes to identify the gene responsible. We next 
performed a panel of peroxisomal investigations in blood and cultured 
fibroblasts, including assessment of D-bifunctional protein (DBP) stability and 
activity by immunoblot and enzymologic methods, respectively.
RESULTS: Exome sequencing identified compound heterozygous mutations in HSD17B4, 
encoding peroxisomal DBP, in all 3 probands. Both identified mutations alter a 
conserved residue within the active site of DBP's enoyl-CoA hydratase domain. 
Routine peroxisomal screening tests, including very long-chain fatty acids and 
phytanic acid, were normal. DBP enzymatic activity was markedly reduced.
CONCLUSION: Exome sequencing provides a powerful and elegant tool in the 
specific diagnosis of "mild" or "atypical" neurometabolic disorders. Given the 
broad differential diagnosis and the absence of detectable biochemical 
abnormalities in blood, molecular testing of HSD17B4 should be considered as a 
first-line investigation in patients with compatible features.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000000219
PMCID: PMC3963001
PMID: 24553428 [Indexed for MEDLINE]