1. J Cell Biochem. 2014 Oct;115(10):1779-86. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24844.

Altered signaling in the G1 phase deregulates chondrocyte growth in a mouse 
model with proteoglycan undersulfation.

De Leonardis F(1), Monti L, Gualeni B, Tenni R, Forlino A, Rossi A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Unit of Biochemistry, University of Pavia, 
Pavia, Italy.

In several skeletal dysplasias defects in extracellular matrix molecules affect 
not only the structural and mechanical properties of cartilage, but also the 
complex network of signaling pathways involved in cell proliferation and 
differentiation. Sulfated proteoglycans, besides playing an important structural 
role in cartilage, are crucial in modulating the transport, diffusion, and 
interactions of growth factors with their specific targets, taking part in the 
regulation of signaling pathways involved in skeletal development and growth. In 
this work, we investigated by real time PCR and Western blots of the 
microdissected growth plate and by immunohistochemistry the molecular basis of 
reduced chondrocyte proliferation in the growth plate of the dtd mouse, a 
chondrodysplastic model with defective chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan 
sulfation of articular and growth plate cartilage. We detected activation of the 
Wnt pathway, leading to an increase in the non-phosphorylated form of nuclear 
β-catenin and subsequent up-regulation of cyclin D1 expression in the G1 phase 
of the cell cycle. β-Catenin was further stabilized by up-regulation of Smad3 
expression through TGF-β pathway synergistic activation. We demonstrate that 
notwithstanding cyclin D1 expression increase, cell cycle progression is 
compromised in the G1 phase due to reduced phosphorylation of the pocket protein 
p130 leading to inhibition of transcription factors of the E2F family which are 
crucial for cell cycle progression and DNA replication. These data, together 
with altered Indian hedgehox signaling detected previously, explain at the 
molecular level the reduced chondrocyte proliferation rate of the dtd growth 
plate leading to reduced skeletal growth.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcb.24844
PMCID: PMC4262066
PMID: 24820054 [Indexed for MEDLINE]