1. Metabolites. 2014 Aug 7;4(3):640-54. doi: 10.3390/metabo4030640.

The Succinated Proteome of FH-Mutant Tumours.

Yang M(1), Ternette N(2), Su H(3), Dabiri R(4), Kessler BM(5), Adam J(6), Teh 
BT(7), Pollard PJ(8).

Author information:
(1)Cancer Biology and Metabolism Group, Institute of Genetics and Molecular 
Medicine, Edinburgh Cancer Research UK Centre, University of Edinburgh, Western 
General Hospital, Crewe Road South, Edinburgh EH4 2XR, UK. 
ming.yang@igmm.ed.ac.uk.
(2)Central Proteomics Facility, Target Discovery Institute, University of 
Oxford, Oxford OX3 7FZ, UK. nicola.ternette@ndm.ox.ac.uk.
(3)Cancer Biology and Metabolism Group, Institute of Genetics and Molecular 
Medicine, Edinburgh Cancer Research UK Centre, University of Edinburgh, Western 
General Hospital, Crewe Road South, Edinburgh EH4 2XR, UK. 
huizhong.su@igmm.ed.ac.uk.
(4)Cancer Biology and Metabolism Group, Institute of Genetics and Molecular 
Medicine, Edinburgh Cancer Research UK Centre, University of Edinburgh, Western 
General Hospital, Crewe Road South, Edinburgh EH4 2XR, UK. rd292@exeter.ac.uk.
(5)Central Proteomics Facility, Target Discovery Institute, University of 
Oxford, Oxford OX3 7FZ, UK. benedikt.kessler@ndm.ox.ac.uk.
(6)Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology & Metabolism, University of Oxford, 
Oxford OX3 7LJ, UK. julie.adam@ocdem.ox.ac.uk.
(7)Cancer Science Institute of Singapore, National University of Singapore, 
Centre for Translational Medicine, #12-01,117599, Singapore. 
teh.bin.tean@singhealth.com.sg.
(8)Cancer Biology and Metabolism Group, Institute of Genetics and Molecular 
Medicine, Edinburgh Cancer Research UK Centre, University of Edinburgh, Western 
General Hospital, Crewe Road South, Edinburgh EH4 2XR, UK. 
patrick.pollard@igmm.ed.ac.uk.

Inherited mutations in the Krebs cycle enzyme fumarate hydratase (FH) predispose 
to hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell cancer (HLRCC). Loss of FH activity 
in HLRCC tumours causes accumulation of the Krebs cycle intermediate fumarate to 
high levels, which may act as an oncometabolite through various, but not 
necessarily mutually exclusive, mechanisms. One such mechanism, succination, is 
an irreversible non-enzymatic modification of cysteine residues by fumarate, to 
form S-(2-succino)cysteine (2SC). Previous studies have demonstrated that 
succination of proteins including glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase 
(GAPDH), kelch-like ECH-associated protein 1 (KEAP1) and mitochondrial aconitase 
(ACO2) can have profound effects on cellular metabolism. Furthermore, 
immunostaining for 2SC is a sensitive and specific biomarker for HLRCC tumours. 
Here, we performed a proteomic screen on an FH-mutant tumour and two 
HLRCC-derived cancer cell lines and identified 60 proteins where one or more 
cysteine residues were succinated; 10 of which were succinated at cysteine 
residues either predicted, or experimentally proven, to be functionally 
significant. Bioinformatic enrichment analyses identified most succinated 
targets to be involved in redox signaling. To our knowledge, this is the first 
proteomic-based succination screen performed in human tumours and cancer-derived 
cells and has identified novel 2SC targets that may be relevant to the 
pathogenesis of HLRCC.

DOI: 10.3390/metabo4030640
PMCID: PMC4192685
PMID: 25105836