1. Drug Des Devel Ther. 2014 Dec 3;8:2409-21. doi: 10.2147/DDDT.S59722.
eCollection  2014.

Functional characterization of a competitive peptide antagonist of p65 in human 
macrophage-like cells suggests therapeutic potential for chronic inflammation.

Srinivasan M(1), Blackburn C(1), Lahiri DK(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral Pathology, Medicine and Radiology, Indiana University 
School of Dentistry, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(2)Institute of Psychiatry Research, Department of Psychiatry, Indiana 
University-Purdue University, Indianapolis, IN, USA ; Department of Medical and 
Molecular Genetics, School of Medicine, Indiana University-Purdue University, 
Indianapolis, IN, USA.

Glucocorticoid-induced leucine zipper (GILZ) is a glucocorticoid responsive 
protein that links the nuclear factor-kappa B (NFκB) and the glucocorticoid 
signaling pathways. Functional and binding studies suggest that the proline-rich 
region at the carboxy terminus of GILZ binds the p65 subunit of NFκB and 
suppresses the immunoinflammatory response. A widely-used strategy in the 
discovery of peptide drugs involves exploitation of the complementary surfaces 
of naturally occurring binding partners. Previously, we observed that a 
synthetic peptide (GILZ-P) derived from the proline-rich region of GILZ bound 
activated p65 and ameliorated experimental encephalomyelitis. Here we 
characterize the secondary structure of GILZ-P by circular dichroic analysis. 
GILZ-P adopts an extended polyproline type II helical conformation consistent 
with the structural conformation commonly observed in interfaces of transient 
intermolecular interactions. To determine the potential application of GILZ-P in 
humans, we evaluated the toxicity and efficacy of the peptide drug in mature 
human macrophage-like THP-1 cells. Treatment with GILZ-P at a wide range of 
concentrations commonly used for peptide drugs was nontoxic as determined by 
cell viability and apoptosis assays. Functionally, GILZ-P suppressed 
proliferation and glutamate secretion by activated macrophages by inhibiting 
nuclear translocation of p65. Collectively, our data suggest that the GILZ-P has 
therapeutic potential in chronic CNS diseases where persistent inflammation 
leads to neurodegeneration such as multiple sclerosis and Alzheimer's disease.

DOI: 10.2147/DDDT.S59722
PMCID: PMC4262379
PMID: 25584020 [Indexed for MEDLINE]