1. Br J Cancer. 2015 Mar 31;112(7):1206-14. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2015.86.

Acquired resistance to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors alters the metabolism of 
human head and neck squamous carcinoma cells and xenograft tumours.

Beloueche-Babari M(1), Box C(2), Arunan V(1), Parkes HG(1), Valenti M(2), De 
Haven Brandon A(2), Jackson LE(1), Eccles SA(2), Leach MO(1).

Author information:
(1)Cancer Research UK Cancer Imaging Centre, Division of Radiotherapy and 
Imaging, The Institute of Cancer Research, London and The Royal Marsden NHS 
Foundation Trust, Sutton, Surrey SM2 5PT, UK.
(2)Division of Cancer Therapeutics, The Institute of Cancer Research, London SM2 
5NG, UK.

BACKGROUND: Acquired resistance to molecularly targeted therapeutics is a key 
challenge in personalised cancer medicine, highlighting the need for identifying 
the underlying mechanisms and early biomarkers of relapse, in order to guide 
subsequent patient management.
METHODS: Here we use human head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) models 
and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy to assess the metabolic 
changes that follow acquired resistance to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors 
(TKIs), and which could serve as potential metabolic biomarkers of drug 
resistance.
RESULTS: Comparison of NMR metabolite profiles obtained from control (CAL(S)) 
and EGFR TKI-resistant (CAL(R)) cells grown as 2D monolayers, 3D spheroids or 
xenograft tumours in athymic mice revealed a number of differences between the 
sensitive and drug-resistant models. In particular, we observed elevated levels 
of glycerophosphocholine (GPC) in CAL(R) relative to CAL(S) monolayers, 
spheroids and tumours, independent of the growth rate or environment. In 
addition, there was an increase in alanine, aspartate and 
creatine+phosphocreatine in resistant spheroids and xenografts, and increased 
levels of lactate, branched-chain amino acids and a fall in phosphoethanolamine 
only in xenografts. The xenograft lactate build-up was associated with an 
increased expression of the glucose transporter GLUT-1, whereas the rise in GPC 
was attributed to inhibition of GPC phosphodiesterase. Reduced 
glycerophosphocholine (GPC) and phosphocholine were observed in a second HNSCC 
model probably indicative of a different drug resistance mechanism.
CONCLUSIONS: Our studies reveal metabolic signatures associated not only with 
acquired EGFR TKI resistance but also growth pattern, microenvironment and 
contributing mechanisms in HNSCC models. These findings warrant further 
investigation as metabolic biomarkers of disease relapse in the clinic.

DOI: 10.1038/bjc.2015.86
PMCID: PMC4385966
PMID: 25742484 [Indexed for MEDLINE]