1. Anal Chem. 2015 Oct 6;87(19):9829-9837. doi: 10.1021/acs.analchem.5b02217.

Rapid assessment of human amylin aggregation and its inhibition by copper(II) 
ions by laser ablation electrospray ionization mass spectrometry with ion 
mobility separation.

Li H(#)(1), Ha E(#)(1), Donaldson RP(2), Jeremic AM(2), Vertes A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, W. M. Keck Institute for Proteomics Technology and 
Applications, The George Washington University, Washington, D.C. 20052, United 
States.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, The George Washington University, 
Washington, D.C. 20052, United States.
(#)Contributed equally

Native electrospray ionization (ESI) mass spectrometry (MS) is often used to 
monitor noncovalent complex formation between peptides and ligands. The 
relatively low throughput of this technique, however, is not compatible with 
extensive screening. Laser ablation electrospray ionization (LAESI) MS combined 
with ion mobility separation (IMS) can analyze complex formation and provide 
conformation information within a matter of seconds. Islet amyloid polypeptide 
(IAPP) or amylin, a 37-amino acid residue peptide, is produced in pancreatic 
beta-cells through proteolytic cleavage of its prohormone. Both amylin and its 
precursor can aggregate and produce toxic oligomers and fibrils leading to cell 
death in the pancreas that can eventually contribute to the development of type 
2 diabetes mellitus. The inhibitory effect of the copper(II) ion on amylin 
aggregation has been recently discovered, but details of the interaction remain 
unknown. Finding other more physiologically tolerated approaches requires large 
scale screening of potential inhibitors. Here, we demonstrate that LAESI-IMS-MS 
can reveal the binding stoichiometry, copper oxidation state, and the 
dissociation constant of human amylin-copper(II) complex. The conformations of 
hIAPP in the presence of copper(II) ions were also analyzed by IMS, and 
preferential association between the β-hairpin amylin monomer and the metal ion 
was found. The copper(II) ion exhibited strong association with the -HSSNN- 
residues of the amylin. In the absence of copper(II), amylin dimers were 
detected with collision cross sections consistent with monomers of β-hairpin 
conformation. When copper(II) was present in the solution, no dimers were 
detected. Thus, the copper(II) ions disrupt the association pathway to the 
formation of β-sheet rich amylin fibrils. Using LAESI-IMS-MS for the assessment 
of amylin-copper(II) interactions demonstrates the utility of this technique for 
the high-throughput screening of potential inhibitors of amylin oligomerization 
and fibril formation. More generally, this rapid technique opens the door for 
high-throughput screening of potential inhibitors of amyloid protein 
aggregation.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.analchem.5b02217
PMCID: PMC4617747
PMID: 26352401 [Indexed for MEDLINE]