1. Neurobiol Dis. 2015 Oct;82:552-560. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2015.09.002. Epub 2015 
Sep 12.

Dietary DHA supplementation in an APP/PS1 transgenic rat model of AD reduces 
behavioral and Aβ pathology and modulates Aβ oligomerization.

Teng E(1), Taylor K(2), Bilousova T(2), Weiland D(3), Pham T(2), Zuo X(4), Yang 
F(3), Chen PP(3), Glabe CG(5), Takacs A(6), Hoffman DR(7), Frautschy SA(3), Cole 
GM(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA; Veterans Affairs Greater Los Angeles 
Healthcare System, Los Angeles, CA, USA. Electronic address: eteng@ucla.edu.
(2)Department of Neurology, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA; Veterans Affairs Greater Los Angeles 
Healthcare System, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA; Veterans Affairs Greater Los Angeles 
Healthcare System, Los Angeles, CA, USA; Department of Neurobiology and 
Neurology, Beijing Institute of Geriatrics, Xuanwu Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, China.
(5)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, University of California, 
Irvine, CA, USA; Biochemistry Department and Experimental Biochemistry Unit, 
King Fahd Medical Research Center, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi 
Arabia.
(6)Retina Foundation of the Southwest, Dallas, TX, USA.
(7)Retina Foundation of the Southwest, Dallas, TX, USA; Department of 
Ophthalmology, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA.

Increased dietary consumption of docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) is associated with 
decreased risk for Alzheimer's disease (AD). These effects have been postulated 
to arise from DHA's pleiotropic effects on AD pathophysiology, including its 
effects on β-amyloid (Aβ) production, aggregation, and toxicity. While in vitro 
studies suggest that DHA may inhibit and reverse the formation of toxic Aβ 
oligomers, it remains uncertain whether these mechanisms operate in vivo at the 
physiological concentrations of DHA attainable through dietary supplementation. 
We sought to clarify the effects of dietary DHA supplementation on Aβ indices in 
a transgenic APP/PS1 rat model of AD. Animals maintained on a DHA-supplemented 
diet exhibited reductions in hippocampal Aβ plaque density and modest 
improvements on behavioral testing relative to those maintained on a 
DHA-depleted diet. However, DHA supplementation also increased overall soluble 
Aβ oligomer levels in the hippocampus. Further quantification of specific 
conformational populations of Aβ oligomers indicated that DHA supplementation 
increased fibrillar (i.e. putatively less toxic) Aβ oligomers and decreased 
prefibrillar (i.e. putatively more toxic) Aβ oligomers. These results provide in 
vivo evidence suggesting that DHA can modulate Aβ aggregation by stabilizing 
soluble fibrillar Aβ oligomers and thus reduce the formation of both Aβ plaques 
and prefibrillar Aβ oligomers. However, since fibrillar Aβ oligomers still 
retain inherent neurotoxicity, DHA may need to be combined with other 
interventions that can additionally reduce fibrillar Aβ oligomer levels for more 
effective prevention of AD in clinical settings.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2015.09.002
PMCID: PMC4641021
PMID: 26369878 [Indexed for MEDLINE]