1. Bioinformatics. 2016 Mar 1;32(5):713-21. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btv641. 
Epub 2015 Nov 6.

Probabilistic models of genetic variation in structured populations applied to 
global human studies.

Hao W(1), Song M(1), Storey JD(2).

Author information:
(1)Lewis-Sigler Institute for Integrative Genomics and.
(2)Lewis-Sigler Institute for Integrative Genomics and Center for Statistics and 
Machine Learning, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA.

MOTIVATION: Modern population genetics studies typically involve genome-wide 
genotyping of individuals from a diverse network of ancestries. An important 
problem is how to formulate and estimate probabilistic models of observed 
genotypes that account for complex population structure. The most prominent work 
on this problem has focused on estimating a model of admixture proportions of 
ancestral populations for each individual. Here, we instead focus on modeling 
variation of the genotypes without requiring a higher-level admixture 
interpretation.
RESULTS: We formulate two general probabilistic models, and we propose 
computationally efficient algorithms to estimate them. First, we show how 
principal component analysis can be utilized to estimate a general model that 
includes the well-known Pritchard-Stephens-Donnelly admixture model as a special 
case. Noting some drawbacks of this approach, we introduce a new 'logistic 
factor analysis' framework that seeks to directly model the logit transformation 
of probabilities underlying observed genotypes in terms of latent variables that 
capture population structure. We demonstrate these advances on data from the 
Human Genome Diversity Panel and 1000 Genomes Project, where we are able to 
identify SNPs that are highly differentiated with respect to structure while 
making minimal modeling assumptions.
AVAILABILITY AND IMPLEMENTATION: A Bioconductor R package called lfa is 
available at http://www.bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/lfa.html
CONTACT: jstorey@princeton.edu
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics 
online.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btv641
PMCID: PMC4795615
PMID: 26545820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]