1. Front Behav Neurosci. 2015 Dec 8;9:331. doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2015.00331. 
eCollection 2015.

The Effects of Electrical and Optical Stimulation of Midbrain Dopaminergic 
Neurons on Rat 50-kHz Ultrasonic Vocalizations.

Scardochio T(1), Trujillo-Pisanty I(2), Conover K(2), Shizgal P(2), Clarke 
PB(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Neuropsychopharmacology, McGill 
University Montreal, QC, Canada.
(2)Department of Psychology, Center for Studies in Behavioral Neurobiology, 
Concordia University Montreal, QC, Canada.
(3)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Neuropsychopharmacology, McGill 
University Montreal, QC, Canada ; Department of Psychology, Center for Studies 
in Behavioral Neurobiology, Concordia University Montreal, QC, Canada.

RATIONALE: Adult rats emit ultrasonic vocalizations (USVs) at around 50-kHz; 
these commonly occur in contexts that putatively engender positive affect. While 
several reports indicate that dopaminergic (DAergic) transmission plays a role 
in the emission of 50-kHz calls, the pharmacological evidence is mixed. 
Different modes of dopamine (DA) release (i.e., tonic and phasic) could 
potentially explain this discrepancy.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the potential role of phasic DA release in 50-kHz call 
emission.
METHODS: In Experiment 1, USVs were recorded in adult male rats following 
unexpected electrical stimulation of the medial forebrain bundle (MFB). In 
parallel, phasic DA release in the nucleus accumbens (NAcc) was recorded using 
fast-scan cyclic voltammetry. In Experiment 2, USVs were recorded following 
response-contingent or non-contingent optogenetic stimulation of midbrain 
DAergic neurons. Four 20-s schedules of optogenetic stimulation were used: 
fixed-interval, fixed-time, variable-interval, and variable-time.
RESULTS: Brief electrical stimulation of the MFB increased both 50-kHz call rate 
and phasic DA release in the NAcc. During optogenetic stimulation sessions, rats 
initially called at a high rate comparable to that observed following 
reinforcers such as psychostimulants. Although optogenetic stimulation 
maintained reinforced responding throughout the 2-h session, the call rate 
declined to near zero within the first 30 min. The trill call subtype 
predominated following both electrical and optical stimulation.
CONCLUSION: The occurrence of electrically-evoked 50-kHz calls, time-locked to 
phasic DA (Experiment 1), provides correlational evidence supporting a role for 
phasic DA in USV production. However, in Experiment 2, the temporal dissociation 
between calling and optogenetic stimulation of midbrain DAergic neurons suggests 
that phasic mesolimbic DA release is not sufficient to produce 50-kHz calls. The 
emission of the trill subtype of 50-kHz calls potentially provides a marker 
distinguishing positive affect from positive reinforcement.

DOI: 10.3389/fnbeh.2015.00331
PMCID: PMC4672056
PMID: 26696851