1. PLoS One. 2016 Feb 10;11(2):e0148461. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0148461. 
eCollection 2016.

Calcium Imaging of Neuronal Activity in Drosophila Can Identify Anticonvulsive 
Compounds.

Streit AK(1), Fan YN(1), Masullo L(1), Baines RA(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester, 
M13 9PT, United Kingdom.

Although there are now a number of antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) available, 
approximately one-third of epilepsy patients respond poorly to drug 
intervention. The reasons for this are complex, but are probably reflective of 
the increasing number of identified mutations that predispose individuals to 
this disease. Thus, there is a clear requirement for the development of novel 
treatments to address this unmet clinical need. The existence of gene mutations 
that mimic a seizure-like behaviour in the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster, 
offers the possibility to exploit the powerful genetics of this insect to 
identify novel cellular targets to facilitate design of more effective AEDs. In 
this study we use neuronal expression of GCaMP, a potent calcium reporter, to 
image neuronal activity using a non-invasive and rapid method. Expression in 
motoneurons in the isolated CNS of third instar larvae shows waves of 
calcium-activity that pass between segments of the ventral nerve cord. Time 
between calcium peaks, in the same neurons, between adjacent segments usually 
show a temporal separation of greater than 200 ms. Exposure to proconvulsants 
(picrotoxin or 4-aminopyridine) reduces separation to below 200 ms showing 
increased synchrony of activity across adjacent segments. Increased synchrony, 
characteristic of epilepsy, is similarly observed in genetic seizure mutants: 
bangsenseless1 (bss1) and paralyticK1270T (paraK1270T). Exposure of bss1 to 
clinically-used antiepileptic drugs (phenytoin or gabapentin) significantly 
reduces synchrony. In this study we use the measure of synchronicity to evaluate 
the effectiveness of known and novel anticonvulsive compounds (antipain, 
isethionate, etopiside rapamycin and dipyramidole) to reduce seizure-like CNS 
activity. We further show that such compounds also reduce the Drosophila 
voltage-gated persistent Na+ current (INaP) in an identified motoneuron (aCC). 
Our combined assays provide a rapid and reliable method to screen unknown 
compounds for potential to function as anticonvulsants.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0148461
PMCID: PMC4749298
PMID: 26863447 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.