1. Mol Med Rep. 2016 Oct;14(4):3184-98. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2016.5618. Epub 2016 Aug
 9.

Potential fluid biomarkers for pathological brain changes in Alzheimer's 
disease: Implication for the screening of cognitive frailty.

Ruan Q(1), D'Onofrio G(2), Sancarlo D(2), Greco A(2), Yu Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Shanghai Institute of Geriatrics and Gerontology, Shanghai Key Laboratory of 
Clinical Geriatrics, Department of Geriatrics, Huadong Hospital, and Research 
Center of Aging and Medicine, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, 
Shanghai 200040, P.R. China.
(2)Geriatric Unit & Laboratory of Gerontology and Geriatrics, Department of 
Medical Sciences, IRCCS 'Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza', San Giovanni Rotondo, 
I‑71013 Foggia, Italy.

Cognitive frailty (CF) overlaps with early neuropathological alterations 
associated with aging‑related major neurocognitive disorders, including 
Alzheimer's disease (AD). Fluid biomarkers for these pathological brain 
alterations allow for early diagnosis in the preclinical stages of AD, and for 
objective prognostic assessments in clinical intervention trials. These 
biomarkers may also be helpful in the screening of CF. The present study 
reviewed the literature and identified systematic reviews of cohort studies and 
other authoritative reports. The selection criteria for potentially suitable 
fluid biomarkers included: i) Frequent use in studies of fluid‑derived markers 
and ii) evidence of novel measurement techniques for fluid‑derived markers. The 
present study focused on studies that assessed these biomarkers in AD, mild 
cognitive impairment and non‑AD demented subjects. At present, widely used fluid 
biomarkers include cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), total tau, phosphorylated tau and 
amyloid‑β levels. With the development of novel measurement techniques and 
improvements in understanding regarding the mechanisms underlying aging‑related 
major neurocognitive disorders, numerous novel biomarkers associated with 
various aspects of AD neuropathology are being explored. These include specific 
measurements of Aβ oligomer or monomer forms, tau proteins in the peripheral 
plasma and CSF, and novel markers of synaptic dysfunction, neuronal damage and 
apoptosis, neuronal activity alteration, neuroinflammation, blood brain barrier 
dysfunction, oxidative stress, metabolites, mitochondrial function and aberrant 
lipid metabolism. The proposed panels of fluid biomarkers may be useful in the 
early diagnosis of AD, prediction of the progression of AD from preclinical 
stages to the dementia stage, and the differentiation of AD from non‑AD 
dementia. In combination with physical frailty, the present study surmised that 
these biomarkers may also be used as biomarkers for CF, thus contribute to 
discovering causes and informing interventions for cognitive impairment in 
individuals with CF.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2016.5618
PMCID: PMC5042792
PMID: 27511317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]