1. J Med Internet Res. 2016 Aug 15;18(8):e220. doi: 10.2196/jmir.6153.

Efficacy of Internet-Based Self-Monitoring Interventions on Maternal and 
Neonatal Outcomes in Perinatal Diabetic Women: A Systematic Review and 
Meta-Analysis.

Lau Y(1), Htun TP, Wong SN, Tam WS, Klainin-Yobas P.

Author information:
(1)National University of Singapore, Alice Lee Centre for Nursing Studies, 
Singapore, Singapore. nurly@nus.edu.sg.

BACKGROUND: Self-monitoring using the Internet offers new opportunities to 
engage perinatal diabetic women in self-management to reduce maternal and 
neonatal complications.
OBJECTIVE: This review aims to synthesize the best available evidence to 
evaluate the efficacy of Internet-based self-monitoring interventions in 
improving maternal and neonatal outcomes among perinatal diabetic women.
METHODS: The review was conducted using Cochrane Central Register of Controlled 
Trials, PubMed, EMBASE, Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health 
Literature, PsyINFO, Scopus, and ProQuest Dissertations and Theses to search for 
English-language research studies without any year limitation. A risk of bias 
table was used to assess methodological quality. Meta-analysis was performed 
with RevMan software. Cochran Q and I(2) tests were used to assess 
heterogeneity. The overall effect was assessed using z tests at P<.05. Of the 
438 studies identified through electronic searches and reference lists, nine 
experimental studies from 10 publications were selected.
RESULTS: Half of the selected studies showed low risk of bias and comprised 852 
perinatal diabetic women in six countries. The meta-analysis revealed that 
Internet-based self-monitoring interventions significantly decreased the level 
of maternal glycated hemoglobin A1c (z=2.23, P=.03) compared to usual care among 
perinatal diabetic women at postintervention. Moreover, Internet-based 
self-monitoring interventions significantly decreased the cesarean delivery rate 
(z=2.23, P=.03) compared to usual care among the mixed group at 
postintervention.
CONCLUSIONS: This review shows neonatal or other maternal outcomes are similar 
between Internet-based self-monitoring interventions and usual diabetes care 
among perinatal diabetic women. The long-term effects of the intervention must 
be confirmed in future studies using randomized controlled trials and follow-up 
data.

DOI: 10.2196/jmir.6153
PMCID: PMC5004058
PMID: 27526637 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.