1. PLoS One. 2016 Sep 29;11(9):e0163679. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0163679. 
eCollection 2016.

Quantitative Expression Analysis in Brassica napus by Northern Blot Analysis and 
Reverse Transcription-Quantitative PCR in a Complex Experimental Setting.

Rumlow A(1), Keunen E(2), Klein J(1), Pallmann P(3), Riemenschneider A(1), 
Cuypers A(2), Papenbrock J(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Botany, Leibniz University Hannover, Hannover, Germany.
(2)Centre for Environmental Sciences, Hasselt University, Diepenbeek, Belgium.
(3)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Lancaster University, Lancaster, 
United Kingdom.

Analysis of gene expression is one of the major ways to better understand plant 
reactions to changes in environmental conditions. The comparison of many 
different factors influencing plant growth challenges the gene expression 
analysis for specific gene-targeted experiments, especially with regard to the 
choice of suitable reference genes. The aim of this study is to compare 
expression results obtained by Northern blot, semi-quantitative PCR and RT-qPCR, 
and to identify a reliable set of reference genes for oilseed rape (Brassica 
napus L.) suitable for comparing gene expression under complex experimental 
conditions. We investigated the influence of several factors such as sulfur 
deficiency, different time points during the day, varying light conditions, and 
their interaction on gene expression in oilseed rape plants. The expression of 
selected reference genes was indeed influenced under these conditions in 
different ways. Therefore, a recently developed algorithm, called GrayNorm, was 
applied to validate a set of reference genes for normalizing results obtained by 
Northern blot analysis. After careful comparison of the three methods mentioned 
above, Northern blot analysis seems to be a reliable and cost-effective 
alternative for gene expression analysis under a complex growth regime. For 
using this method in a quantitative way a number of references was validated 
revealing that for our experiment a set of three references provides an 
appropriate normalization. Semi-quantitative PCR was prone to many handling 
errors and difficult to control while RT-qPCR was very sensitive to expression 
fluctuations of the reference genes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0163679
PMCID: PMC5042561
PMID: 27685087

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.