1. Biochemistry. 2017 Jan 31;56(4):602-611. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.6b01089.
Epub  2017 Jan 17.

Tethering an N-Glycosylation Sequon-Containing Peptide Creates a Catalytically 
Competent Oligosaccharyltransferase Complex.

Matsumoto S(1), Taguchi Y(1), Shimada A(1), Igura M(1), Kohda D(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Structural Biology, Medical Institute of Bioregulation, ‡Research 
Center for Advanced Immunology, and §Research Center for Live-Protein Dynamics, 
Kyushu University , Maidashi 3-1-1, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

Oligosaccharyltransferase (OST) transfers an oligosaccharide chain to the Asn 
residue in the Asn-X-Ser/Thr sequon in proteins, where X is not proline. A 
sequon was tethered to an archaeal OST enzyme via a disulfide bond. The 
positions of the cysteine residues in the OST protein and the sequon-containing 
acceptor peptide were selected by reference to the eubacterial OST structure in 
a noncovalent complex with an acceptor peptide. We determined the crystal 
structure of the cross-linked OST-sequon complex. The Ser/Thr-binding pocket 
recognizes the Thr residue in the sequon, and the catalytic structure termed the 
"carboxylate dyad" interacted with the Asn residue. Thus, the recognition and 
the catalytic mechanism of the sequon are conserved between the archaeal and 
eubacterial OSTs. We found that the tethered peptides in the complex were 
efficiently glycosylated in the presence of the oligosaccharide donor. The 
stringent requirements are greatly relaxed in the cross-linked state. The two 
conserved acidic residues in the catalytic structure were each dispensable, 
although the double mutation abolished the activity. A Gln residue at the Asn 
position in the sequon functioned as an acceptor, and the hydroxy group at 
position +2 was not required. In the standard assay using short free peptides, 
strong amino acid preferences were observed at the X position, but the 
preferences, except for Pro, completely disappeared in the cross-linked state. 
By skipping the initial binding process and stabilizing the complex state, the 
catalytically competent cross-linked complex offers a unique system for studying 
the oligosaccharyl transfer reaction.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.6b01089
PMID: 27997792 [Indexed for MEDLINE]