1. Sci Rep. 2017 Jan 24;7:41034. doi: 10.1038/srep41034.

A systematic SNP selection approach to identify mechanisms underlying disease 
aetiology: linking height to post-menopausal breast and colorectal cancer risk.

Elands RJ(1), Simons CC(1), Riemenschneider M(2)(3), Isaacs A(4)(5), Schouten 
LJ(1), Verhage BA(1), Van Steen K(6), Godschalk RW(7), van den Brandt PA(1), 
Stoll M(2)(5), Weijenberg MP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, GROW-School for Oncology and Developmental 
Biology, Maastricht University, Maastricht, the Netherlands.
(2)Institute of Human Genetics, Genetic Epidemiology, University of Münster, 
Münster, Germany.
(3)Department of Bioinformatics, Straubing Center of Science, Straubing, 
Germany.
(4)Department of Epidemiology, Genetic Epidemiology Unit, Erasmus Medical 
Center, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, Maastricht Centre for Systems Biology (MaCSBio), 
CARIM-School for Cardiovascular Diseases, Maastricht University, Maastricht, the 
Netherlands.
(6)Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Montefiore 
Institute, University of Liège, Liège, Belgium.
(7)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, NUTRIM-School of Nutrition and 
Translational Research in Metabolism, Maastricht University, Maastricht, the 
Netherlands.

Data from GWAS suggest that SNPs associated with complex diseases or traits tend 
to co-segregate in regions of low recombination, harbouring functionally linked 
gene clusters. This phenomenon allows for selecting a limited number of SNPs 
from GWAS repositories for large-scale studies investigating shared mechanisms 
between diseases. For example, we were interested in shared mechanisms between 
adult-attained height and post-menopausal breast cancer (BC) and colorectal 
cancer (CRC) risk, because height is a risk factor for these cancers, though 
likely not a causal factor. Using SNPs from public GWAS repositories at 
p-values < 1 × 10-5 and a genomic sliding window of 1 mega base pair, we 
identified SNP clusters including at least one SNP associated with height and 
one SNP associated with either post-menopausal BC or CRC risk (or both). SNPs 
were annotated to genes using HapMap and GRAIL and analysed for significantly 
overrepresented pathways using ConsensuspathDB. Twelve clusters including 56 
SNPs annotated to 26 genes were prioritised because these included at least one 
height- and one BC risk- or CRC risk-associated SNP annotated to the same gene. 
Annotated genes were involved in Indian hedgehog signalling 
(p-value = 7.78 × 10-7) and several cancer site-specific pathways. This 
systematic approach identified a limited number of clustered SNPs, which 
pinpoint potential shared mechanisms linking together the complex phenotypes 
height, post-menopausal BC and CRC.

DOI: 10.1038/srep41034
PMCID: PMC5259777
PMID: 28117334 [Indexed for MEDLINE]