1. Front Pediatr. 2017 Feb 27;5:37. doi: 10.3389/fped.2017.00037. eCollection
2017.

Humoral Immunodeficiency with Hypotonia, Feeding Difficulties, Enteropathy, and 
Mild Eczema Caused by a Classical FOXP3 Mutation.

Tuijnenburg P(1), Cuadrado E(2), Bosch AM(3), Kindermann A(4), Jansen MH(1), 
Alders M(5), van Leeuwen EM(6), Kuijpers TW(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology, Immunology, Rheumatology and Infectious 
Diseases, Emma Children's Hospital, Academic Medical Center (AMC), University of 
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands; Department of Experimental Immunology, 
Academic Medical Center (AMC), University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(2)Department of Hematopoiesis, Sanquin Research and Landsteiner Laboratory, 
University of Amsterdam , Amsterdam , Netherlands.
(3)Department of Metabolic Disorders, Emma Children's Hospital, Academic Medical 
Center (AMC), University of Amsterdam , Amsterdam , Netherlands.
(4)Department of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Emma Children's Hospital, Academic 
Medical Center (AMC), University of Amsterdam , Amsterdam , Netherlands.
(5)Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Center (AMC), University of 
Amsterdam , Amsterdam , Netherlands.
(6)Department of Experimental Immunology, Academic Medical Center (AMC), 
University of Amsterdam , Amsterdam , Netherlands.
(7)Department of Pediatric Hematology, Immunology, Rheumatology and Infectious 
Diseases, Emma Children's Hospital, Academic Medical Center (AMC), University of 
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands; Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic 
Medical Center (AMC), University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands.

We describe here the case of a boy who presented with pulmonary infections, 
feeding difficulties due to velopharyngeal insufficiency and gastroesophageal 
reflux, myopathy, and hypotonia soon after birth. Later, he was also found to 
have an elevated immunoglobulin (Ig) E and mild eczema and was diagnosed with 
inflammatory bowel disease. Further immunological screening at the age of 
7 years showed low B and NK cell numbers but normal CD4+ and CD8+ T cells and 
notably, normal numbers of CD4+ regulatory T (Treg) cells. Serum IgG, IgA, and 
IgM were low to normal, but he had a deficient response to a pneumococcal 
polysaccharide vaccine and thus a humoral immunodeficiency. To our surprise, 
whole exome sequencing revealed a mutation in forkhead box protein 3 (FOXP3), 
encoding an essential transcription factor for the development and function of 
Treg cells. This classical mutation is associated with immune dysregulation, 
polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X-linked (IPEX) syndrome. Further in vitro 
studies indeed showed defective function of Treg cells despite normal FOXP3 
protein expression and nuclear localization. The boy underwent hematopoietic 
stem cell transplantation at 11 years of age and despite the temporary 
development of diabetes while on prednisone is now doing much better, IgE levels 
have declined, and his fatigue has improved. This case illustrates that a 
classical pathogenic mutation in FOXP3 can lead to a clinical phenotype where 
the diagnosis of IPEX syndrome was never considered because of the lack of 
diabetes and the presence of only mild eczema, in addition to the normal Treg 
cell numbers and FOXP3 expression.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2017.00037
PMCID: PMC5326763
PMID: 28289675