1. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2017 Jul 31;5(1):59. doi: 10.1186/s40478-017-0461-5.

Mutation-induced loss of APP function causes GABAergic depletion in recessive 
familial Alzheimer's disease: analysis of Osaka mutation-knockin mice.

Umeda T(1)(2), Kimura T(3), Yoshida K(4), Takao K(5)(6), Fujita Y(1), Matsuyama 
S(7), Sakai A(1), Yamashita M(1), Yamashita Y(1), Ohnishi K(1), Suzuki M(3), 
Takuma H(1), Miyakawa T(5), Takashima A(3), Morita T(4), Mori H(2)(8), Tomiyama 
T(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Translational Neuroscience, Osaka City University Graduate 
School of Medicine, 1-4-3 Asahimachi, Abeno-ku, Osaka, 545-8585, Japan.
(2)Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology, Japan Science and 
Technology Agency, Kawaguchi, Japan.
(3)Department of Aging Neurobiology, Center for Development of Advanced Medicine 
for Dementia, National Center for Geriatrics and Gerontology, Obu, Japan.
(4)Department of Molecular Genetics, Osaka City University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Osaka, Japan.
(5)Section of Behavior Patterns, Center for Genetic Analysis of Behavior, 
National Institute for Physiological Sciences, Okazaki, Japan.
(6)Present address: Life Science Research Center, University of Toyama, Toyama, 
Japan.
(7)Biosignal Research Center, Kobe University, Kobe, Japan.
(8)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Osaka City University Medical School, 
Osaka, Japan.
(9)Department of Translational Neuroscience, Osaka City University Graduate 
School of Medicine, 1-4-3 Asahimachi, Abeno-ku, Osaka, 545-8585, Japan. 
tomi@med.osaka-cu.ac.jp.
(10)Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology, Japan Science and 
Technology Agency, Kawaguchi, Japan. tomi@med.osaka-cu.ac.jp.

The E693Δ (Osaka) mutation in APP is linked to familial Alzheimer's disease. 
While this mutation accelerates amyloid β (Aβ) oligomerization, only patient 
homozygotes suffer from dementia, implying that this mutation is recessive and 
causes loss-of-function of amyloid precursor protein (APP). To investigate the 
recessive trait, we generated a new mouse model by knocking-in the Osaka 
mutation into endogenous mouse APP. The produced homozygous, heterozygous, and 
non-knockin littermates were compared for memory, neuropathology, and synaptic 
plasticity. Homozygotes showed memory impairment at 4 months, whereas 
heterozygotes did not, even at 8 months. Immunohistochemical and biochemical 
analyses revealed that only homozygotes displayed intraneuronal accumulation of 
Aβ oligomers at 8 months, followed by abnormal tau phosphorylation, synapse 
loss, glial activation, and neuron loss. These pathologies were not observed at 
younger ages, suggesting that a certain mechanism other than Aβ accumulation 
underlies the memory disturbance at 4 months. For the electrophysiology studies 
at 4 months, high-frequency stimulation evoked long-term potentiation in all 
mice in the presence of picrotoxin, but in the absence of picrotoxin, such 
potentiation was observed only in homozygotes, suggesting their GABAergic 
deficit. In support of this, the levels of GABA-related proteins and the number 
of dentate GABAergic interneurons were decreased in 4-month-old homozygotes. 
Since APP has been shown to play a role in dentate GABAergic synapse formation, 
the observed GABAergic depletion is likely associated with an impairment of the 
APP function presumably caused by the Osaka mutation. Oral administration of 
diazepam to homozygotes from 6 months improved memory at 8 months, and 
furthermore, prevented Aβ oligomer accumulation, indicating that GABAergic 
deficiency is a cause of memory impairment and also a driving force of Aβ 
accumulation. Our findings suggest that the Osaka mutation causes loss of APP 
function, leading to GABAergic depletion and memory disorder when wild-type APP 
is absent, providing a mechanism of the recessive heredity.

DOI: 10.1186/s40478-017-0461-5
PMCID: PMC5537936
PMID: 28760161 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL: All procedures performed in 
studies involving animals were in accordance with the ethical standards of the 
institution at which the studies were conducted. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not 
applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: Drs. Umeda, Yoshida, Morita, Mori, and Tomiyama 
have a Japanese patent (No. 2015–50,032) on the knockin mouse pending. 
PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.