1. Microbiologyopen. 2017 Dec;6(6):e00514. doi: 10.1002/mbo3.514. Epub 2017 Aug
10.

Genomic insights into the pathogenicity and environmental adaptability of 
Enterococcus hirae R17 isolated from pork offered for retail sale.

Peng Z(1)(2), Li M(1), Wang W(1), Liu H(3), Fanning S(1)(4), Hu Y(1), Zhang 
J(2), Li F(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Food Safety Risk Assessment, Ministry of Health, China 
National Center for Food Safety Risk Assessment, Beijing, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Infectious Disease Prevention and Control, 
Collaborative Innovation Center for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious 
Diseases, National Institute for Communicable Disease Control and Prevention, 
Chinese Center for Disease and Prevention, Beijing, China.
(3)Institute of Geographic Sciences and Natural Resources Research, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(4)UCD-Centre for Food Safety, School of Public Health, Physiotherapy and Sports 
Science, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin, Ireland.

Genetic information about Enterococcus hirae is limited, a feature that has 
compromised our understanding of these clinically challenging bacteria. In this 
study, comparative analysis was performed of E. hirae R17, a 
daptomycin-resistant strain isolated from pork purchased from a retail market in 
Beijing, China, and three other enterococcal genomes (Enterococcus faecium DO, 
Enterococcus faecalis V583, and E. hirae ATCC™ 9790). Some 1,412 genes were 
identified that represented the core genome together with an additional 139 
genes that were specific to E. hirae R17. The functions of these R17 
strain-specific coding sequences relate to the COGs categories of carbohydrate 
transport and metabolism and transcription, a finding that suggests the 
carbohydrate utilization capacity of E. hirae R17 may be more extensive when 
compared with the other three bacterial species (spp.). Analysis of genomic 
islands and virulence genes highlighted the potential that horizontal gene 
transfer played as a contributor of variations in pathogenicity in this isolate. 
Drug-resistance gene prediction and antibiotic susceptibility testing indicated 
E. hirae R17 was resistant to several antimicrobial compounds, including 
bacitracin, ciprofloxacin, daptomycin, erythromycin, and tetracycline, thereby 
limiting chemotherapeutic treatment options. Further, tolerance to biocides and 
metals may confer a phenotype that facilitates the survival and adaptation of 
this isolate against food preservatives, disinfectants, and antibacterial 
coatings. The genomic plasticity, mediated by IS elements, transposases, and 
tandem repeats, identified in the E. hirae R17 genome may support adaptation to 
new environmental niches, such as those that are found in hospitalized patients. 
A predicted transmissible plasmid, pRZ1, was found to carry several 
antimicrobial determinants, along with some predicted pathogenic genes. These 
data supported the previously determined phenotype confirming that the foodborne 
E. hirae R17 is a multidrug-resistant pathogenic bacterium with evident genome 
plasticity and environmental adaptability.

© 2017 The Authors. MicrobiologyOpen published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/mbo3.514
PMCID: PMC5727370
PMID: 28799224 [Indexed for MEDLINE]