1. Oncotarget. 2017 Jul 18;8(44):76279-76289. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.19348. 
eCollection 2017 Sep 29.

Downregulation of HADH promotes gastric cancer progression via Akt signaling 
pathway.

Shen C(#)(1), Song YH(#)(1), Xie Y(#)(2), Wang X(#)(1), Wang Y(#)(3), Wang 
C(#)(4), Liu S(5), Xue SL(6), Li Y(7), Liu B(8), Tang Z(9), Chen W(4), Song 
J(1), Amin HM(10), Zhou J(3).

Author information:
(1)Cyrus Tang Hematology Center, Collaborative Innovation Center of Hematology, 
Soochow University, Suzhou, P. R. China.
(2)Department of Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, 
Suzhou, P. R. China.
(3)Department of General Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow 
University, Suzhou, P. R. China.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow 
University, Suzhou, P. R. China.
(5)Suzhou Vocational Health College, Suzhou Key Laboratory of Biotechnology for 
Laboratory Medicine, Suzhou, P. R. China.
(6)Department of Hematology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow 
University, Jiangsu Institute of Hematology, Collaborative Innovation Center of 
Hematology, Soochow University, Suzhou, P. R. China.
(7)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery & Institute of Cardiovascular Science, 
First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou, P. R. China.
(8)Department of Cardiology, Second Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun, P. 
R. China.
(9)Department of Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Medical College of 
Soochow University, Suzhou, P. R. China.
(10)Department of Hematopathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, Texas, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

HADH is a key enzyme in fatty acid oxidation. The aim of this study was to 
identify the role of HADH in gastric cancer. We analyzed the expression of HADH 
in 102 pairs of gastric cancer samples. Western blot analysis revealed that HADH 
was decreased in stage I/II gastric cancer samples compared to matched adjacent 
normal gastric tissue, and its expression was further decreased in stage III/IV 
samples. Importantly, the reduced expression of HADH was associated with 
increased expression of p-Akt and reduced expression of PTEN in the gastric 
carcinoma tumor samples. To determine the significance of HADH downregulation in 
gastric cancer progression, we tested the impact of HADH knockdown or 
overexpression on the migration and invasion of the gastric cancer cells using a 
transwell assay. Knockdown of HADH significantly promoted gastric cancer cell 
migration and invasion, which was associated with increased expression of p-Akt. 
The PI3K inhibitor LY294002 inhibited HADH shRNA induced migration/invasion, and 
abolished the upregulation of p-Akt. By contrast, HADH overexpression inhibited 
the migration and invasion of MKN45 cells. Herein, for the first time, we 
demonstrate that downregulation of HADH promotes gastric cancer progression via 
activation of Akt signaling pathway.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.19348
PMCID: PMC5652705
PMID: 29100311

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interests.