1. BMC Nephrol. 2018 Feb 7;19(1):31. doi: 10.1186/s12882-018-0829-1.

Gender-related differences in clinicopathological characteristics and renal 
outcomes of Chinese patients with IgA nephropathy.

Deng W(1)(2), Tan X(2), Zhou Q(1)(3), Ai Z(1), Liu W(1), Chen W(1), Yu X(1), 
Yang Q(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Key Laboratory of Nephrology, Ministry of Health and Guangdong 
Province, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510080, China.
(2)Department of Nephrology, Kaiping Central Hospital, Jiangmen, 529300, China.
(3)Clinical Research Centre, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, 510080, China.
(4)Department of Nephrology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Key Laboratory of Nephrology, Ministry of Health and Guangdong 
Province, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510080, China. qiongqyzzm@qq.com.

BACKGROUND: The prognostic effect of gender on immunoglobulin A nephropathy 
(IgAN) is not clear. We explored gender-related differences in 
clinicopathological features and renal outcomes in IgAN.
METHODS: This was a single-centre retrospective study. Patients were divided 
into two groups according to gender. The clinicopathological features at biopsy 
and renal outcomes during the follow-up were collected and analysed. Renal 
outcomes were defined as the doubling of baseline serum creatinine and end-stage 
renal disease (ESRD) (estimated glomerular filtration rate < 15 mL/min/1.73 m2, 
dialysis, or renal transplantation). The prognostic effects of gender were 
evaluated by Cox regression models.
RESULTS: A total of 988 eligible IgAN patients were enrolled, and the ratio of 
males to females was 1:1.4. Compared with female patients, male patients had 
worse renal function, greater proteinuria, a higher prevalence of hypertension, 
hypertriglyceridaemia and hyperuricaemia, and more severe segmental sclerosis 
and tubular atrophy/interstitial fibrosis. However, haematuria occurred more 
frequently in female patients. During a median follow-up time of 48.6 (34.7, 
62.7) months, no differences in renal survival rates were noted between the male 
and female groups. Multivariable Cox regression analyses revealed that gender 
was not a significant risk factor for renal outcomes after frequency matching of 
baseline eGFR and serum uric acid (SUA) levels. In addition, male and female 
patients shared similar risk factors, including a low eGFR and increased 
proteinuria and segmental sclerosis. In males, however, an elevated proportion 
of global glomerulosclerosis was also a poor prognostic factor for renal 
survival.
CONCLUSIONS: Male IgAN patients presented with worse clinicopathologic features 
than female patients, but no significant differences were observed in long-term 
renal survival between male and female patients by eGFR- and SUA level-matching.

DOI: 10.1186/s12882-018-0829-1
PMCID: PMC5804055
PMID: 29415664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: This 
study was approved by Institutional Committee of Ethics (ICE) for Clinical 
Research and Animal Trials, the First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen 
University (Approval No. [2016] 215). All participants involved in the study 
were informed by the physicians that their medical records and clinical 
characteristics would be used for the research before they did renal biopsy and 
signed the ICF. All participants agreed and authorized the researchers to used 
their de-identified records for this study. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not 
applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.