1. J Drug Alcohol Res. 2017;6:236036. doi: 10.4303/jdar/236036. Epub 2017 Sep 16.

Alcohol-Induced Increases in Inflammatory Cytokines Are Attenuated by Nicotine 
in Region-Selective Manner in Male Rats.

Kalejaiye O(1), Getachew B(1), Ferguson CL(1), Taylor RE(1), Tizabi Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, Howard University, 
Washington, DC 20059, USA.

BACKGROUND: Heavy use of alcohol is commonly associated with heavy smoking 
(nicotine intake). Although many factors, including mood effects of these two 
drugs may contribute to their co-use, the exact neurobiological underpinnings 
are far from clear. It is well known that chronic alcohol exposure induces 
neuroinflammation that may precipitate depressive-like behavior, which is 
considered an important factor in alcohol relapse. Nicotine, on the other hand, 
possesses anti-inflammatory and antidepressant effects.
PURPOSE: In this study, we sought to determine which proinflammatory markers may 
be associated with the depressogenic effects of chronic alcohol and whether 
nicotine pretreatment may normalize these changes.
STUDY DESIGN: For this purpose, we treated adult male Wistar rats with alcohol 
(1.0 g/kg, IP), nicotine (0.3 mg/kg, IP) or their combination once daily for 14 
days. Two prominent proinflammatory cytokines (IL-1β and TNF-α) in two primary 
brain regions, namely the hippocampus and frontal cortex that are intimately 
involved in mood regulation, were evaluated.
RESULTS: Chronic alcohol resulted in increases in both cytokines in both regions 
as determined by Western blot. Nicotine completely blocked alcohol-induced 
effects in the hippocampus, but not in the frontal cortex. These data suggest 
that nicotine may mitigate the inflammatory effects of alcohol in 
brain-selective region. Hence, the previously observed depressogenic effects of 
alcohol and the antidepressant effects of nicotine may at least be partially 
mediated through manipulations of proinflammatory cytokines in the hippocampus.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest possible therapeutic potential of 
anti-inflammatory cytokines in combating alcohol-induced depression and/or 
relapse.

DOI: 10.4303/jdar/236036
PMCID: PMC5798246
PMID: 29416901

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest.