1. Genome Biol Evol. 2018 Apr 1;10(4):1039-1047. doi: 10.1093/gbe/evy060.

Influence of Electron-Holes on DNA Sequence-Specific Mutation Rates.

Suárez-Villagrán MY(1)(2), Azevedo RBR(3), Miller JH Jr(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physics, University of Houston, Houston.
(2)Texas Center for Superconductivity, University of Houston, Houston.
(3)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Houston, Houston.

Biases in mutation rate can influence molecular evolution, yielding rates of 
evolution that vary widely in different parts of the genome and even among 
neighboring nucleotides. Here, we explore one possible mechanism of influence on 
sequence-specific mutation rates, the electron-hole, which can localize and 
potentially trigger a replication mismatch. A hole is a mobile site of positive 
charge created during one-electron oxidation by, for example, radiation, contact 
with a mutagenic agent, or oxidative stress. Its quantum wavelike properties 
cause it to localize at various sites with probabilities that vary widely, by 
orders of magnitude, and depend strongly on the local sequence. We find 
significant correlations between hole probabilities and mutation rates within 
base triplets, observed in published mutation accumulation experiments on four 
species of bacteria. We have also computed hole probability spectra for 
hypervariable segment I of the human mtDNA control region, which contains 
several mutational hotspots, and for heptanucleotides in noncoding regions of 
the human genome, whose polymorphism levels have recently been reported. We 
observe significant correlations between hole probabilities, and 
context-specific mutation and substitution rates. The correlation with hole 
probability cannot be explained entirely by CpG methylation in the 
heptanucleotide data. Peaks in hole probability tend to coincide with mutational 
hotspots, even in mtDNA where CpG methylation is rare. Our results suggest that 
hole-enhanced mutational mechanisms, such as oxidation-stabilized 
tautomerization and base deamination, contribute to molecular evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/gbe/evy060
PMCID: PMC5887664
PMID: 29617801 [Indexed for MEDLINE]