1. PLoS Genet. 2019 Jan 7;15(1):e1007883. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1007883. 
eCollection 2019 Jan.

CDI/CDS system-encoding genes of Burkholderia thailandensis are located in a 
mobile genetic element that defines a new class of transposon.

Ocasio AB(1), Cotter PA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of North 
Carolina-Chapel Hill, NC, United States of America.

Intercellular communication and self-recognition are critical for coordinating 
cooperative and competitive behaviors during sociomicrobiological community 
development. Contact-dependent growth inhibition (CDI) proteins are polymorphic 
toxin delivery systems that inhibit the growth of non-self neighboring bacteria 
that lack the appropriate immunity protein. In Burkholderia thailandensis, CDI 
system proteins (encoded by bcpAIOB genes) also induce cooperative behaviors 
among sibling (self) cells, a phenomenon called contact-dependent signaling 
(CDS). Here we describe a mobile genetic element (MGE) that carries the bcpAIOB 
genes in B. thailandensis E264. It is a ~210 kb composite transposon with 
insertion sequence (IS) elements at each end. Although the ISs are most similar 
to IS2 of Escherichia coli, the transposase-dependent intermediate molecule 
displays characteristics more similar to those of the IS26 translocatable unit 
(TU). A reaction requiring only the "left" IS-encoded transposase results in 
formation of an extrachromosomal circular dsDNA intermediate ("the megacircle") 
composed of the left IS and the sequences intervening between the ISs. Insertion 
of the megacircle into the chromosome occurs next to a pre-existing copy of an 
IS2-like element, recreating a functional composite transposon. We found that 
BcpA activity is required for megacircle formation, and in turn, megacircle 
formation is required for CDS phenotypes. Our data support a model in which the 
bcpAIOB genes function as both helping and harming greenbeard genes, 
simultaneously enhancing the fitness of self bacteria that possess the same 
allele plus tightly linked genes that mediate cooperative behaviors, and killing 
non-self bacteria that do not possess the same bcpAIOB allele. Mobility of the 
megacircle between cells could allow bacteria invading a community to be 
converted to self, and would facilitate propagation of the bcpAIOB genes in the 
event that the invading strain is capable of overtaking the resident community.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1007883
PMCID: PMC6350997
PMID: 30615607 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.