1. Endocrinol Diabetes Metab Case Rep. 2019 Mar 18;2019:19-0006. doi: 
10.1530/EDM-19-0006. Online ahead of print.

A thyroid gland with over 30 foci of papillary thyroid carcinoma with activating 
BRAF V600E mutation.

Pancer J(1), Mitmaker E(2), Ajise O(3), Tabah R(2), How J(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, Quebec, 
Canada.
(2)Department of Surgery, McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, Quebec, 
Canada.
(3)Department of Pathology, McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, Quebec, 
Canada.

Multifocal papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) is common and the number of tumor 
foci rarely exceeds ten. The mechanism of multifocal disease is debated, with 
the two main hypotheses consisting of either intrathyroidal metastatic spread 
from a single tumor or independent multicentric tumorigenesis from distinct 
progenitor cells. We report the case of a 46-year-old woman who underwent total 
thyroidectomy and left central neck lymph node dissection after fine-needle 
aspiration of bilateral thyroid nodules that yielded cytological findings 
consistent with PTC. Final pathology of the surgical specimen showed an isthmic 
dominant 1.5 cm classical PTC and over 30 foci of microcarcinoma, which 
displayed decreasing density with increasing distance from the central lesion. 
Furthermore, all malignant tumors and lymph nodes harbored the activating BRAF 
V600E mutation. The present case highlights various pathological features that 
support a mechanism of intraglandular spread, namely a strategic isthmic 
location of the primary tumor, radial pattern of distribution and extensive 
number of small malignant foci and BRAF mutational homogeneity. Learning points: 
Multifocal papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) is commonly seen in clinical 
practice, but the number of malignant foci is usually limited to ten or less. 
There is no clear consensus in the literature as to whether multifocal PTC 
arises from a single or multiple distinct tumor progenitor cells. Strategic 
location of the dominant tumor in the thyroid isthmus may favor intraglandular 
dissemination of malignant cells by means of the extensive lymphatic network. An 
important pathological finding that may be suggestive of intrathyroidal 
metastatic spread is a central pattern of distribution with a reduction in the 
density of satellite lesions with increasing distance from the dominant focus. 
PTCs originating from the isthmus with intraglandular metastatic dissemination 
behave more aggressively. As such, a more aggressive treatment course may be 
warranted, particularly with regard to the extent of surgery.

DOI: 10.1530/EDM-19-0006
PMCID: PMC6432975
PMID: 30884463