1. PLoS Pathog. 2019 Mar 22;15(3):e1007667. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007667. 
eCollection 2019 Mar.

The histone chaperone HIRA promotes the induction of host innate immune defences 
in response to HSV-1 infection.

McFarlane S(1), Orr A(1), Roberts APE(1), Conn KL(2)(3), Iliev V(1), Loney C(1), 
da Silva Filipe A(1), Smollett K(1), Gu Q(1), Robertson N(4), Adams PD(4)(5), 
Rai TS(6), Boutell C(1).

Author information:
(1)MRC-University of Glasgow Centre for Virus Research (CVR), Garscube Campus, 
Glasgow, Scotland, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Veterinary Microbiology, Western College of Veterinary 
Medicine, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatoon, CA.
(3)Li Ka Shing Institute of Virology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, 
CA.
(4)Beatson Institute for Cancer Research, Glasgow, Scotland, United Kingdom.
(5)Sanford Burnham Prebys Medical Discovery Institute, San Diego, CA, United 
States of America.
(6)Northern Ireland Centre for Stratified Medicine, Biomedical Sciences Research 
Institute, Ulster University, Londonderry, United Kingdom.

Host innate immune defences play a critical role in restricting the 
intracellular propagation and pathogenesis of invading viral pathogens. Here we 
show that the histone H3.3 chaperone HIRA (histone cell cycle regulator) 
associates with promyelocytic leukaemia nuclear bodies (PML-NBs) to stimulate 
the induction of innate immune defences against herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) 
infection. Following the activation of innate immune signalling, HIRA localized 
at PML-NBs in a Janus-Associated Kinase (JAK), Cyclin Dependent Kinase (CDK), 
and Sp100-dependent manner. RNA-seq analysis revealed that HIRA promoted the 
transcriptional upregulation of a broad repertoire of host genes that regulate 
innate immunity to HSV-1 infection, including those involved in MHC-I antigen 
presentation, cytokine signalling, and interferon stimulated gene (ISG) 
expression. ChIP-seq analysis revealed that PML, the principle scaffolding 
protein of PML-NBs, was required for the enrichment of HIRA onto ISGs, 
identifying a role for PML in the HIRA-dependent regulation of innate immunity 
to virus infection. Our data identifies independent roles for HIRA in the 
intrinsic silencing of viral gene expression and the induction of innate immune 
defences to restrict the initiation and propagation of HSV-1 infection, 
respectively. These intracellular host defences are antagonized by the HSV-1 
ubiquitin ligase ICP0, which disrupts the stable recruitment of HIRA to 
infecting viral genomes and PML-NBs at spatiotemporally distinct phases of 
infection. Our study highlights the importance of histone chaperones to regulate 
multiple phases of intracellular immunity to virus infection, findings that are 
likely to be highly pertinent in the cellular restriction of many clinically 
important viral pathogens.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007667
PMCID: PMC6472835
PMID: 30901352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.