1. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2020 Feb 1;75(2):337-341. doi: 10.1093/jac/dkz435.

Persistent circulation of a fluoroquinolone-resistant Salmonella enterica Typhi 
clone in the Indian subcontinent.

Britto CD(1), Dyson ZA(2)(3), Mathias S(4), Bosco A(4), Dougan G(3)(5), Jose 
S(4), Nagaraj S(4), Holt KE(2)(6), Pollard AJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Oxford Vaccine Group, Department of Paediatrics, University of Oxford, and 
the NIHR Oxford Biomedical Research Centre, Oxford, OX3 7LE, UK.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, Central Clinical School, Monash 
University, Melbourne, Victoria, 3004, Australia.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(4)St John's Medical College Hospital, Bengaluru, India.
(5)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton, UK.
(6)Department of Infection Biology, Faculty of Infections and Tropical Diseases, 
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: The molecular structure of circulating enteric fever pathogens was 
studied using hospital-based genomic surveillance in a tertiary care referral 
centre in South India as a first genomic surveillance study, to our knowledge, 
of blood culture-confirmed enteric fever in the region.
METHODS: Blood culture surveillance was conducted at St John's Medical College 
Hospital, Bengaluru, between July 2016 and June 2017. The bacterial isolates 
collected were linked to demographic variables of patients and subjected to WGS. 
The resulting pathogen genomic data were also globally contextualized to gauge 
possible phylogeographical patterns.
RESULTS: Hospital-based genomic surveillance for enteric fever in Bengaluru, 
India, identified 101 Salmonella enterica Typhi and 14 S. Paratyphi A in a 
1 year period. Ninety-six percent of isolates displayed non-susceptibility to 
fluoroquinolones. WGS showed the dominant pathogen was S. Typhi genotype 4.3.1.2 
(H58 lineage II). A fluoroquinolone-resistant triple-mutant clone of S. Typhi 
4.3.1.2 previously associated with gatifloxacin treatment failure in Nepal was 
implicated in 18% of enteric fever cases, indicating ongoing inter-regional 
circulation.
CONCLUSIONS: Enteric fever in South India continues to be a major public health 
issue and is strongly associated with antimicrobial resistance. Robust 
microbiological surveillance is necessary to direct appropriate treatment and 
preventive strategies. Of particular concern is the emergence and expansion of 
the highly fluoroquinolone-resistant triple-mutant S. Typhi clone and its 
ongoing inter- and intra-country transmission in South Asia, which highlights 
the need for regional coordination of intervention strategies, including 
vaccination and longer-term strategies such as improvements to support hygiene 
and sanitation.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
British Society for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/dkz435
PMCID: PMC7223262
PMID: 31665304 [Indexed for MEDLINE]