1. mSystems. 2019 Nov 5;4(6):e00481-19. doi: 10.1128/mSystems.00481-19.

Quantitative Proteome Analysis of Atg5-Deficient Mouse Embryonic Fibroblasts 
Reveals the Range of the Autophagy-Modulated Basal Cellular Proteome.

Sharma KB(1), Sharma M(1), Aggarwal S(1), Yadav AK(1), Bhatnagar S(1), Vrati 
S(2)(3), Kalia M(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Translational Health Science and Technology Institute, NCR Biotech Science 
Cluster, Faridabad, Haryana, India.
(2)Translational Health Science and Technology Institute, NCR Biotech Science 
Cluster, Faridabad, Haryana, India vrati@rcb.res.in manjula@rcb.res.in.
(3)Regional Centre for Biotechnology, NCR Biotech Science Cluster, Faridabad, 
Haryana, India.

Basal autophagy is crucial for maintenance of cellular homeostasis. ATG5 is an 
essential protein for autophagosome formation, and its depletion has been 
extensively used as a tool to disrupt autophagy. Here, we characterize the 
impact of Atg5 deficiency on the cellular proteome of mouse embryonic 
fibroblasts (MEFs). Using a tandem mass tagging (TMT)-based quantitative 
proteomics analysis, we observe that 14% of identified proteins show 
dysregulated levels in atg5-/- MEFs. These proteins were distributed across 
diverse biological processes, such as cell adhesion, development, 
differentiation, transport, metabolism, and immune responses. Several of the 
upregulated proteins were receptors involved in transforming growth factor β 
(TGF-β) signaling, JAK-STAT signaling, junction adhesion, and 
interferon/cytokine-receptor interactions and were validated as autophagy 
substrates. Nearly equal numbers of proteins, including several lysosomal 
proteins and enzymes, were downregulated, suggesting a complex role of 
autophagy/ATG5 in regulating their levels. The atg5-/- MEFs had lower levels of 
key immune sensors and effectors, including Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2), 
interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), IRF7, MLKL, and STAT1/3/5/6, which were 
restored by reexpression of ATG5. While these cells could efficiently mount a 
type I interferon response to the double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) mimic poly(I·C), 
they were compromised in their inflammatory response to the bacterial 
pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and 
Pam3CSK4. Transcriptional activation and secretion of interleukin-6 (IL-6) in 
these cells could be recovered by ATG5 expression, supporting the role of 
autophagy in the TLR2-induced inflammatory response. This study provides a key 
resource for understanding the effect of autophagy/ATG5 deficiency on the 
fibroblast proteome.IMPORTANCE Autophagy performs housekeeping functions for 
cells and maintains a functional mode by degrading damaged proteins and 
organelles and providing energy under starvation conditions. The process is 
tightly regulated by the evolutionarily conserved Atg genes, of which Atg5 is 
one such crucial mediator. Here, we have done a comprehensive quantitative 
proteome analysis of mouse embryonic fibroblasts that lack a functional 
autophagy pathway (Atg5 knockout). We observe that 14% of the identified 
cellular proteome is remodeled, and several proteins distributed across diverse 
cellular processes with functions in signaling, cell adhesion, development, and 
immunity show either higher or lower levels under autophagy-deficient 
conditions. These cells have lower levels of crucial immune proteins that are 
required to mount a protective inflammatory response. This study will serve as a 
valuable resource to determine the role of autophagy in modulating specific 
protein levels in cells.

Copyright © 2019 Sharma et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mSystems.00481-19
PMCID: PMC6832020
PMID: 31690592