1. Mol Neurodegener. 2019 Nov 8;14(1):40. doi: 10.1186/s13024-019-0339-z.

Reduced sphingolipid hydrolase activities, substrate accumulation and 
ganglioside decline in Parkinson's disease.

Huebecker M(1), Moloney EB(2), van der Spoel AC(3), Priestman DA(1), Isacson 
O(4), Hallett PJ(5), Platt FM(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX1 3QT, UK.
(2)Neuroregeneration Institute, McLean Hospital / Harvard Medical School, 
Belmont, MA, 02478, USA.
(3)Departments of Pediatrics and Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Atlantic 
Research Centre, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, B3H 4R2, Canada.
(4)Neuroregeneration Institute, McLean Hospital / Harvard Medical School, 
Belmont, MA, 02478, USA. isacson@hms.harvard.edu.
(5)Neuroregeneration Institute, McLean Hospital / Harvard Medical School, 
Belmont, MA, 02478, USA. phallett@mclean.harvard.edu.
(6)Department of Pharmacology, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX1 3QT, UK. 
frances.platt@pharm.ox.ac.uk.

Erratum in
    Mol Neurodegener. 2020 Jan 15;15(1):6. doi: 10.1186/s13024-019-0355-z.

BACKGROUND: Haploinsufficiency in the Gaucher disease GBA gene, which encodes 
the lysosomal glucocerebrosidase GBA, and ageing represent major risk factors 
for developing Parkinson's disease (PD). Recently, more than fifty other 
lysosomal storage disorder gene variants have been identified in PD, implicating 
lysosomal dysfunction more broadly as a key risk factor for PD. Despite the 
evidence of multiple lysosomal genetic risks, it remains unclear how 
sphingolipid hydrolase activities, other than GBA, are altered with ageing or in 
PD. Moreover, it is not fully known if levels of glycosphingolipid substrates 
for these enzymes change in vulnerable brain regions of PD. Finally, little is 
known about the levels of complex gangliosides in substantia nigra which may 
play a significant role in ageing and PD.
METHODS: To study sphingolipid hydrolase activities and glycosphingolipid 
expression in ageing and in PD, two independent cohorts of human substantia 
nigra tissues were obtained. Fluorescent 4-methylumbelliferone assays were used 
to determine multiple enzyme activities. The lysosomal GBA and non-lysosomal 
GBA2 activities were distinguished using the inhibitor NB-DGJ. Sensitive and 
quantitative normal-phase HPLC was performed to study glycosphingolipid levels. 
In addition, glycosphingolipid levels in cerebrospinal fluid and serum were 
analysed as possible biomarkers for PD.
RESULTS: The present study demonstrates, in two independent cohorts of human 
post-mortem substantia nigra, that sporadic PD is associated with deficiencies 
in multiple lysosomal hydrolases (e.g. α-galactosidase and β-hexosaminidase), in 
addition to reduced GBA and GBA2 activities and concomitant glycosphingolipid 
substrate accumulation. Furthermore, the data show significant reductions in 
levels of complex gangliosides (e.g. GM1a) in substantia nigra, CSF and serum in 
ageing, PD, and REM sleep behaviour disorder, which is a strong predictor of PD.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings conclusively demonstrate reductions in GBA activity 
in the parkinsonian midbrain, and for the first time, reductions in the activity 
of several other sphingolipid hydrolases. Furthermore, significant reductions 
were seen in complex gangliosides in PD and ageing. The diminished activities of 
these lysosomal hydrolases, the glycosphingolipid substrate accumulation, and 
the reduced levels of complex gangliosides are likely major contributors to the 
primary development of the pathology seen in PD and related disorders with age.

DOI: 10.1186/s13024-019-0339-z
PMCID: PMC6842240
PMID: 31703585 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.