1. Front Physiol. 2019 Nov 5;10:1382. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2019.01382. eCollection 
2019.

Exercise Physiology Across the Lifespan in Cystic Fibrosis.

Shei RJ(1)(2), Mackintosh KA(3), Peabody Lever JE(1)(2)(4), McNarry MA(3), Krick 
S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, The University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, United 
States.
(2)Gregory Fleming James Cystic Fibrosis Research Center, The University of 
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, United States.
(3)Applied Sports, Technology, Exercise and Medicine Research Centre, College of 
Engineering, Swansea University, Swansea, United Kingdom.
(4)Medical Scientist Training Program, The University of Alabama at Birmingham, 
Birmingham, AL, United States.

Cystic fibrosis (CF), a severe life-limiting disease, is associated with 
multi-organ pathologies that contribute to a reduced exercise capacity. At 
present, the impact of, and interaction between, disease progression and other 
age-related physiological changes in CF on exercise capacity from child- to 
adult-hood is poorly understood. Indeed, the influences of disease progression 
and aging are inherently linked, leading to increasingly complex interactions. 
Thus, when interpreting age-related differences in exercise tolerance and 
devising exercise-based therapies for those with CF, it is critical to consider 
age-specific factors. Specifically, changes in lung function, chronic airway 
colonization by increasingly pathogenic and drug-resistant bacteria, the 
frequency and severity of pulmonary exacerbations, endocrine comorbidities, 
nutrition-related factors, and CFTR (cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance 
regulator protein) modulator therapy, duration, and age of onset are important 
to consider. Accounting for how these factors ultimately influence the ability 
to exercise is central to understanding exercise impairments in individuals with 
CF, especially as the expected lifespan with CF continues to increase with 
advancements in therapies. Further studies are required that account for these 
factors and the changing landscape of CF in order to better understand how the 
evolution of CF disease impacts exercise (in)tolerance across the lifespan and 
thereby identify appropriate intervention targets and strategies.

Copyright © 2019 Shei, Mackintosh, Peabody Lever, McNarry and Krick.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2019.01382
PMCID: PMC6856653
PMID: 31780953