1. JIMD Rep. 2019 Dec 1;51(1):53-61. doi: 10.1002/jmd2.12078. eCollection 2020
Jan.

Early detection of lysosomal diseases by screening of cases of idiopathic 
splenomegaly and/or thrombocytopenia with a next-generation sequencing gene 
panel.

Muñoz G(1), García-Seisdedos D(1), Ciubotariu C(1), Piris-Villaespesa M(2), 
Gandía M(1), Martín-Moro F(2), Gutiérrez-Solana LG(3)(4), Morado M(5), 
López-Jiménez J(2), Sánchez-Herranz A(1), Villarrubia J(1)(2), Del Castillo 
FJ(1)(4)(6).

Author information:
(1)UCA de Genómica Traslacional Hospital Universitario Ramón y Cajal, IRYCIS 
Madrid Spain.
(2)Servicio de Hematología Hospital Universitario Ramón y Cajal, IRYCIS Madrid 
Spain.
(3)Consulta de Neurodegenerativas, Servicio de Neurología Pediátrica Hospital 
Infantil Universitario Niño Jesús Madrid Spain.
(4)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER) 
Madrid Spain.
(5)Servicio de Hematología Hospital Universitario La Paz Madrid Spain.
(6)Servicio de Genética Hospital Universitario Ramón y Cajal, IRYCIS Madrid 
Spain.

Lysosomal diseases (LD) are a group of about 70 rare hereditary disorders 
(combined incidence 1:5000) in which diverse lysosomal functions are impaired, 
impacting multiple organs and systems. The first clinical signs and symptoms are 
usually unspecific and shared by hundreds of other disorders. Diagnosis of LD 
traditionally relies on performing specific enzymatic assays, if available, upon 
clinical suspicion of the disorder. However, the combination of the insidious 
onset of LD and the lack of awareness on these rare diseases among medical 
personnel results in undesirable diagnostic delays, with unchecked disease 
progression, appearance of complications and a worsened prognosis. We tested the 
usefulness of a next-generation sequencing-based gene panel for quick, early 
detection of LD among cases of idiopathic splenomegaly and/or thrombocytopenia, 
two of the earliest clinical signs observed in most LD. Our 73-gene panel 
interrogated 28 genes for LD, 1 biomarker and 44 genes underlying non-LD 
differential diagnoses. Among 38 unrelated patients, we elucidated eight cases 
(21%), five with LD (GM1 gangliosidosis, Sanfilippo disease A and B, 
Niemann-Pick disease B, Gaucher disease) and three with non-LD conditions. 
Interestingly, we identified three LD patients harboring pathogenic mutations in 
two LD genes each, which may result in unusual disease presentations and impact 
treatment. Turnaround time for panel screening and genetic validation was 1 
month. Our results underline the usefulness of resequencing gene panels for 
quick and cost-effective screening of LDs and disorders sharing with them early 
clinical signs.

© 2019 The Authors. Journal of Inherited Metabolic Disease published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jmd2.12078
PMCID: PMC7012743
PMID: 32071839

Conflict of interest statement: G.M. received grants and honoraria from Sanofi 
Genzyme. L.G.G.‐S. received consulting fees from Biomarin, Sanofi Genzyme, Shire 
Takeda and Ultragenyx. M.M. received grants and honoraria from Sanofi Genzyme. 
J.V. received grants and honoraria from Sanofi Genzyme and consulting fees from 
Shire Takeda. F.J.dC. received grants and honoraria from Sanofi Genzyme. All the 
other authors have no conflict of interest to declare.