1. J Bone Miner Res. 2020 Jul;35(7):1322-1332. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.3995. Epub 2020 
Mar 19.

Adult Osteosclerotic Metaphyseal Dysplasia With Progressive Osteonecrosis of the 
Jaws and Abnormal Bone Resorption Pattern Due to a LRRK1 Splice Site Mutation.

Howaldt A(1)(2), Hennig AF(1)(2)(3), Rolvien T(4)(5), Rössler U(1)(2), Stelzer 
N(1)(2), Knaus A(6), Böttger S(7), Zustin J(4), Geißler S(2), Oheim R(4), Amling 
M(4), Howaldt HP(7), Kornak U(1)(2)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Institut für Medizinische Genetik und Humangenetik, Charité - 
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie Universität Berlin, 
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany.
(2)BIH Center for Regenerative Therapies, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 
Corporate Member of Freie Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, 
and Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(4)Department of Osteology and Biomechanics, University Medical Center 
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(5)Department of Orthopedics, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, 
Hamburg, Germany.
(6)Institute for Genomic Statistics and Bioinformatics, University Hospital 
Bonn, Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(7)Department for Maxillo Facial Surgery, Justus Liebig University Gießen, 
Gießen, Germany.
(8)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany.
(9)Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen, 
Germany.

Osteosclerotic metaphyseal dysplasia (OSMD) is a rare autosomal recessive 
sclerosing skeletal dysplasia. We report on a 34-year-old patient with sandwich 
vertebrae, platyspondyly, osteosclerosis of the tubular bones, pathologic 
fractures, and anemia. In the third decade, he developed osteonecrosis of the 
jaws, which was progressive in spite of repeated surgical treatment over a 
period of 11 years. An iliac crest bone biopsy revealed the presence of 
hypermineralized cartilage remnants, large multinucleated osteoclasts with 
abnormal morphology, and inadequate bone resorption typical for osteoclast-rich 
osteopetrosis. After exclusion of mutations in TCIRG1 and CLCN7 we performed 
trio-based exome sequencing. The novel homozygous splice-site mutation c.261G>A 
in the gene LRRK1 was found and co-segregated with the phenotype in the family. 
cDNA sequencing showed nearly complete skipping of exon 3 leading to a 
frameshift (p.Ala34Profs*33). Osteoclasts differentiated from the patient's 
peripheral blood monocytes were extremely large. Instead of resorption pits 
these cells were only capable of superficial erosion. Phosphorylation of 
L-plastin at position Ser5 was strongly reduced in patient-derived osteoclasts 
showing a loss of function of the mutated LRRK1 kinase protein. Our analysis 
indicates a strong overlap of LRRK1-related OSMD with other forms of 
intermediate osteopetrosis, but an exceptional abnormality of osteoclast 
resorption. Like in other osteoclast pathologies an increased risk for 
progressive osteonecrosis of the jaws should be considered in OSMD, an 
intermediate form of osteopetrosis. © 2020 The Authors. Journal of Bone and 
Mineral Research published by American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

© 2020 The Authors. Journal of Bone and Mineral Research published by American 
Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

DOI: 10.1002/jbmr.3995
PMID: 32119750 [Indexed for MEDLINE]