1. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2020 Jul 25;54(4):696-706. doi: 10.33594/000000249.

Impact of the DSP-H1684R Genetic Variant on Ion Channels Activity in 
iPSC-Derived Cardiomyocytes.

Gusev K(1), Khudiakov A(2), Zaytseva A(2)(3), Perepelina K(2)(4), Makeenok S(1), 
Kaznacheyeva E(5), Kostareva A(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cytology, Russian Academy of Sciences, St. Petersburg, Russia.
(2)Almazov National Medical Research Centre of the Ministry of Health of the 
Russian Federation, St. Petersburg, Russia.
(3)Sechenov Institute of Evolutionary Physiology and Biochemistry, Russian 
Academy of Sciences, St. Petersburg, Russia.
(4)Saint Petersburg State University, St. Petersburg, Russia.
(5)Institute of Cytology, Russian Academy of Sciences, St. Petersburg, Russia, 
evkazn@incras.ru.
(6)Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Mutations of desmosomal genes are known to cause arrhythmogenic 
cardiomyopathy characterized by arrhythmias and sudden cardiac death. 
Previously, we described a novel genetic variant H1684R in desmoplakin gene 
(DSP), associated with a progressive cardiac conduction disease (PCCD). In the 
present study, we aimed to investigate an effect of the DSP-H1684R genetic 
variant on the activity of ion channels.
METHODS: We used cardiomyocytes derived from induced pluripotent stem cells 
(iPSC cardiomyocytes) from a patient with DSP-H1684R genetic variant and from 
two healthy donors. Immunofluorescent staining and western blot analyses were 
used to characterize patient-specific cardiomyocytes. By the whole-cell 
voltage-clamp technique we estimated the activity of voltage-gated sodium, 
calcium, and potassium channels that are responsible for action potential 
generation and its shape. Action potentials' parameters were measured using 
whole-cell current-clamp technique.
RESULTS: In patient-specific cardiomyocytes we observed both lower amplitudes of 
currents through sodium Nav1.5 channels and L-type calcium channels, but higher 
amplitude of current through transient-outward potassium channels in comparison 
to donor cardiomyocytes. Current-clamp measurements revealed shortening of 
action-potential in DSP-H1684R-carrying iPSC cardiomyocytes. Therefore, observed 
alterations in the channels activity might have a great impact on the properties 
of action potential and development of PCCD.
CONCLUSION: Our results show that desmoplakin genetic variants, besides 
conduction slowing caused by structural heart remodeling, could affect multiple 
ion channel activity aggravating arrhythmia manifestation in PCCD.

© Copyright by the Author(s). Published by Cell Physiol Biochem Press.

DOI: 10.33594/000000249
PMID: 32706220 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.