1. Curr Hypertens Rep. 2020 Sep 7;22(11):89. doi: 10.1007/s11906-020-01098-2.

The Role of the Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone System in Preeclampsia: a Review.

Gathiram P(1), Moodley J(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Family Medicine, School of Nursing and Public Health, 
University of KwaZulu-Natal, Durban, South Africa.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Women's Health and HIV Research 
Group, University of KwaZulu-Natal, Durban, South Africa. jmog@ukzn.ac.za.
(3)College of Health Sciences, University of KwaZulu-Natal, Durban, 
KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa. jmog@ukzn.ac.za.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Preeclampsia (PE) is a complex human pregnancy-specific 
condition and is clinically characterized by new onset hypertension and 
proteinuria in the second half of pregnancy. The precise etiology of PE is 
unknown, but much of the pathophysiology has been elucidated, and it is accepted 
that the disorder is multifactorial in nature. Historically, because of the 
presence of proteinuria, the role of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system 
(RAAS) has been considered in the etiology of PE. However, the results of 
studies (including maternal circulatory angiotensin II, urinary angiotensinogen, 
plasma renin and prorenin, AT1 receptor antibodies, and gene polymorphisms) on 
the role of the RAAS in the etiology of PE have proved controversial. The 
purpose of this narrative review was to evaluate the contemporary literature on 
the RAAS and its role in the pathophysiology of pregnancy.
RECENT FINDINGS: The current review shows that although the RAAS has a role in 
the development of normal pregnancy, it does not have a significant role in the 
pathophysiology of PE except for the AT1-AA components. Despite many researchers 
having measured increases in s[P}RR and [P]RR, this may be independent of the 
RAAS. Our view is in keeping with contemporary thinking that the placenta rather 
than the RAAS plays a central role in elaborating pro-inflammatory factors 
(antiangiogenic and angiogenic) into the maternal circulation resulting in 
widespread endothelial dysfunction in all organ systems including the renal 
system.

DOI: 10.1007/s11906-020-01098-2
PMID: 32893333 [Indexed for MEDLINE]