1. Cancer Sci. 2021 Mar;112(3):953-961. doi: 10.1111/cas.14669. Epub 2021 Feb 6.

Current status and future outlook for patient-derived cancer models from a rare 
cancer research perspective.

Kondo T(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Rare Cancer Research, National Cancer Center Research Institute, 
Chuo-ku, Japan.

Rare cancers are a group of approximately 200 malignancies with extremely low 
incidences and with a wide variety of genotypes and phenotypes. Collectively, 
they are more common than any single malignancy. However, given the small 
numbers of individuals diagnosed with rare cancers, it is difficult to design 
clinical trials with sufficient patient numbers. Therefore, few effective 
anticancer drugs have been developed, and evidence-based medicine is not always 
feasible for rare cancers. Consequently, their clinical outcomes are generally 
poorer. Cancer research requires adequate models that faithfully recapitulate 
molecular features and reproduce treatment responses of the original tumors. 
Such models allow us to focus on more efficacious drugs in the clinical studies. 
For rare cancers, patient-derived cancer models are particularly important 
because the enrollment of sufficient patients is rarely attainable within a 
reasonable period of time. However, extremely few models are available for rare 
cancers. For example, cell lines and xenografts are available for only a limited 
number of histological subtypes of sarcomas; therefore, most sarcoma research is 
performed without such models, and a lack of adequate cancer models causes a lag 
in therapeutic development. The establishment of novel rare cancer models will 
dramatically facilitate rare cancer research and treatment development in the 
near future. This review focuses on the status of patient-derived rare cancer 
models and discusses their pivotal problems and possibilities, using sarcomas as 
a representative rare cancer type. Multi-institutional collaboration will help 
address the scarcity of patient-derived rare cancer models.

© 2020 The Authors. Cancer Science published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd 
on behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

DOI: 10.1111/cas.14669
PMCID: PMC7935796
PMID: 32986888 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author officially collaborates with Charles 
River Laboratories, Biospecimen Laboratories, and ZEON Corporation on research 
relevant to patient‐derived cancer models.