1. Redox Biol. 2020 Oct;37:101755. doi: 10.1016/j.redox.2020.101755. Epub 2020
Oct  16.

TRPM2 channel-mediated cell death: An important mechanism linking oxidative 
stress-inducing pathological factors to associated pathological conditions.

Malko P(1), Jiang LH(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of 
Leeds, UK.
(2)Sino-UK Joint Laboratory of Brain Function and Injury of Henan Province and 
Department of Physiology and Pathophysiology, Xinxiang Medical University, PR 
China; School of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Biological Sciences, University 
of Leeds, UK. Electronic address: l.h.jiang@leeds.ac.uk.

Oxidative stress resulting from the accumulation of high levels of reactive 
oxygen species is a salient feature of, and a well-recognised pathological 
factor for, diverse pathologies. One common mechanism for oxidative stress 
damage is via the disruption of intracellular ion homeostasis to induce cell 
death. TRPM2 is a non-selective Ca2+-permeable cation channel with a wide 
distribution throughout the body and is highly sensitive to activation by 
oxidative stress. Recent studies have collected abundant evidence to show its 
important role in mediating cell death induced by miscellaneous oxidative 
stress-inducing pathological factors, both endogenous and exogenous, including 
ischemia/reperfusion and the neurotoxicants amyloid-β peptides and MPTP/MPP+ 
that cause neuronal demise in the brain, myocardial ischemia/reperfusion, 
proinflammatory mediators that disrupt endothelial function, diabetogenic agent 
streptozotocin and diabetes risk factor free fatty acids that induce loss of 
pancreatic β-cells, bile acids that damage pancreatic acinar cells, renal 
ischemia/reperfusion and albuminuria that are detrimental to kidney cells, 
acetaminophen that triggers hepatocyte death, and nanoparticles that injure 
pericytes. Studies have also shed light on the signalling mechanisms by which 
these pathological factors activate the TRPM2 channel to alter intracellular ion 
homeostasis leading to aberrant initiation of various cell death pathways. 
TRPM2-mediated cell death thus emerges as an important mechanism in the 
pathogenesis of conditions including ischemic stroke, neurodegenerative 
diseases, cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, pancreatitis, chronic kidney 
disease, liver damage and neurovascular injury. These findings raise the 
exciting perspective of targeting the TRPM2 channel as a novel therapeutic 
strategy to treat such oxidative stress-associated diseases.

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.redox.2020.101755
PMCID: PMC7600390
PMID: 33130440 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: We declare no conflict of interest.