1. BMC Pediatr. 2020 Dec 14;20(1):559. doi: 10.1186/s12887-020-02453-7.

Safety of sildenafil in premature infants with severe bronchopulmonary dysplasia 
(SILDI-SAFE): a multicenter, randomized, placebo-controlled, sequential 
dose-escalating, double-masked, safety study.

Schneider S(1), Bailey M(2), Spears T(2), Esther CR Jr(1), Laughon MM(1), Hornik 
CP(2)(3), Jackson W(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, The University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(2)Duke Clinical Research Institute, Durham, NC, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC, 
USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, The University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA. wesley.jackson@unc.edu.

BACKGROUND: Pulmonary hypertension is a deadly complication of bronchopulmonary 
dysplasia, the most common pulmonary morbidity of prematurity. Despite these 
catastrophic consequences, no evidence-based therapies are available for the 
prevention of pulmonary hypertension in this population. Sildenafil is a potent 
pulmonary vasodilator approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for the 
treatment of pulmonary hypertension in adults. Preclinical models suggest a 
beneficial effect of sildenafil on premature lungs through improved 
alveolarization and preserved vascular development. Sildenafil may therefore 
prevent the development of pulmonary hypertension associated with lung disease 
of prematurity by reducing pulmonary vascular remodeling and lowering pulmonary 
vascular resistance; however, clinical trial evidence is needed. The present 
study, supported by the National Institutes of Health's National Heart Lung and 
Blood Institute, will generate safety, pharmacokinetics, and preliminary 
effectiveness data on sildenafil in a population of premature infants with 
severe bronchopulmonary dysplasia at risk for pulmonary hypertension.
METHODS: We have designed a multicenter, randomized, placebo-controlled, 
sequential dose-escalating, double-masked, safety trial of sildenafil in 
premature infants with severe bronchopulmonary dysplasia. We will randomize 120 
premature infants < 29 weeks gestational age with severe bronchopulmonary 
dysplasia at 32-40 weeks postmenstrual age in a dose-escalating approach 3:1 
(sildenafil: placebo) sequentially into each of 3 cohorts at ~ 30 clinical 
sites. Participants will receive up to 34 days of study drug, followed by 
28 days of safety monitoring. The primary outcome will be safety as determined 
by incidence of hypotension. Secondary outcomes will include pharmacokinetics 
and preliminary effectiveness of sildenafil based on presence or absence of 
pulmonary hypertension diagnosed by echocardiography at the end of treatment 
period.
DISCUSSION: Sildenafil is a promising intervention to prevent the development of 
pulmonary hypertension in premature infants with bronchopulmonary dysplasia. 
Clinical trials of sildenafil specifically designed for premature infants are 
urgently needed. The current study will make substantial contributions to 
scientific knowledge of the safety of sildenafil in premature infants at risk 
for pulmonary hypertension. Results from the study will be used by investigators 
to inform the design of a pivotal efficacy trial.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT04447989 . Registered 25 June 2020.

DOI: 10.1186/s12887-020-02453-7
PMCID: PMC7735412
PMID: 33317479 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.