1. PLoS One. 2021 Mar 15;16(3):e0248592. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0248592. 
eCollection 2021.

An image segmentation technique with statistical strategies for pesticide 
efficacy assessment.

Kim SB(1), Kim DS(2), Mo X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, California State University, 
Monterey Bay, Seaside, California, United States of America.
(2)Department of Plant Sciences, University of California, Davis, Salinas, 
California, United States of America.

Image analysis is a useful technique to evaluate the efficacy of a treatment for 
weed control. In this study, we address two practical challenges in the image 
analysis. First, it is challenging to accurately quantify the efficacy of a 
treatment when an entire experimental unit is not affected by the treatment. 
Second, RGB codes, which can be used to identify weed growth in the image 
analysis, may not be stable due to various surrounding factors, human errors, 
and unknown reasons. To address the former challenge, the technique of image 
segmentation is considered. To address the latter challenge, the proportion of 
weed area is adjusted under a beta regression model. The beta regression is a 
useful statistical method when the outcome variable (proportion) ranges between 
zero and one. In this study, we attempt to accurately evaluate the efficacy of a 
35% hydrogen peroxide (HP). The image segmentation was applied to separate two 
zones, where the HP was directly applied (gray zone) and its surroundings 
(nongray zone). The weed growth was monitored for five days after the treatment, 
and the beta regression was implemented to compare the weed growth between the 
gray zone and the control group and between the nongray zone and the control 
group. The estimated treatment effect was substantially different after the 
implementation of image segmentation and the adjustment of green area.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0248592
PMCID: PMC7959351
PMID: 33720980 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.