1. PLoS One. 2021 May 3;16(5):e0245407. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0245407. 
eCollection 2021.

One step forward, two steps back: Transcriptional advancements and fermentation 
phenomena in Actinobacillus succinogenes 130Z.

Long DS(1), Immethun CM(2), Vallecilla-Yepez L(3), Wilkins MR(3)(4)(5), Saha 
R(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Complex Biosystems Program, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, Nebraska, United 
States of America.
(2)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of Nebraska, 
Lincoln, Nebraska, United States of America.
(3)Department of Biological Systems Engineering, University of Nebraska, 
Lincoln, Nebraska, United States of America.
(4)Department of Food Science and Technology, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, 
Nebraska, United States of America.
(5)Industrial Agricultural Products Center, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, 
Nebraska, United States of America.

Within the field of bioproduction, non-model organisms offer promise as 
bio-platform candidates. Non-model organisms can possess natural abilities to 
consume complex feedstocks, produce industrially useful chemicals, and withstand 
extreme environments that can be ideal for product extraction. However, 
non-model organisms also come with unique challenges due to lack of 
characterization. As a consequence, developing synthetic biology tools, 
predicting growth behavior, and building computational models can be difficult. 
There have been many advancements that have improved work with non-model 
organisms to address broad limitations, however each organism can come with 
unique surprises. Here we share our work in the non-model bacterium 
Actinobacillus succinognes 130Z, which includes both advancements in synthetic 
biology toolkit development and pitfalls in unpredictable fermentation 
behaviors. To develop a synthetic biology "tool kit" for A. succinogenes, 
information gleaned from a growth study and antibiotic screening was used to 
characterize 22 promoters which demonstrated a 260-fold range of fluorescence 
protein expression. The strongest of the promoters was incorporated into an 
inducible system for tunable gene control in A. succinogenes using the promoter 
for the lac operon as a template. This system flaunted a 481-fold range of 
expression and no significant basal expression. These findings were accompanied 
by unexpected changes in fermentation products characterized by a loss of 
succinic acid and increase in lactic acid after approximately 10 months in the 
lab. During evaluation of the fermentation shifts, new tests of the synthetic 
biology tools in a succinic acid producing strain revealed a significant loss in 
their functionality. Contamination and mutation were ruled out as causes and 
further testing is needed to elucidate the driving factors. The significance of 
this work is to share a successful tool development strategy that could be 
employed in other non-model species, report on an unfortunate phenomenon that 
needs addressed for further development of A. succinogenes, and provide a 
cautionary tale for those undertaking non-model research. In sharing our 
findings, we seek to provide tools and necessary information for further 
development of A. succinogenes as a platform for bioproduction of succinic acid 
and to illustrate the importance of diligent and long-term observation when 
working with non-model bacteria.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0245407
PMCID: PMC8092802
PMID: 33939701 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.