1. Sci Rep. 2021 Jun 22;11(1):13027. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-92447-x.

A new combination strategy to enhance apoptosis in cancer cells by using 
nanoparticles as biocompatible drug delivery carriers.

Kucuksayan E(1)(2)(3), Bozkurt F(2)(4), Yilmaz MT(2)(5), Sircan-Kucuksayan A(6), 
Hanikoglu A(3), Ozben T(7).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biochemistry, Alanya Alaaddin 
Keykubat University (ALKU), Antalya, 07490, Turkey.
(2)Chemical and Metallurgical Engineering Faculty, Department of Food 
Engineering, Yildiz Technical University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biochemistry, Akdeniz University, 
Antalya, Turkey.
(4)Faculty of Engineering and Architecture, Department of Food Engineering, Mus 
Alparslan University, Mus, Turkey.
(5)Faculty of Engineering, Department of Industrial Engineering, King Abdulaziz 
University, Jeddah, 21589, Saudi Arabia.
(6)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Biophysics, Alanya Alaaddin Keykubat 
University (ALKU), Antalya, 07490, Turkey.
(7)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biochemistry, Akdeniz University, 
Antalya, Turkey. ozben@akdeniz.edu.tr.

Some experimental and clinical studies have been conducted for the usage of 
chemotherapeutic drugs encapsulated into nanoparticles (NPs). However, no study 
has been conducted so far on the co-encapsulation of doxorubicin (Dox) and 
epoxomicin (Epo) into NPs as biocompatible drug delivery carriers. Therefore, we 
investigated if co-encapsulation of doxorubicin (Dox) and/or epoxomicin (Epo) 
into NPs enhance their anticancer efficiency and prevent drug resistance and 
toxicity to normal cells. We synthesized Dox and/or Epo loaded poly 
(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) NPs using a multiple emulsion solvent 
evaporation technique and characterized them in terms of their particle size and 
stability, surface, molecular, thermal, encapsulation efficiency and in vitro 
release properties. We studied the effects of drug encapsulated NPs on cellular 
accumulation, intracellular drug levels, oxidative stress status, cellular 
viability, drug resistance, 20S proteasome activity, cytosolic Nuclear Factor 
Kappa B (NF-κB-p65), and apoptosis in breast cancer and normal cells. Our 
results proved that the nanoparticles we synthesized were thermally stable 
possessing higher encapsulation efficiency and particle stability. Thermal, 
morphological and molecular analyses demonstrated the presence of Dox and/or Epo 
within NPs, indicating that they were successfully loaded. Cell line assays 
proved that Dox and Epo loaded NPs were less cytotoxic to single-layer normal 
HUVECs than free Dox and Epo, suggesting that the NPs would be biocompatible 
drug delivery carriers. The apoptotic index of free Dox and Epo increased 50% 
through their encapsulation into NPs, proving combination strategy to enhance 
apoptosis in breast cancer cells. Our results demonstrated that the 
co-encapsulation of Dox and Epo within NPs would be a promising treatment 
strategy to overcome multidrug resistance and toxicity to normal tissues that 
can be studied in further in vivo and clinical studies in breast cancer.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-92447-x
PMCID: PMC8219778
PMID: 34158544 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.