1. Elife. 2021 Jun 28;10:e66988. doi: 10.7554/eLife.66988.

A novel decoy strategy for polymyxin resistance in Acinetobacter baumannii.

Park J(#)(1), Kim M(#)(1), Shin B(#)(1), Kang M(1), Yang J(1), Lee TK(2), Park 
W(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Environmental Microbiology, Department of 
Environmental Science and Ecological Engineering, Korea University, Seoul, 
Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Environmental Engineering, Yonsei University, Wonju, Republic 
of Korea.
(#)Contributed equally

Modification of the outer membrane charge by a polymyxin B (PMB)-induced PmrAB 
two-component system appears to be a dominant phenomenon in PMB-resistant 
Acinetobacter baumannii. PMB-resistant variants and many clinical isolates also 
appeared to produce outer membrane vesicles (OMVs). Genomic, transcriptomic, and 
proteomic analyses revealed that upregulation of the pmr operon and decreased 
membrane-linkage proteins (OmpA, OmpW, and BamE) are linked to overproduction of 
OMVs, which also promoted enhanced biofilm formation. The addition of OMVs from 
PMB-resistant variants into the cultures of PMB-susceptible A. baumannii and the 
clinical isolates protected these susceptible bacteria from PMB. Taxonomic 
profiling of in vitro human gut microbiomes under anaerobic conditions 
demonstrated that OMVs completely protected the microbial community against PMB 
treatment. A Galleria mellonella-infection model with PMB treatment showed that 
OMVs increased the mortality rate of larvae by protecting A. baumannii from PMB. 
Taken together, OMVs released from A. baumannii functioned as decoys against 
PMB.

Plain Language Summary: Wrapped in a thick, protective outer membrane, 
Acinetobacter baumannii bacteria can sometimes cause serious infections when 
they find their way into human lungs and urinary tracts. Antibiotics are 
increasingly ineffective against this threat, which forces physicians to resort 
to polymyxin B, an old, positively-charged drug that ‘sticks’ to the 
negatively-charged proteins and fatty components at the surface of A. baumannii. 
Scientists have noticed that when bacteria are exposed to lethal drugs, they 
often react by releasing vesicles, small ‘sacs’ made of pieces of the outer 
membranes which can contain DNA or enzymes. How this strategy protects the cells 
against antibiotics such as polymyxin B remains poorly understood. To 
investigate this question, Park et al. examined different strains of A. 
baumannii, showing that bacteria resistant to polymyxin B had lower levels of 
outer membrane proteins but would release more vesicles. Adding vesicles from 
resistant strains to non-resistant A. baumannii cultures helped cells to survive 
the drugs. In fact, this protective effect extended to other species, shielding 
whole communities of bacteria against polymyxin B. In vivo, the vesicles 
protected bacteria in moth larvae infected with A. baumannii, leading to a 
higher death rate in the animals. Experiments showed that the negatively-charged 
vesicles worked as decoys, trapping the positively-charged polymyxin B away from 
its target. Taken together, the findings by Park et al. highlight a new strategy 
that allows certain strains of bacteria to protect themselves from antibiotics, 
while also benefitting the rest of the microbial community.

© 2021, Park et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.66988
PMCID: PMC8324293
PMID: 34180396 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: JP, MK, BS, MK, JY, TL, WP No competing 
interests declared