1. Indian J Nephrol. 2021 Mar-Apr;31(2):97-110. doi: 10.4103/ijn.IJN_245_19. Epub
 2021 Apr 2.

The Nitty-Gritties of Kt/V(urea) Calculations in Hemodialysis and Peritoneal 
Dialysis.

Churchill BM(1), Patri P(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Associate Medical Director, Medical Science and Strategy (Asia), IQVIA, 
Bengaluru, Karnataka, India.
(2)Consultant Nephrologist, Transplant Physician, Head of Department, Columbia 
Asia Hospital - Sarjapur Road, Ambalipura, Bengaluru, Karnataka, India.
(3)Faculty, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY, USA.

In advanced Chronic Kidney Disease, patients require renal replacement therapy 
(dialysis or transplantation) for clearance of toxins, electrolyte and acid-base 
balance and removal of excess fluid. Dialysis adequacy should be taken into 
consideration in the adjustment of the dialysis prescription. Kt/Vurea is one 
method of measuring dialysis adequacy that is commonly used in clinical 
practice. Different formulae for calculating Kt/V are available. The appropriate 
Kt/V formula to be used depends on the clinical scenario, as well as parameters 
such as gender and size of patient, frequency of dialysis, mode of dialysis (ie 
hemodialysis vs, peritoneal dialysis), inter-dialysis weight gain, clinical 
symptoms, complications (fluid overload, hyperkalemia, intolerance to dialysis, 
etc), and residual kidney function. Nutrition parameters including serum protein 
and albumin levels, vitamin B12 and β2-microglobulin levels should be factored 
into the assessment of dialysis adequacy. In this review, we have described how 
Kt/Vurea is calculated in hemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis with examples. We 
reviewed the available literature by searching for papers related to calculating 
Kt/Vurea, single pool Kt/V, double pool Kt/V, weekly Kt/V, standard Kt/V, 
surface area normalized Kt/V, and various equations commonly practiced in 
clinical practice. We found several original articles, some review articles 
along with detailed information from manufacturers of different dialyzers 
published on their websites or as package inserts. Understanding the different 
equations available for calculating Kt/Vurea and the application of these 
results in the clinical setting is important for refining patient care and for 
designing clinical studies.

Copyright: © 2021 Indian Journal of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.4103/ijn.IJN_245_19
PMCID: PMC8240937
PMID: 34267430

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.