1. Front Immunol. 2021 Jul 15;12:592031. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.592031. 
eCollection 2021.

Targeting Neoepitopes to Treat Solid Malignancies: Immunosurgery.

de Sousa E(1), Lérias JR(1), Beltran A(2), Paraschoudi G(1), Condeço C(1), 
Kamiki J(1), António PA(1), Figueiredo N(3), Carvalho C(3), Castillo-Martin 
M(2), Wang Z(4), Ligeiro D(5), Rao M(1), Maeurer M(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)ImmunoSurgery Unit, Champalimaud Centre for the Unknown, Lisbon, Portugal.
(2)Department of Pathology, Champalimaud Clinical Centre, Lisbon, Portugal.
(3)Digestive Unit, Champalimaud Clinical Centre, Lisbon, Portugal.
(4)Jiangsu Industrial Technology Research Institute (JITRI), Applied Adaptome 
Immunology Institute, Nanjing, China.
(5)Lisbon Centre for Blood and Transplantation, Instituto Português do Sangue e 
Transplantação (IPST), Lisbon, Portugal.
(6)I Medical Clinic, Johannes Gutenberg University of Mainz, Mainz, Germany.

Successful outcome of immune checkpoint blockade in patients with solid cancers 
is in part associated with a high tumor mutational burden (TMB) and the 
recognition of private neoantigens by T-cells. The quality and quantity of 
target recognition is determined by the repertoire of 'neoepitope'-specific 
T-cell receptors (TCRs) in tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL), or peripheral 
T-cells. Interferon gamma (IFN-γ), produced by T-cells and other immune cells, 
is essential for controlling proliferation of transformed cells, induction of 
apoptosis and enhancing human leukocyte antigen (HLA) expression, thereby 
increasing immunogenicity of cancer cells. TCR αβ-dependent therapies should 
account for tumor heterogeneity and availability of the TCR repertoire capable 
of reacting to neoepitopes and functional HLA pathways. Immunogenic epitopes in 
the tumor-stroma may also be targeted to achieve tumor-containment by changing 
the immune-contexture in the tumor microenvironment (TME). Non protein-coding 
regions of the tumor-cell genome may also contain many aberrantly expressed, 
non-mutated tumor-associated antigens (TAAs) capable of eliciting productive 
anti-tumor immune responses. Whole-exome sequencing (WES) and/or RNA sequencing 
(RNA-Seq) of cancer tissue, combined with several layers of bioinformatic 
analysis is commonly used to predict possible neoepitopes present in clinical 
samples. At the ImmunoSurgery Unit of the Champalimaud Centre for the Unknown 
(CCU), a pipeline combining several tools is used for predicting private 
mutations from WES and RNA-Seq data followed by the construction of synthetic 
peptides tailored for immunological response assessment reflecting the patient's 
tumor mutations, guided by MHC typing. Subsequent immunoassays allow the 
detection of differential IFN-γ production patterns associated with 
(intra-tumoral) spatiotemporal differences in TIL or peripheral T-cells versus 
TIL. These bioinformatics tools, in addition to histopathological assessment, 
immunological readouts from functional bioassays and deep T-cell 'adaptome' 
analyses, are expected to advance discovery and development of next-generation 
personalized precision medicine strategies to improve clinical outcomes in 
cancer in the context of i) anti-tumor vaccination strategies, ii) gauging 
mutation-reactive T-cell responses in biological therapies and iii) expansion of 
tumor-reactive T-cells for the cellular treatment of patients with cancer.

Copyright © 2021 de Sousa, Lérias, Beltran, Paraschoudi, Condeço, Kamiki, 
António, Figueiredo, Carvalho, Castillo-Martin, Wang, Ligeiro, Rao and Maeurer.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.592031
PMCID: PMC8320363
PMID: 34335558 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.