1. Pain. 2022 May 1;163(5):e675-e688. doi: 10.1097/j.pain.0000000000002460.

Inhibitory interneurons with differential plasticities at their connections tune 
excitatory-inhibitory balance in the spinal nociceptive system.

Cathenaut L(1), Leonardon B, Kuster R, Inquimbert P, Schlichter R, Hugel S.

Author information:
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Université de Strasbourg, 
Institut des Neurosciences Cellulaires et Intégratives, Strasbourg, France.

Networks of the dorsal horn of the spinal cord process nociceptive information 
from the periphery. In these networks, the excitation-inhibition balance is 
critical to shape this nociceptive information and to gate it to the brain where 
it is interpreted as pain. Our aim was to define whether short-term plasticity 
of inhibitory connections could tune this inhibition-excitation balance by 
differentially controlling excitatory and inhibitory microcircuits. To this end, 
we used spinal cord slices from adult mice expressing enhanced green fluorescent 
protein (eGFP) under the GAD65 promoter and recorded from both eGFP+ (putative 
inhibitory) and eGFP- (putative excitatory) neurons of lamina II while 
stimulating single presynaptic GABAergic interneurons at various frequencies. 
Our results indicate that GABAergic neurons of lamina II simultaneously contact 
eGFP- and eGFP+ neurons, but these connections display very different 
frequency-dependent short-term plasticities. Connections onto eGFP- interneurons 
displayed limited frequency-dependent changes and strong time-dependent 
summation of inhibitory synaptic currents that was however subjected to a tonic 
activity-dependent inhibition involving A1 adenosine receptors. By contrast, 
GABAergic connections onto eGFP+ interneurons expressed pronounced 
frequency-dependent depression, thus favoring disinhibition at these synapses by 
a mechanism involving the activation of GABAB autoreceptors at low frequency. 
Interestingly, the balance favors inhibition at frequencies associated with 
intense pain, whereas it favors excitation at frequencies associated with low 
pain. Therefore, these target-specific and frequency-specific plasticities allow 
to tune the balance between inhibition and disinhibition while processing 
frequency-coded information from primary afferents. These short-term 
plasticities and their modulation by A1 and GABAB receptors might represent an 
interesting target in pain-alleviating strategies.

Copyright © 2021 International Association for the Study of Pain.

DOI: 10.1097/j.pain.0000000000002460
PMID: 34490851 [Indexed for MEDLINE]