1. BMJ Open. 2021 Oct 29;11(10):e046050. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2020-046050.

Barriers and facilitators of diabetes management by continuous glucose 
monitoring systems among adults with type 2 diabetes: a protocol of qualitative 
systematic review.

Zheng M(1)(2), Patel A(3), Khoja A(4), Luo Y(5)(6), Lin W(7), He Q(8), Zhao 
X(9), Wang J(10), Yang S(2), Hu P(11).

Author information:
(1)Adelaide Medical School, The University of Adelaide Faculty of Health and 
Medical Sciences, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia 
mingyue.zheng@adelaide.edu.au hupeng@cdutcm.edu.cn.
(2)School of Health and Rehabilitation, Chengdu University of Traditional 
Chinese Medicine, Chengdu, China.
(3)Observatory Evidence Service, Public Health Wales, Cardiff, UK.
(4)Adelaide Medical School, The University of Adelaide Faculty of Health and 
Medical Sciences, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.
(5)Center of Infectious Diseases, Sichuan University West China Hospital, 
Chengdu, Sichuan, China.
(6)Institute for Disaster Management and Reconstruction, Sichuan University, 
Chengdu, Sichuan, China.
(7)School of Management, Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, 
Chengdu, Sichuan, China.
(8)Department of Tendon Trauma, N0.1 Orthopedics Hospital of ChengDu QingYang 
District Medical Center, Chengdu, China.
(9)School of Pharmacy, Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, 
Chengdu, Sichuan, China.
(10)School of Public Health, Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, 
Chengdu, Sichuan, China.
(11)School of Health and Rehabilitation, Chengdu University of Traditional 
Chinese Medicine, Chengdu, China mingyue.zheng@adelaide.edu.au 
hupeng@cdutcm.edu.cn.

INTRODUCTION: Studies suggest that continuous glucose monitors (CGMs) play an 
important role in the management of diabetes. Although general acceptance has 
been reported by patients with type 2 diabetes towards the use of CGMs, 
potential barriers exist like pain due to sensor insertion, accidental removal 
of the device or adhesive strip, impacts of daily activities, skin reactions to 
sensor adhesive, etc. This systematic review of qualitative studies aims to 
explore the perspectives, experiences and narratives of patients and caregivers 
about CGM use, and its barriers and facilitators.
METHODS AND ANALYSIS: This review will include qualitative studies and 
cross-sectional and longitudinal cohort studies using open-ended questions, 
published in English by 30 October 2021. The following electronic databases will 
be searched: Cochrane Library, PubMed, EMBASE, CINAHL, PsycINFO and Scopus. A 
search of grey literature will be conducted via an online search of Google 
Scholar, WorldCat, ClinicalTrials.gov and OpenGrey A combined search strategy 
using medical subject headings (MeSH), controlled vocabulary and 'free-text' 
terms will be appropriately revised to suit each database. Primary outcomes will 
include patient and caregiver perspectives on diabetes management regarding 
glucose control; living with CGM (quality of life, experience of wearing a CGM); 
psychological aspects (anxiety, depression, emotional burden); barriers 
(technical issues, financial issues) to use of CGM and thoughts (interpretation, 
understanding) on the CGM report. A qualitative meta-synthesis will be conducted 
employing a systematic literature search of existing literature, quality 
assessment using study-specific tools and an aggregative thematic synthesis by a 
multidisciplinary team.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: Ethical approval is not required since this is a 
systematic review. The results will help improve clinical implementation of CGMs 
on part of both patients and caregivers.
PROSPERO REGISTRATION NUMBER: CRD42020152211.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2020-046050
PMCID: PMC8559096
PMID: 34716153 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.