1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2021 Nov 2;12:775233. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2021.775233. eCollection 2021.

Optogenetic Activation of Arcuate Kisspeptin Neurons Generates a Luteinizing 
Hormone Surge-Like Secretion in an Estradiol-Dependent Manner.

Lin XH(1)(2), Lass G(1), Kong LS(1), Wang H(3), Li XF(1), Huang HF(2), O'Byrne 
KT(1).

Author information:
(1)Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital, Institute of Reproduction and 
Development, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Women and Children's Health, Faculty of Life Sciences and 
Medicine, King's College London, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Maternal and Child Health Hospital 
of Songjiang District, Shanghai, China.

Traditionally, the anteroventral periventricular (AVPV) nucleus has been the 
brain area associated with luteinizing hormone (LH) surge secretion in rodents. 
However, the role of the other population of hypothalamic kisspeptin neurons, in 
the arcuate nucleus (ARC), has been less well characterized with respect to 
surge generation. Previous experiments have demonstrated ARC kisspeptin 
knockdown reduced the amplitude of LH surges, indicating that they have a role 
in surge amplification. The present study used an optogenetic approach to 
selectively stimulate ARC kisspeptin neurons and examine the effect on LH surges 
in mice with different hormonal administrations. LH level was monitored from 
13:00 to 21:00 h, at 30-minute intervals. Intact Kiss-Cre female mice showed 
increased LH secretion during the stimulation period in addition to displaying a 
spontaneous LH surge around the time of lights off. In ovariectomized Kiss-Cre 
mice, optogenetic stimulation was followed by a surge-like secretion of LH 
immediately after the stimulation period. Ovariectomized Kiss-Cre mice with a 
low dose of 17β-estradiol (OVX+E) replacement displayed a surge-like increase in 
LH release during period of optic stimulation. No LH response to the optic 
stimulation was observed in OVX+E mice on the day of estradiol benzoate (EB) 
treatment (day 1). However, after administration of progesterone (day 2), all 
OVX+E+EB+P mice exhibited an LH surge during optic stimulation. A spontaneous LH 
surge also occurred in these mice at the expected time. Taken together, these 
results help to affirm the fact that ARC kisspeptin may have a novel 
amplificatory role in LH surge production, which is dependent on the gonadal 
steroid milieu.

Copyright © 2021 Lin, Lass, Kong, Wang, Li, Huang and O’Byrne.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2021.775233
PMCID: PMC8593229
PMID: 34795643 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.