1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2022 Mar;149(3):819-832. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaci.2021.10.027. Epub 2021 Dec 8.

Pathogenic insights from genetic causes of autoinflammatory inflammasomopathies 
and interferonopathies.

Lin B(1), Goldbach-Mansky R(2).

Author information:
(1)Translational Autoinflammatory Diseases Section, Laboratory of Clinical 
Immunology and Microbiology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Md. Electronic address: 
bin.lin@nih.gov.
(2)Translational Autoinflammatory Diseases Section, Laboratory of Clinical 
Immunology and Microbiology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Md. Electronic address: 
goldbacr@mail.nih.gov.

A number of systemic autoinflammatory diseases arise from gain-of-function 
mutations in genes encoding IL-1-activating inflammasomes or cytoplasmic nucleic 
acid sensors including the receptor and sensor STING and result in increased 
IL-1 and type I interferon production, respectively. Blocking these pathways in 
human diseases has provided proof-of-concept, confirming the prominent roles of 
these cytokines in disease pathogenesis. Recent insights into the multilayered 
regulation of these sensor pathways and insights into their role in amplifying 
the disease pathogenesis of monogenic and complex genetic diseases spurred new 
drug development targeting the sensors. This review provides insights into the 
pathogenesis and genetic causes of these "prototypic" diseases caused by gain-of 
function mutations in IL-1-activating inflammasomes (inflammasomopathies) and in 
interferon-activating pathways (interferonopathies) including STING-associated 
vasculopathy with onset in infancy, Aicardi-Goutieres syndrome, and 
proteasome-associated autoinflammatory syndromes that link activation of the 
viral sensors STING, "self" nucleic acid metabolism, and the 
ubiquitin-proteasome system to "type I interferon production" and human 
diseases. Clinical responses and biomarker changes to Janus kinase inhibitors 
confirm a role of interferons, and a growing number of diseases with "interferon 
signatures" unveil extensive cross-talk between major inflammatory 
pathways. Understanding these interactions promises new tools in tackling the 
significant clinical challenges in treating patients with these conditions.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2021.10.027
PMCID: PMC8901451
PMID: 34893352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: Dr. Goldbach-Mansky has 
received study support under government CRADAs from SOBI, Regeneron, Novartis 
and Eli Lilly. All other authors have nothing to disclose.