1. Brain Pathol. 2022 Jul;32(4):e13044. doi: 10.1111/bpa.13044. Epub 2021 Dec 16.

No evidence of aberrant amyloid β and phosphorylated tau expression in herpes 
simplex virus-infected neurons of the trigeminal ganglia and brain.

Tran DN(1), Bakx ATCM(1), van Dis V(2), Aronica E(3), Verdijk RM(2), Ouwendijk 
WJD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Viroscience, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam, 
the Netherlands.
(2)Department of Pathology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam, the 
Netherlands.
(3)Department of (Neuro)Pathology, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Amsterdam University 
Medical Centers, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

Increasing evidence supports the role of neurotropic herpes simplex virus 1 
(HSV-1) in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, it is unclear 
whether previously reported findings in HSV-1 cell culture and animal models can 
be translated to humans. Here, we analyzed clinical specimens from latently 
HSV-1 infected individuals and individuals with lytic HSV infection of the brain 
(herpes simplex encephalitis; HSE). Latent HSV-1 DNA load and latency-associated 
transcript (LAT) expression were identical between trigeminal ganglia (TG) of AD 
patients and controls. Amyloid β (Aβ) and hyperphosphorylated tau (pTau) were 
not detected in latently HSV-infected TG neurons. Aging-related intraneuronal Aβ 
accumulations, neurofibrillary tangles (NFT), and/or extracellular Aβ plaques 
were observed in the brain of some HSE patients, but these were neither 
restricted to HSV-infected neurons nor brain regions containing virus-infected 
cells. Analysis of unique brain material from an AD patient with concurrent HSE 
showed that HSV-infected cells frequently localized close to Aβ plaques and NFT, 
but were not associated with exacerbated AD-related pathology. HSE-associated 
neuroinflammation was not associated with specific Aβ or pTau phenotypes. 
Collectively, we observed that neither latent nor lytic HSV infection of human 
neurons is directly associated with aberrant Aβ or pTau protein expression in 
ganglia and brain.

© 2021 The Authors. Brain Pathology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf 
of International Society of Neuropathology.

DOI: 10.1111/bpa.13044
PMCID: PMC9245940
PMID: 34913212 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.