1. Transl Lung Cancer Res. 2021 Nov;10(11):4200-4208. doi: 10.21037/tlcr-21-601.

Assessing the association of diabetes with lung cancer risk.

Leiter A(1), Charokopos A(2), Bailey S(3), Gallagher EJ(1)(4), Hirsch FR(5), 
LeRoith D(1), Wisnivesky JP(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Bone Diseases, Department of 
Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(2)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(3)Division of General Internal Medicine, Department of Medicine, Icahn School 
of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(4)Tisch Cancer Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
NY, USA.
(5)Center for Thoracic Oncology, Tisch Cancer Institute, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.

BACKGROUND: Diabetes is a well-established risk factor for many cancers, but its 
relationship with lung cancer incidence remains unclear. In this study, we aimed 
to assess if diabetes is independently associated with lung cancer risk and 
histology subtype among participants in a screening study.
METHODS: In a retrospective cohort study using data from the Prostate, Lung, 
Colorectal, and Ovarian (PLCO) study, we assessed the association of 
self-reported diabetes with lung cancer incidence using Poisson regression while 
adjusting for other established risk factors in the PLCOM2012, a validated lung 
cancer prediction model. The adjusted association of diabetes and lung cancer 
cell type was evaluated using nominal regression. Stratified analyses were also 
conducted according to sex, smoking history, and body mass index categories.
RESULTS: Overall, 140,395 participants were included in our analysis. Diabetes 
was not significantly associated with lung cancer incidence [incidence rate 
ratio (IRR): 1.03, 95% confidence interval (CI): 0.91-1.17]. Similarly, 
stratified analyses also did not show significant associations between diabetes 
and lung cancer risk (all P values >0.05). We found no significant difference in 
the distribution of lung cancer histology in participants with vs. without 
diabetes (P=0.30).
CONCLUSIONS: Diabetes was not an independent risk factor for lung cancer in a 
large cohort of PLCO participants. We did not observe differences in histology 
according to diabetes status. These results suggest that patients with diabetes 
do not need more aggressive lung cancer screening. Future research including 
more detailed metabolic parameters may further elucidate the relationship 
between metabolic disease and lung cancer risk.

2021 Translational Lung Cancer Research. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/tlcr-21-601
PMCID: PMC8674590
PMID: 35004250

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: All authors have 
completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at 
https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/tlcr-21-601). EJG is on the advisory board for 
Novartis and received consulting honorarium from Seattle Genetics and SynDevRx 
and has received payment for educational events from Infomedica and the American 
Diabetes Association. FRH reports consulting fees from Bristol-Myers Squibb, 
Merck, Amgen, AstraZenica/Daiichi, Sanofi, Regeneron, Novartis, OncoCyte, and 
Genentech, honoraria for lectures from AstraZeneca and Roche, and payment for 
expert testimony from Gehrson Lehrman Group. JPW received consulting honorarium 
from Banook, GSK, Sanofi and Atea Pharmaceutical and research grants from Sanofi 
and Arnold Consultants. The other authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.