1. Antioxidants (Basel). 2021 Dec 28;11(1):69. doi: 10.3390/antiox11010069.

Vitamin C Deficiency May Delay Diet-Induced NASH Regression in the Guinea Pig.

Skat-Rørdam J(1), Pedersen K(1), Skovsted GF(1), Gregersen I(1), Vangsgaard 
S(1), Ipsen DH(2), Latta M(3), Lykkesfeldt J(1), Tveden-Nyborg P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, Section of Experimental Animal 
Models, University of Copenhagen, Grønnegårdsvej 15, DK-1870 Frederiksberg, 
Denmark.
(2)Global Obesity and Liver Disease Research In Vivo Pharmacology DK II, Novo 
Nordisk A/S, Novo Nordisk Park 1, 2760 Måløv, Denmark.
(3)Global Obesity & Liver Disease Research, Global Drug Discovery, Novo Nordisk 
A/S, Novo Park 1, 2670 Måløv, Denmark.

Oxidative stress is directly linked to non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) 
and the progression to steaotohepatitis (NASH). Thus, a beneficial role of 
antioxidants in delaying disease progression and/or accelerating recovery may be 
expected, as corroborated by recommendations of, e.g., vitamin E supplementation 
to patients. This study investigated the effect of vitamin C deficiency-often 
resulting from poor diets low in fruits and vegetables and high in fat-combined 
with/without a change to a low fat diet on NAFLD/NASH phenotype and hepatic 
transcriptome in the guinea pig NASH model. Vitamin C deficiency per se did not 
accelerate disease induction. However, the results showed an effect of the diet 
change on the resolution of hepatic histopathological hallmarks (steatosis, 
inflammation, and ballooning) (p < 0.05 or less) and indicated a positive effect 
of a high vitamin C intake when combined with a low fat diet. Our data show that 
a diet change is important in NASH regression and suggest that a poor vitamin C 
status delays the reversion towards a healthy hepatic transcriptome and 
phenotype. In conclusion, the findings support a beneficial role of adequate 
vitamin C intake in the regression of NASH and may indicate that vitamin C 
supplementation in addition to lifestyle modifications could accelerate recovery 
in NASH patients with poor vitamin C status.

DOI: 10.3390/antiox11010069
PMCID: PMC8772888
PMID: 35052573

Conflict of interest statement: J.S.-R., K.P., G.F.S., and J.L. were partly 
funded by the LifePharm Centre at University of Copenhagen. The LifePharm Centre 
is a collaborative research effort between Novo Nordisk and University of 
Copenhagen. D.H.I. and M.L. are currently employed at Novo Nordisk A/S as part 
of the investigatory research unit of liver diseases. The funders had no role in 
the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; 
in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to publish the results.