1. mSystems. 2022 Apr 26;7(2):e0136621. doi: 10.1128/msystems.01366-21. Epub 2022
 Mar 1.

Biosensor-Coupled In Vivo Mutagenesis and Omics Analysis Reveals Reduced Lysine 
and Arginine Synthesis To Improve Malonyl-Coenzyme A Flux in Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae.

Qiu C(1), Huang M(2), Hou Y(1), Tao H(1), Zhao J(3), Shen Y(1), Bao X(3), Qi 
Q(1), Hou J(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Microbial Technology, Shandong 
Universitygrid.27255.37, Qingdao, People's Republic of China.
(2)School of Food Science and Engineering, South China University of 
Technologygrid.79703.3a, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Biobased Material and Green Papermaking, School of 
Bioengineering, Qi Lu University of Technology, Jinan, People's Republic of 
China.

Malonyl-coenzyme A (malonyl-CoA) is an important precursor for producing various 
chemicals, but its low availability limits the synthesis of downstream products 
in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Owing to the complexity of metabolism, evolutionary 
engineering is required for developing strains with improved malonyl-CoA 
synthesis. Here, using the biosensor we constructed previously, a growth-based 
screening system that links the availability of malonyl-CoA with cell growth is 
developed. Coupling this system with in vivo continuous mutagenesis enabled 
rapid generation of genome-scale mutation library and screening strains with 
improved malonyl-CoA availability. The mutant strains are analyzed by 
whole-genome sequencing and transcriptome analysis. The omics analysis revealed 
that the carbon flux rearrangement to storage carbohydrate and amino acids 
synthesis affected malonyl-CoA metabolism. Through reverse engineering, new 
processes especially reduced lysine and arginine synthesis were found to improve 
malonyl-CoA synthesis. Our study provides a valuable complementary tool to other 
high-throughput screening method for mutant strains with improved metabolite 
synthesis and improves our understanding of the metabolic regulation of 
malonyl-CoA synthesis. IMPORTANCE Malonyl-CoA is a key precursor for the 
production a variety of value-added chemicals. Although rational engineering has 
been performed to improve the synthesis of malonyl-CoA in S. cerevisiae, due to 
the complexity of the metabolism there is a need for evolving strains and 
analyzing new mechanism to improve malonyl-CoA flux. Here, we developed a 
growth-based screening system that linked the availability of malonyl-CoA with 
cell growth and manipulated DNA replication for rapid in vivo mutagenesis. The 
combination of growth-based screening with in vivo mutagenesis enabled quick 
evolution of strains with improved malonyl-CoA availability. The whole-genome 
sequencing, transcriptome analysis of the mutated strains, together with reverse 
engineering, demonstrated weakening carbon flux to lysine and arginine synthesis 
and storage carbohydrate can contribute to malonyl-CoA synthesis. Our work 
provides a guideline in simultaneous strain screening and continuous evolution 
for improved metabolic intermediates and identified new targets for improving 
malonyl-CoA downstream product synthesis.

DOI: 10.1128/msystems.01366-21
PMCID: PMC9040634
PMID: 35229648 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.