1. Brain. 2022 Jul 29;145(7):2276-2292. doi: 10.1093/brain/awac174.

Neurovascular coupling mechanisms in health and neurovascular uncoupling in 
Alzheimer's disease.

Zhu WM(1), Neuhaus A(2), Beard DJ(2)(3), Sutherland BA(4), DeLuca GC(5).

Author information:
(1)Oxford Medical School, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(2)Acute Stroke Programme, Radcliffe Department of Medicine, University of 
Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(3)School of Biomedical Sciences and Pharmacy, University of Newcastle, 
Newcastle, Australia.
(4)Tasmanian School of Medicine, College of Health and Medicine, University of 
Tasmania, Hobart, Australia.
(5)Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
UK.

To match the metabolic demands of the brain, mechanisms have evolved to couple 
neuronal activity to vasodilation, thus increasing local cerebral blood flow and 
delivery of oxygen and glucose to active neurons. Rather than relying on 
metabolic feedback signals such as the consumption of oxygen or glucose, the 
main signalling pathways rely on the release of vasoactive molecules by neurons 
and astrocytes, which act on contractile cells. Vascular smooth muscle cells and 
pericytes are the contractile cells associated with arterioles and capillaries, 
respectively, which relax and induce vasodilation. Much progress has been made 
in understanding the complex signalling pathways of neurovascular coupling, but 
issues such as the contributions of capillary pericytes and astrocyte calcium 
signal remain contentious. Study of neurovascular coupling mechanisms is 
especially important as cerebral blood flow dysregulation is a prominent feature 
of Alzheimer's disease. In this article we will discuss developments and 
controversies in the understanding of neurovascular coupling and finish by 
discussing current knowledge concerning neurovascular uncoupling in Alzheimer's 
disease.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awac174
PMCID: PMC9337814
PMID: 35551356 [Indexed for MEDLINE]