1. Membranes (Basel). 2022 Jun 29;12(7):673. doi: 10.3390/membranes12070673.

Amphiphilic Gold Nanoparticles: A Biomimetic Tool to Gain Mechanistic Insights 
into Peptide-Lipid Interactions.

Canepa E(1), Relini A(1), Bochicchio D(1), Lavagna E(1), Mescola A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physics, University of Genoa, Via Dodecaneso 33, 16146 Genoa, 
Italy.
(2)CNR-Nanoscience Institute-S3, Via Campi 213/A, 41125 Modena, Italy.

Functional peptides are now widely used in a myriad of biomedical and clinical 
contexts, from cancer therapy and tumor targeting to the treatment of bacterial 
and viral infections. Underlying this diverse range of applications are the 
non-specific interactions that can occur between peptides and cell membranes, 
which, in many contexts, result in spontaneous internalization of the peptide 
within cells by avoiding energy-driven endocytosis. For this to occur, the 
amphipathicity and surface structural flexibility of the peptides play a crucial 
role and can be regulated by the presence of specific molecular residues that 
give rise to precise molecular events. Nevertheless, most of the mechanistic 
details regulating the encounter between peptides and the membranes of bacterial 
or animal cells are still poorly understood, thus greatly limiting the 
biomimetic potential of these therapeutic molecules. In this arena, finely 
engineered nanomaterials-such as small amphiphilic gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) 
protected by a mixed thiol monolayer-can provide a powerful tool for mimicking 
and investigating the physicochemical processes underlying peptide-lipid 
interactions. Within this perspective, we present here a critical review of 
membrane effects induced by both amphiphilic AuNPs and well-known amphiphilic 
peptide families, such as cell-penetrating peptides and antimicrobial peptides. 
Our discussion is focused particularly on the effects provoked on widely studied 
model cell membranes, such as supported lipid bilayers and lipid vesicles. 
Remarkable similarities in the peptide or nanoparticle membrane behavior are 
critically analyzed. Overall, our work provides an overview of the use of 
amphiphilic AuNPs as a highly promising tailor-made model to decipher the 
molecular events behind non-specific peptide-lipid interactions and highlights 
the main affinities observed both theoretically and experimentally. The 
knowledge resulting from this biomimetic approach could pave the way for the 
design of synthetic peptides with tailored functionalities for next-generation 
biomedical applications, such as highly efficient intracellular delivery 
systems.

DOI: 10.3390/membranes12070673
PMCID: PMC9324301
PMID: 35877876

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.