1. Biomedicines. 2022 Oct 1;10(10):2450. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines10102450.

NF-κB Mutations in Germinal Center B-Cell Lymphomas: Relation to NF-κB Function 
in Normal B Cells.

Pasqualucci L(1), Klein U(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Cancer Genetics, Department of Pathology & Cell Biology, The 
Herbert Irving Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbia University, New York, NY 
10032, USA.
(2)Division of Haematology & Immunology, Leeds Institute of Medical Research at 
St. James's, University of Leeds, Leeds LS9 7TF, UK.

Most B cell lymphomas arise from the oncogenic transformation of B cells that 
have undergone the germinal center (GC) reaction of the T cell-dependent immune 
response, where high-affinity memory B cells and plasma cells are generated. The 
high proliferation of GC B cells coupled with occasional errors in the 
DNA-modifying processes of somatic hypermutation and class switch recombination 
put the cell at a risk to obtain transforming genetic aberrations, which may 
activate proto-oncogenes or inactivate tumour suppressor genes. Several subtypes 
of GC lymphomas harbor genetic mutations leading to constitutive, aberrant 
activation of the nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) signaling pathway. In normal B 
cells, NF-κB has crucial biological roles in development and physiology. GC 
lymphomas highjack these activities to promote tumour-cell growth and survival. 
It has become increasingly clear that the separate canonical and non-canonical 
routes of the NF-κB pathway and the five downstream NF-κB transcription factors 
have distinct functions in the successive stages of GC B-cell development. These 
findings may have direct implications for understanding how aberrant NF-κB 
activation promotes the genesis of various GC lymphomas corresponding to the 
developmentally distinct GC B-cell subsets. The knowledge arising from these 
studies may be explored for the development of precision medicine approaches 
aimed at more effective treatments of the corresponding tumours with specific 
NF-κB inhibitors, thus reducing systemic toxicity. We here provide an overview 
on the patterns of genetic NF-κB mutations encountered in the various GC 
lymphomas and discuss the consequences of aberrant NF-κB activation in those 
malignancies as related to the biology of NF-κB in their putative normal 
cellular counterparts.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines10102450
PMCID: PMC9599362
PMID: 36289712

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.