1. Front Pharmacol. 2022 Oct 14;13:1012008. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2022.1012008. 
eCollection 2022.

Exploring the druggability of the binding site of aurovertin, an exogenous 
allosteric inhibitor of F(O)F(1)-ATP synthase.

Cofas-Vargas LF(1), Mendoza-Espinosa P(1)(2), Avila-Barrientos LP(1), 
Prada-Gracia D(3), Riveros-Rosas H(4), García-Hernández E(1).

Author information:
(1)Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Instituto de Química, Ciudad 
Universitaria, Mexico City, Mexico.
(2)Tecnologico de Monterrey, The Institute for Obesity Research, Monterrey, 
Mexico.
(3)Unidad de Investigación en Biología Computacional y Diseño de Fármacos, 
Hospital Infantil de México Federico Gómez, Mexico City, Mexico.
(4)Departamento de Bioquímica, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Nacional 
Autónoma de México, Avenida Universidad 3000, Cd. Universitaria, Mexico City, 
Mexico.

In addition to playing a central role in the mitochondria as the main producer 
of ATP, FOF1-ATP synthase performs diverse key regulatory functions in the cell 
membrane. Its malfunction has been linked to a growing number of human diseases, 
including hypertension, atherosclerosis, cancer, and some neurodegenerative, 
autoimmune, and aging diseases. Furthermore, inhibition of this enzyme 
jeopardizes the survival of several bacterial pathogens of public health 
concern. Therefore, FOF1-ATP synthase has emerged as a novel drug target both to 
treat human diseases and to combat antibiotic resistance. In this work, we 
carried out a computational characterization of the binding sites of the fungal 
antibiotic aurovertin in the bovine F1 subcomplex, which shares a large identity 
with the human enzyme. Molecular dynamics simulations showed that although the 
binding sites can be described as preformed, the inhibitor hinders inter-subunit 
communications and exerts long-range effects on the dynamics of the catalytic 
site residues. End-point binding free energy calculations revealed hot spot 
residues for aurovertin recognition. These residues were also relevant to 
stabilize solvent sites determined from mixed-solvent molecular dynamics, which 
mimic the interaction between aurovertin and the enzyme, and could be used as 
pharmacophore constraints in virtual screening campaigns. To explore the 
possibility of finding species-specific inhibitors targeting the aurovertin 
binding site, we performed free energy calculations for two bacterial enzymes 
with experimentally solved 3D structures. Finally, an analysis of bacterial 
sequences was carried out to determine conservation of the aurovertin binding 
site. Taken together, our results constitute a first step in paving the way for 
structure-based development of new allosteric drugs targeting FOF1-ATP synthase 
sites of exogenous inhibitors.

Copyright © 2022 Cofas-Vargas, Mendoza-Espinosa, Avila-Barrientos, Prada-Gracia, 
Riveros-Rosas and García-Hernández.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2022.1012008
PMCID: PMC9615146
PMID: 36313289