1. Mater Today Bio. 2022 Nov 18;17:100498. doi: 10.1016/j.mtbio.2022.100498. 
eCollection 2022 Dec 15.

Pre-clinical evaluation of thermosensitive decellularized adipose 
tissue/platelet-rich plasma interpenetrating polymer network hydrogel for wound 
healing.

Tang J(1), Li H(1)(2), Peng H(1)(3), Zhang Z(1), Liu C(1), Cheng Y(2), Wang 
K(1), Yu Z(1), Lyu Z(4), Zhang J(5), Yi C(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Xijing Hospital, Fourth 
Military Medical University, Xi'an, China.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Basic Medicine, 
Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, China.
(3)College of Life Science, Northwest University, Xi'an, China.
(4)Department of Burns and Plastic Surgery, Second Affiliated Hospital of Fourth 
Military Medical University, Xi'an, China.
(5)Institute of Preventive Medicine, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, 
China.
(6)Department of Plastic Surgery, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang 
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China.

Wound healing remains a challenge worldwide, and an ideal wound dressing that 
promotes healing is urgently needed. In this study, we developed a 
thermosensitive injectable hydrogel known as the thermosensitive decellularized 
adipose tissue/platelet-rich plasma interpenetrating polymer network (t-DPI) 
hydrogel based on decellularized adipose tissue (DAT) and temperature-controlled 
platelet-rich plasma (t-PRP). Abundant platelets, growth factors (GFs), and 
bioactive substances from the decellularized extracellular matrix (dECM) in the 
t-DPI hydrogel had positive effects on wound healing. The morphology, 
thermosensitivity, and GFs release properties of the t-DPI hydrogel were 
studied. In vitro, the t-DPI hydrogel showed ideal cytocompatibility and the 
abilities to promote the proliferation, migration and tube formation of human 
umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs). Moreover, M2 macrophage polarization 
was enhanced after treated with t-DPI hydrogel. In vivo, the t-DPI hydrogel 
notably accelerated the full-thickness wound healing. The positive role of the 
t-DPI hydrogel on pro-angiogenesis, macrophage polarization and collagen 
deposition were validated in the nude mouse full-thickness skin defect model. In 
addition, the clinical application potential was confirmed using a pre-clinical 
porcine full-thickness wound model. Overall, this study demonstrated that the 
t-DPI hydrogel achieves fast and ideal wound healing in full-thickness wound 
defects and provides a potential clinical treatment strategy.

© 2022 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mtbio.2022.100498
PMCID: PMC9709109
PMID: 36466958

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.