1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Nov 29;23(23):14938. doi: 10.3390/ijms232314938.

Glucosylsphingosine (Lyso-Gb(1)): An Informative Biomarker in the Clinical 
Monitoring of Patients with Gaucher Disease.

Gayed MM(1), Jung SH(1), Huggins E(1), Rodriguez-Rassi E(1), DeArmey S(1), 
Kishnani PS(1), Stiles AR(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Duke University 
Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.
(2)Biochemical Genetics Laboratory, Duke University Health System, Durham, NC 
27713, USA.

Historically, disease burden and treatment responses in patients with Gaucher 
disease (GD) was assessed by monitoring clinical data, laboratory, imaging, 
chitotriosidase (CHITO), and other biomarkers; however, these biomarkers lack 
specificity and CHITO is uninformative in patients heterozygous or homozygous 
for the CHIT1 c.1049_1072dup24 variant. Recently, glucosylsphingosine 
(lyso-Gb1), a sensitive and specific GD biomarker, has been recommended for 
patient monitoring. Furthermore, studies measuring lyso-Gb1 and CHITO in 
patients on long-term treatment with enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) and/or 
substrate reduction therapy (SRT) reported as group data show a reduction in 
both analytes, yet individualized patient data are generally unavailable. We 
describe seven patients on long-term treatment with longitudinal clinical data 
with monitoring based on current treatment guidelines. We present four patients 
who exhibit stable disease with normalized CHITO despite elevated lyso-Gb1. We 
present one patient who transitioned from ERT to SRT due to lack of a clinical 
response with life-threatening thrombocytopenia who responded with marked 
improvement in platelets, and normalized levels of both CHITO and lyso-Gb1. 
Finally, we present two ERT to SRT switch patients with stable disease on ERT 
who exhibited non-compliance on SRT, one with mirrored marked elevations of 
CHITO and lyso-Gb1; and another with normal CHITO and platelets, but increasing 
lyso-Gb1 levels and enlarged spleen. These clinical vignettes highlight the role 
of lyso-Gb1 as a sensitive biomarker in management of patients with GD, and its 
further value when CHITO is normal and thus uninformative. We highlight the 
personalized medicine approach needed to optimize treatment outcomes and 
recommendations for these patients.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms232314938
PMCID: PMC9736277
PMID: 36499264 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: P.S.K. has received research/grant support from 
Sanofi Genzyme, Pfizer, and Takeda. Priya S. Kishnani has received consulting 
fees and honoraria from Sanofi Genzyme and Takeda. Priya S. Kishnani is a member 
of the Gaucher Disease Registry Advisory Board for Sanofi Genzyme. She also is a 
member of the Advisory Board for Takeda. A.R.S. has received research/grant 
support from Takeda. S.D. has participated on Sanofi Genzyme Advisory Boards and 
received honoraria from Sanofi Genzyme.