1. mBio. 2023 Apr 25;14(2):e0054923. doi: 10.1128/mbio.00549-23. Epub 2023 Apr 3.

Genome-Wide CRISPR-Cas9 Screen Identifies SMCHD1 as a Restriction Factor for 
Herpesviruses.

Tian X(1)(2)(3)(4), Zhou Y(1)(2), Wang S(1)(2), Gao M(1)(2), Xia Y(1), Li 
Y(2)(5), Zhong Y(1)(2), Xu W(2), Bai L(2)(5), Fu B(2), Zhou Y(2)(5), Lee 
HR(6)(7), Deng H(8)(9), Lan K(2)(5), Feng P(10), Zhang J(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory Breeding Base of Basic Science of Stomatology & Key 
Laboratory of Oral Biomedicine Ministry of Education, School & Hospital of 
Stomatology, State Key Laboratory of Virology, Medical Research Institute, Wuhan 
University, Wuhan, China.
(2)Frontier Science Center for Immunology and Metabolism, Wuhan University, 
Wuhan, China.
(3)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Zhongnan Hospital of 
Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.
(4)Wuhan Research Center for Infectious Diseases and Cancer, Chinese Academy of 
Medical Sciences, Wuhan, China.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Virology, School of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, 
Wuhan, China.
(6)Department of Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, College of Science and 
Technology, Korea University, Sejong, South Korea.
(7)Department of Lab Medicine, College of Medicine, Korea University, Seoul, 
South Korea.
(8)CAS Key Laboratory of Infection and Immunity, CAS Center for Excellence in 
Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Beijing, China.
(9)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(10)Section of Infection and Immunity, Herman Ostrow School of Dentistry, Norris 
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, 
California, USA.

Intrinsic immunity is the frontline of host defense against invading pathogens. 
To combat viral infection, mammalian hosts deploy cell-intrinsic effectors to 
block viral replication prior to the onset of innate and adaptive immunity. In 
this study, SMCHD1 is identified as a pivotal cellular factor that restricts 
Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) lytic reactivation through a 
genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 knockout screen. Genome-wide chromatin profiling 
revealed that SMCHD1 associates with the KSHV genome, most prominently the 
origin of lytic DNA replication (ORI-Lyt). SMCHD1 mutants defective in DNA 
binding could not bind ORI-Lyt and failed to restrict KSHV lytic replication. 
Moreover, SMCHD1 functioned as a pan-herpesvirus restriction factor that 
potently suppressed a wide range of herpesviruses, including alpha, beta, and 
gamma subfamilies. SMCHD1 deficiency facilitated the replication of a murine 
herpesvirus in vivo. These findings uncovered SMCHD1 as a restriction factor 
against herpesviruses, and this could be harnessed for the development of 
antiviral therapies to limit viral infection. IMPORTANCE Intrinsic immunity 
represents the frontline of host defense against invading pathogens. However, 
our understanding of cell-intrinsic antiviral effectors remains limited. In this 
study, we identified SMCHD1 as a cell-intrinsic restriction factor that 
controlled KSHV lytic reactivation. Moreover, SMCHD1 restricted the replication 
of a wide range of herpesviruses by targeting the origins of viral DNA 
replication (ORIs), and SMCHD1 deficiency facilitated the replication of a 
murine herpesvirus in vivo. This study helps us to better understand intrinsic 
antiviral immunity, which may be harnessed to develop new therapeutics for the 
treatment of herpesvirus infection and the related diseases.

DOI: 10.1128/mbio.00549-23
PMCID: PMC10128004
PMID: 37010434 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.