1. Cell Mol Biol Lett. 2023 May 15;28(1):40. doi: 10.1186/s11658-023-00456-7.

Galectin-1 promotes angiogenesis and chondrogenesis during antler regeneration.

Li X(1), Shi W(1), Wei G(1), Lv J(1), Wang D(1), Xing B(1), Zhou J(1), Zhao 
J(1), Sun H(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Special Economic Animal and Plant Sciences, Chinese Academy of 
Agricultural Sciences, Jilin, China.
(2)Institute of Special Economic Animal and Plant Sciences, Chinese Academy of 
Agricultural Sciences, Jilin, China. Sunhongmei@caas.cn.

BACKGROUND: Deer antlers are the only known mammalian structure that undergoes 
full regeneration. In addition, it is peculiar because when growing, it contains 
vascularized cartilage. The differentiation of antler stem cells (ASCs) into 
chondrocytes while inducing endochondral extension of blood vessels is necessary 
to form antler vascularized cartilage. Therefore, antlers provide an 
unparalleled opportunity to investigate chondrogenesis, angiogenesis, and 
regenerative medicine. A study found that Galectin-1 (GAL-1), which can be used 
as a marker in some tumors, is highly expressed in ASCs. This intrigued us to 
investigate what role GAL-1 could play in antler regeneration.
METHODS: We measured the expression level of GAL-1 in antler tissues and cells 
by immunohistochemistry, WB and QPCR. We constructed antlerogenic periosteal 
cells (APCs, one cell type of ASCs) with the GAL-1 gene knocked out 
(APCGAL-1-/-) using CRISPR-CAS9 gene editing system. The effect of GAL-1 on 
angiogenesis was determined by stimulating human umbilical vein endothelial 
cells (HUVECs) using APCGAL-1-/- conditioned medium or adding exogenous deer 
GAL-1 protein. The effect of APCGAL-1-/- on chondrogenic differentiation was 
evaluated compared with the APCs under micro-mass culture. The gene expression 
pattern of APCGAL-1-/- was analyzed by transcriptome sequencing.
RESULTS: Immunohistochemistry revealed that GAL-1 was widely expressed in the 
antlerogenic periosteum (AP), pedicle periosteum (PP) and antler growth center. 
Western blot and qRT-PCR analysis using deer cell lines further supports this 
result. The proliferation, migration, and tube formation assays of human 
umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) showed that the proangiogenic activity 
of APCGAL-1-/- medium was significantly decreased (P < 0.05) compared with the 
APCs medium. The proangiogenic activity of deer GAL-1 protein was further 
confirmed by adding exogenous deer GAL-1 protein (P < 0.05). The chondrogenic 
differentiation ability of APCGAL-1-/- was impeded under micro-mass culture. The 
terms of GO and KEGG enrichment of the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) of 
APCGAL-1-/- showed that down-regulated expression of pathways associated with 
deer antler angiogenesis, osteogenesis and stem cell pluripotency, such as the 
PI3K-AKT signaling pathway, signaling pathways regulating pluripotency of stem 
cells and TGF-β signaling pathway.
CONCLUSIONS: Deer GAL-1, has strong angiogenic activity, is widely and highly 
expressed in deer antler. The APCs can induce angiogenesis by secreting GAL-1. 
The knockout of GAL-1 gene of APCs damaged its ability to induce angiogenesis 
and differentiate into chondrocytes. This ability is crucial to the formation of 
deer antler vascularized cartilage. Moreover, Deer antlers offer a unique model 
to explore explore how angiogenesis at high levels of GAL-1 expression can be 
elegantly regulated without becoming cancerous.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s11658-023-00456-7
PMCID: PMC10184426
PMID: 37189051 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.