1. Redox Biol. 2023 Aug;64:102784. doi: 10.1016/j.redox.2023.102784. Epub 2023
Jun  19.

Citrullination of actin-ligand and nuclear structural proteins, cytoskeleton 
reorganization and protein redistribution across cellular fractions are early 
events in ionomycin-induced NETosis.

Reis LR(1), Souza Junior DR(1), Tomasin R(1), Bruni-Cardoso A(1), Di Mascio 
P(1), Ronsein GE(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Chemistry, University of São Paulo, 
São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Chemistry, University of São Paulo, 
São Paulo, Brazil. Electronic address: ronsein@iq.usp.br.

Neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) are web-like structures of DNA coated with 
cytotoxic proteins and histones released by activated neutrophils through a 
process called NETosis. NETs release occurs through a sequence of highly 
organized events leading to chromatin expansion and rupture of nuclear and 
cellular membranes. In calcium ionophore-induced NETosis, the enzyme 
peptidylargine deiminase 4 (PAD4) mediates chromatin decondensation through 
histone citrullination, but the biochemical pathways involved in this process 
are not fully understood. Here we use live-imaging microscopy and proteomic 
studies of the neutrophil cellular fractions to investigate the early events in 
ionomycin-triggered NETosis. We found that before ionomycin-stimulated 
neutrophils release NETs, profound biochemical changes occur in and around their 
nucleus, such as, cytoskeleton reorganization, nuclear redistribution of 
actin-remodeling related proteins, and citrullination of actin-ligand and 
nuclear structural proteins. Ionomycin-stimulated neutrophils rapidly lose their 
characteristic polymorphic nucleus, and these changes are promptly communicated 
to the extracellular environment through the secretion of proteins related to 
immune response. Therefore, our findings revealed key biochemical mediators in 
the early process that subsequently culminates with nuclear and cell membranes 
rupture, and extracellular DNA release.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.redox.2023.102784
PMCID: PMC10320250
PMID: 37356135 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest All authors 
declare there is no financial/personal interest or belief that could affect 
their objectivity. Authors do not have competing interests to declare.