1. Ther Clin Risk Manag. 2023 Jun 23;19:503-523. doi: 10.2147/TCRM.S414460. 
eCollection 2023.

Medications and Food Interfering with the Bioavailability of Levothyroxine: A 
Systematic Review.

Liu H(#)(1), Lu M(#)(1), Hu J(1), Fu G(2), Feng Q(3), Sun S(1), Chen C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Breast and Thyroid Surgery, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan 
University, Wuhan, Hubei, 430060, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei, 
430060, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Orthopedics, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, 
Hubei, People's Republic of China.
(#)Contributed equally

PURPOSE: Levothyroxine is a common prescribed drug. Many medications and food, 
however, can interfere with its bioavailability. The aim of this review was to 
summarize the medications, food and beverages that interact with levothyroxine 
and to assess their effects, mechanisms and treatments.
METHODS: A systematic review on interfering substances that interact with 
levothyroxine was performed. Web of Science, Embase, PubMed, the Cochrane 
library, grey literature from other sources and the lists of references were 
searched for human studies comparing the levothyroxine efficacy with and without 
interfering substances. The patient characteristics, drug classes, effects and 
mechanism were extracted. The NHLBI study quality assessment tools and the JBI 
critical appraisal checklist were used to assess the quality of included 
studies.
RESULTS: A total of 107 articles with 128 studies were included. Drugs 
interactions were revealed in calcium and iron supplements, proton pump 
inhibitors, bile acid sequestrants, phosphate binders, sex hormones, 
anticonvulsants and other drugs. Some food and beverage could also induce 
malabsorption. Proposed mechanisms included direct complexing, alkalization, 
alteration of serum thyroxine-binding globulin levels and acceleration of 
levothyroxine catabolism via deiodination. Dose adjustment, administration 
separation and discontinuation of interfering substances can eliminate the 
interactions. Liquid solutions and soft-gel capsules could eliminate the 
malabsorption due to chelation and alkalization. The qualities of most included 
studies were moderate.
CONCLUSION: Lots of medications and food can impair the bioavailability of 
levothyroxine. Clinicians, patients and pharmaceutical companies should be aware 
of the possible interactions. Further well-designed studies are needed to 
provide more solid evidence on treatment and mechanisms.

© 2023 Liu et al.

DOI: 10.2147/TCRM.S414460
PMCID: PMC10295503
PMID: 37384019

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.