1. Med Oral Patol Oral Cir Bucal. 2023 Sep 1;28(5):e487-e495. doi: 
10.4317/medoral.25890.

The efficacy of hydrogel containing zinc oxide-loaded and minocycline serum 
albumin nanopartical in the treatment of peri-implantitis.

Li X(1), Yuan C, Chen Q, Xue Q, Mou J, Wang P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Implantology Affiliated Stomatological Hospital of Xuzhou 
Medical University 130 Huaihai West Road, Quanshan, Xuzhou, 22100, China 
wpl0771@163.com.

BACKGROUND: We conducted this animal study to assess the efficacy of the novel 
hydrogel containing zinc oxide-loaded and minocycline serum albumin 
nanoparticals (Mino-ZnO@Alb NPs) on peri-implantitis in an experimental mouse 
model.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Mino-ZnO@Alb NPs was prepared as previously reported. The 
peri-implantitis model was successfully established in rats, and the rats were 
divided into three groups randomly: Mino-ZnO@Alb NPs (Mino-ZnO) group, 
minocycline group, and untreated group. Four weeks later, clinical and 
radiographic assessments were performed to evaluate soft tissue inflammation and 
bone resorption level. Histologic analysis was performed to estimate the amount 
of remaining supporting bone tissue (SBT) around implants. ELISA tests were used 
to determine the concentration of inflammation factor interleukin-1-beta (IL-1β) 
and anti-inflammation factor tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α) around 
implants.
RESULTS: After one month, the Mino-ZnO group showed better results than the 
other two groups in regards to the results of bleeding on probing, probing 
pocket depth, bleeding index and gingival index. X-ray showed that SBT at mesial 
and distal sites around implants in the other two groups was significantly lower 
compared with that of Mino-ZnO group. The quantity of osteoclasts in 
peri-implant tissues of the Mino-ZnO group was less than that in the minocycline 
and untreated groups. IL-1β in the Mino-ZnO group was lower than that in the 
other two groups. TNF-α level was the opposite.
CONCLUSIONS: Mino-ZnO@Alb NPs can effectively treat peri-implantitis and promote 
soft tissue healing, and may act as a promising product.

DOI: 10.4317/medoral.25890
PMCID: PMC10499345
PMID: 37471303 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest All of the authors had no 
any personal, financial, commercial or academic conflicts of interest 
separately.