1. Exp Neurol. 1997 Aug;146(2):305-14. doi: 10.1006/exnr.1997.6446.

Intracerebroventricular transplantation of embryonic neuronal tissue from 
inflammatory resistant into inflammatory susceptible rats suppresses specific 
components of inflammation.

Misiewicz B(1), Poltorak M, Raybourne RB, Gomez M, Listwak S, Sternberg EM.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Neuroendocrinology Branch, National Institute of Mental Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

To more directly define the role of central nervous system factors in 
susceptibility to peripheral inflammatory disease, we examined the effect of 
intracerebroventricular transplantation of neuronal tissue from inflammatory 
resistant into inflammatory susceptible rats on subcutaneous carrageenan-induced 
inflammation (a measure of innate immunity), and on the relative percentage of 
naive and memory T helper cells in peripheral blood (a measure of the anamnestic 
immune response). Female inflammatory disease susceptible Lewis (LEW/N) rats 
transplanted with hypothalamic tissue from inflammatory resistant Fischer 
(F344/N) rats exhibited > 85% decrease in carrageenan inflammation compared to 
naive LEW/N rats, LEW/N rats transplanted with F344/N spinal cord, or 
sham-operated animals. LEW/N rats transplanted with LEW/N hypothalamic tissue 
exhibited > 50% decrease in carrageenan inflammation. In contrast, 
intracerebroventricular transplantation of neuronal tissue did not affect the 
characteristically twofold higher percentage of naive versus memory T helper 
cells in LEW/N rats, suggesting that the central nervous system (CNS) and 
hypothalamus play a greater role in the innate inflammatory response than in the 
acquired immune processes. Grafted tissue survived well and did not show 
extensive gliosis or inflammation. Compared to naive LEW/N rats, LEW/N rats 
transplanted with F344/N or LEW/N hypothalamic tissue expressed significantly 
greater hypothalamic corticotropin releasing hormone mRNA. LEW/N rats 
transplanted with F344/N hypothalamic tissue also showed significant increases 
in plasma corticosterone responses to lipopolysaccharide. These data indicate 
that intracerebroventricular transplantation of fetal hypothalamic tissue from 
inflammatory resistant into inflammatory susceptible rats suppresses peripheral 
inflammation partially through hypothalamic factors. These findings have 
implications for understanding the contribution of specific neuronal tissue in 
regulation of components of the immune/inflammatory response and in 
susceptibility to inflammatory disease. Furthermore, this model could be used in 
the development of potential new treatments for inflammatory/autoimmune diseases 
aimed specifically at sites within the CNS.

DOI: 10.1006/exnr.1997.6446
PMID: 9270039 [Indexed for MEDLINE]