1. Biochem J. 1999 Mar 1;338 ( Pt 2)(Pt 2):265-72.

Isolation and complete covalent structure of liver microsomal paraoxonase.

Ozols J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Connecticut Health Center, 
Farmington, CT 06030-3305, USA. ozols@sun.uchc.edu

Paraoxonase (PON1) is a serum esterase exclusively associated with high-density 
lipoproteins; it might confer protection against coronary artery disease by 
destroying pro-inflammatory oxidized lipids in oxidized low-density 
lipoproteins. Here I show that rabbit liver microsomes contain a PON analogue 
(MsPON) and report the isolation and complete covalent structure of MsPON. In 
detergent-solubilized microsomes, MsPON co-purifies with the microsomal 
triacylglycerol transfer protein (MTP) complex. MsPON was separated from the 
complex and purified to homogeneity under non-denaturing conditions. Automated 
sequence analysis of intact MsPON and peptides obtained from enzymic and 
chemical cleavages led to the elucidation of the complete covalent structure of 
MsPON. The protein is a single polypeptide consisting of 350 residues. The 
sequence of rabbit liver microsomal MsPON is 60% identical with that of rabbit 
serum PON1, and 84% identical with the sequence predicted by a human cDNA of 
unknown function, designated PON3. MsPON has a hydrophobic segment at the 
N-terminus that might serve to anchor the protein to the microsomal membrane or 
to the MTP complex. Unlike in the serum enzyme, two potential N-glycan acceptor 
sites in MsPON are not glycosylated. An absence of N-glycans was also indicated 
in the rabbit liver MTP. MsPON has a single free cysteine residue at position 38 
and a disulphide bond between Cys-279 and Cys-348. The microsomal enzyme lacks 
three residues at the N-terminus that are present in the serum protein. MsPON 
lacks four residues at the C-terminus that are present in the rabbit serum 
protein but absent from human serum PON1. On the basis of the observation that 
MsPON displays a high degree of similarity with serum PON1, it is proposed that 
MsPON might have a function related to that of PON1 in serum high-density 
lipoprotein complexes.

PMCID: PMC1220051
PMID: 10024501 [Indexed for MEDLINE]