1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1999 Jun;84(6):2134-9. doi: 10.1210/jcem.84.6.5736.

Inhibition of growth hormone (GH) secretion by a mutant GH-I gene product in 
neuroendocrine cells containing secretory granules: an implication for isolated 
GH deficiency inherited in an autosomal dominant manner.

Hayashi Y(1), Yamamoto M, Ohmori S, Kamijo T, Ogawa M, Seo H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Research Institute of 
Environmental Medicine, Nagoya University, Japan. 
hayashiy@endeavor.riem.nagoya-u.ac.jp

Isolated GH deficiency (IGHD) type II is a disease inherited in an autosomal 
dominant manner. Although point mutations at the donor splice site of intron 3 
of the GH-I gene have been identified in patients, the mechanism of how such 
mutations result in severe GH deficiency is unclear. Recently, we identified two 
mutations in Japanese patients with IGHD type II, G to A substitutions at the 
first (mutA) and fifth (mutE) nucleotides of intron 3. Messenger ribonucleic 
acids skipping exon 3 were transcribed from both mutant GH-I genes. We studied 
in this report the synthesis and secretion of GH encoded by the mutant GH-I 
genes and tested whether inhibition of wild-type GH secretion by mutant products 
could be demonstrated in cultured cell lines. A metabolic labeling study in 
COS-1 cells revealed that a mutant GH with a reduced molecular mass was 
synthesized from the mutant messenger ribonucleic acid and retained in the cells 
for at least 6 h. On the other hand, the wild-type GH was rapidly secreted into 
the medium. Coexpression of mutant and wild-type GH did not result in any 
inhibition of wild-type GH secretion in COS-1 or HepG2 cells. However, 
coexpression of mutant GH resulted in significant inhibition of wild-type GH 
secretion in somatotroph-derived MtT/S cells as well as in 
adrenocorticotroph-derived AtT-20 cells, without affecting cell viability. We 
conclude that the dominant negative effect of mutant GH on the secretion of 
wild-type GH is at least in part responsible for the pathogenesis of IGHD type 
II. Our results also suggest that neuroendocrine cell type-specific mechanisms, 
including intracellular storage of the secretory proteins, are involved in the 
inhibition.

DOI: 10.1210/jcem.84.6.5736
PMID: 10372722 [Indexed for MEDLINE]