1. J Lab Clin Med. 1999 Jan;133(1):55-63. doi: 10.1053/lc.1999.v133.a94239.

Inhibition of activated human mesangial cell proliferation by the natural 
product of Cordyceps sinensis (H1-A): an implication for treatment of IgA 
mesangial nephropathy.

Lin CY(1), Ku FM, Kuo YC, Chen CF, Chen WP, Chen A, Shiao MS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Medical Research, Veterans General 
Hospital-Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China.

Cordyceps sinensis (CS) is a parasitic fungus that has been used as a Chinese 
medicine for a long time in the treatment of nephritis. Today, the hypothesis 
about the pathogenesis of immunoglobulin A nephropathy (IgAN) is that 
nephritogenic IgA immune complexes (IgAIC) go to the kidney to stimulate resting 
mesangial cells to release cytokines and growth factors. These cytokines and 
growth factors cause mesangial cell proliferation and release matrix, chemical 
mediators that lead to the glomerular injury. However, nephritogenic IgAIC in 
humans is still unknown. To solve this problem previously, we established an in 
vitro model that showed that cultured human mesangial cells (HMC) stimulated 
with interleukin-1 (IL-1) plus IL-6 can cause mesangial cell proliferation, 
increasing production of chemical mediators and superoxide anion. An in vivo 
model also proved that this culture medium may lead to renal injury with 
hematuria and proteinuria. Therefore, to fractionate the crude components that 
can be used in the treatment of patients with IgAN, we cultured HMC, and then an 
HMC activating model with HMC incubated with IL-1 and IL-6 was established. We 
fractionated the crude methanolic extracts from fruiting bodies of CS with the 
use of this in vitro inhibition of HMC activation model as our assay method. In 
brief, the fruiting bodies were extracted by silica gel column chromatography. 
One out of 6 column fractions, F-2, significantly inhibited the HMC activation 
by IL-1 plus IL-6. The acute toxicity test with male Institute of Cancer 
Research mice showed no liver toxicity or mutagenicity. Then we established an 
IgAN animal model with R36A (Pneumococcal C-polysaccharide purified from 
Streptococcus pneumoniae) as antigen and anti-R36A IgA monoclonal antibody to 
form nephritogenic IgA-IC, which can induce hematuria and proteinuria in mice 
with IgA deposition in the mesangial area. The mice in the IgAN model fed with 
1% F-2 in diet had significant reduction of hematuria and proteinuria together 
with histopathologic improvement. Therefore this fraction was then purified by 
silica gel column chromatography and high-performance liquid chromatography, 
which got a purified compound H1-A, which can suppress the activated HMC and 
alleviate IgAN (Berger's disease) with clinical and histologic improvement. 
These results give us a new regimen for the treatment of patients with IgAN in 
the future.

DOI: 10.1053/lc.1999.v133.a94239
PMID: 10385482 [Indexed for MEDLINE]