1. J Immunol. 1999 Jul 15;163(2):659-67.

In vivo polysaccharide-specific IgG isotype responses to intact Streptococcus 
pneumoniae are T cell dependent and require CD40- and B7-ligand interactions.

Wu ZQ(1), Vos Q, Shen Y, Lees A, Wilson SR, Briles DE, Gause WC, Mond JJ, 
Snapper CM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Uniformed Services University of the Health 
Sciences, Bethesda, MD 2081, USA.

In vivo Ig responses to soluble, haptenated polysaccharide (PS) Ags are T cell 
independent and do not require CD40 ligand (CD40L). However, little is known 
regarding the regulation of in vivo PS-specific Ig responses to intact bacteria. 
We immunized mice with a nonencapsulated, type 2 Streptococcus pneumoniae (R36A) 
and compared the parameters that regulated in vivo Ig isotype responses to the 
bacterial cell wall C-PS determinant, phosphorylcholine (PC), relative to Ig 
responses to the cell wall protein, pneumococcal surface protein A. Consistent 
with previous reports using soluble PS and protein Ags, the anti-PC and 
anti-pneumococcal surface protein A responses differed in that the anti-PC 
response was induced more rapidly, had a distinctive Ig isotype profile, and 
failed to demonstrate boosting upon secondary challenge with R36A. However, in 
contrast to previous studies, the IgG anti-PC response was TCR-alphabeta+ T cell 
dependent, required CD40L, and was blocked by administration of CTLA4 Ig. The 
nature of the T cell help for the anti-PC response had distinct features in that 
it was only partially blocked by CTLA4 Ig and was dependent upon both CD4+ and 
CD8+ T cells. Surprisingly, whereas the IgM anti-PC response was largely T cell 
independent, a strong requirement for CD40L was still observed, suggesting the 
possibility of an in vivo T cell-independent source for CD40L-dependent help. 
These data suggest that the regulatory parameters that govern in vivo Ig 
responses to purified, soluble PS Ags may not adequately account for PS-specific 
Ig responses to intact bacteria.

PMID: 10395655 [Indexed for MEDLINE]