1. J Cell Biol. 1999 Jul 12;146(1):149-64. doi: 10.1083/jcb.146.1.149.

Myosin light chain kinase functions downstream of Ras/ERK to promote migration 
of urokinase-type plasminogen activator-stimulated cells in an 
integrin-selective manner.

Nguyen DH(1), Catling AD, Webb DJ, Sankovic M, Walker LA, Somlyo AV, Weber MJ, 
Gonias SL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Virginia 
Health Sciences Center, Charlottesville, Virginia 22908, USA.

Urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA) activates the mitogen activated 
protein (MAP) kinases, extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) 1 and 2, in 
diverse cell types. In this study, we demonstrate that uPA stimulates migration 
of MCF-7 breast cancer cells, HT 1080 fibrosarcoma cells, and 
uPAR-overexpressing MCF-7 cells by a mechanism that depends on uPA receptor 
(uPAR)-ligation and ERK activation. Ras and MAP kinase kinase (MEK) were 
necessary and sufficient for uPA-induced ERK activation and stimulation of 
cellular migration, as demonstrated in experiments with dominant-negative and 
constitutively active mutants of these signaling proteins. Myosin light chain 
kinase (MLCK) was also required for uPA-stimulated cellular migration, as 
determined in experiments with three separate MLCK inhibitors. When MCF-7 cells 
were treated with uPA, MLCK was phosphorylated by a MEK-dependent pathway and 
apparently activated, since serine-phosphorylation of myosin II regulatory light 
chain (RLC) was also increased. Despite the transient nature of ERK 
phosphorylation, MLCK remained phosphorylated for at least 6 h. The uPA-induced 
increase in MCF-7 cell migration was observed selectively on vitronectin-coated 
surfaces and was mediated by a beta1-integrin (probably alphaVbeta1) and 
alphaVbeta5. When MCF-7 cells were transfected to express alphaVbeta3 and 
treated with uPA, ERK was still phosphorylated; however, the cells did not 
demonstrate increased migration. Neutralizing the function of alphaVbeta3, with 
blocking antibody, restored the ability of uPA to promote cellular migration. 
Thus, we have demonstrated that uPA promotes cellular migration, in an 
integrin-selective manner, by initiating a uPAR-dependent signaling cascade in 
which Ras, MEK, ERK, and MLCK serve as essential downstream effectors.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.146.1.149
PMCID: PMC2199739
PMID: 10402467 [Indexed for MEDLINE]