1. Virology. 1999 Sep 15;262(1):55-63. doi: 10.1006/viro.1999.9897.

Analysis of the SH3-binding region of HIV-1 nef: partial functional defects 
introduced by mutations in the polyproline helix and the hydrophobic pocket.

Craig HM(1), Pandori MW, Riggs NL, Richman DD, Guatelli JC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, CA, USA.

An SH3-binding domain within the Nef protein of primate lentiviruses has been 
reported to be important to viral replication and infectivity and dispensable 
for CD4 downregulation, but its precise role remains unclear. This study 
investigates the effects of mutations in both the polyproline helix and in the 
hydrophobic pocket that constitute the SH3-binding domain of Nef. The data 
demonstrate that the well-studied mutation of the central prolines is only 
partially disruptive to viral infectivity and replication. The central prolines 
also make a subtle contribution to the efficiency of CD4 downregulation, 
detectable only using low levels of Nef expression. Mutation of a conserved 
arginine in the polyproline helix abrogated more completely Nef-mediated 
enhancement of viral infectivity; this mutation also adversely affected CD4 
downregulation at low levels of Nef expression. Only the R77A mutation 
substantially impaired downregulation of class I MHC. However, mutation of the 
central prolines and of R77 yielded proteins that were expressed less 
efficiently than wild-type Nef. The R77A mutant was expressed most poorly, 
compatible with its defective phenotypes in all assays. Mutations of the 
hydrophobic pocket were minimally detrimental to both the virologic and the 
receptor modulatory functions of Nef. Taken together, this analysis suggests 
that mutations in the SH3-binding domain do not abrogate fully any 
Nef-associated phenotype in the absence of detrimental effects on protein 
expression. We suggest that mutations in this domain can introduce incomplete 
effects caused by subtle impairments to protein expression; these effects may 
appear selective under certain experimental conditions due to different 
sensitivities of the assays to the level of Nef expression.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/viro.1999.9897
PMID: 10489340 [Indexed for MEDLINE]