1. Mol Pharmacol. 1999 Nov;56(5):973-81. doi: 10.1124/mol.56.5.973.

Contribution of individual subunits to the multimeric P2X(2) receptor: estimates 
based on methanethiosulfonate block at T336C.

Stoop R(1), Thomas S, Rassendren F, Kawashima E, Buell G, Surprenant A, North 
RA.

Author information:
(1)Geneva Biomedical Research Institute, Glaxo Wellcome Research and 
Development, Geneva, Switzerland. ron.stoop@ibcm.unil.ch

P2X receptors are membrane proteins that incorporate a cation-selective ion 
channel that can be opened by the binding of extracellular ATP. They associate 
as hetero- and homo-multimers of currently unknown stoichiometry. In this study, 
we have used Xenopus laevis oocytes to express rat P2X(2) receptor subunits, 
which carry a cysteine mutation at position 336. ATP-induced currents at this 
mutant receptor subunit were blocked by more than 90% when exposed to 
[2-(trimethylammonium) ethyl] methanethiosulfonate (MTSET), whereas currents 
from wild-type subunits were not affected. To compare mutant and wild-type 
channel expression, we introduced an epitope in their extracellular domains and 
found for both channels a similar linear relationship between antibody binding 
and currents induced by ATP. To study the contribution of the individual 
subunits to the block by MTSET, we coinjected different mixtures of wild-type 
and mutant-encoding mRNAs. We found that the inhibition by MTSET depended 
linearly on the proportion of mutant subunits, which was clearly contrary to the 
hypothesis that a single mutant subunit could act in a dominant fashion. 
Subsequent concatenation of wild-type and mutant-encoding cDNAs resulted in an 
inhibition by MTSET that also depended linearly on the number of mutant subunits 
and was independent of the position of the mutant subunit, as long as only two 
or three P2X(2) subunits were joined. With four or six subunits joined, however, 
the inhibition by MTSET became strongly position-dependent. The present results 
show that a "per-subunit" channel block causes the blocking effects of MTSET and 
they suggest that not four but maximally three subunits actively participate in 
the channel formation.

DOI: 10.1124/mol.56.5.973
PMID: 10531403 [Indexed for MEDLINE]