1. Epilepsia. 2000 Jan;41(1):52-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1528-1157.2000.tb01505.x.

Electroclinical picture of autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy in 
a Japanese family.

Ito M(1), Kobayashi K, Fujii T, Okuno T, Hirose S, Iwata H, Mitsudome A, Kaneko 
S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Shiga Medical Center for Children, Moriyama, Japan. 
m-ito@qa2.so-net.ne.jp

PURPOSE: Autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy (ADNFLE) is the 
first described partial epilepsy syndrome known to be due to a single gene 
mutation. We found a first Japanese ADNFLE family with a novel mutation of the 
neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR) alpha4 subunit (CHRNA4) gene. 
The aim of this report is precisely to describe the electroclinical 
manifestations of ADNFLE in this family and to compare these findings with those 
of other families reported previously in the literature.
METHODS: Three affected family members were investigated electroclinically by 
close clinical observation, interictal EEG, video-EEG monitoring, magnetic 
resonance imaging, and single-photon-emission tomography. Information about 
other affected family members was obtained from either the spouse or the 
parents. Mutations within the CHRNA4 gene were examined in seven family members.
RESULTS: The clinical manifestations and diagnostic findings in the members of 
this family were consistent with ADNFLE. However, there were intrafamilial and 
interfamilial variations in clinical features. The seizures of the patients were 
brief tonic seizures, with hyperventilation in children and secondarily 
generalized tonic-clonic convulsions in adults. The onset of the children's 
seizures began in infancy and early childhood. The children's seizures were 
sometimes provoked by movement and sound stimulation, and did not respond to 
antiepileptic drugs. On the other hand, the adults' seizures disappeared 
spontaneously or were easily controlled with carbamazepine. Three children 
showed hyperactivity, and two children had mild mental retardation. All patients 
had impaired consciousness during their seizures and no auras. A novel missense 
mutation (c755C>T) in exon 5 of the CHRNA4 gene was found in four affected 
family members.
CONCLUSIONS: The electroclinical pictures of a Japanese family with ADNFLE were 
basically the same as those of other families reported, but with slight 
differences. ADNFLE is probably not uncommon, and it is very likely that there 
are unidentified patients with this inherited disorder in Japan.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1528-1157.2000.tb01505.x
PMID: 10643924 [Indexed for MEDLINE]