1. Clin Chem. 2000 Feb;46(2):224-33.

Flow cytometric assessment of LDL ligand function for detection of heterozygous 
familial defective apolipoprotein B-100.

Raungaard B(1), Heath F, Hansen PS, Brorholt-Petersen JU, Jensen HK, Faergeman 
O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Cardiology, Aarhus Amtssygehus University 
Hospital, Tage Hansens Gade 2, DK-8000 Aarhus C, Denmark. rau@dadlnet.dk

BACKGROUND: Familial defective apolipoprotein (apo) B-100 (FDB) is caused by a 
mutation in the apoB gene and characterized by decreased binding of LDL to LDL 
receptors because of reduced function of the apoB-100 ligand. FDB may be 
associated with severe hypercholesterolemia and cannot always be distinguished 
from familial hypercholesterolemia phenotypically.
METHODS: We used a fluorescence flow cytometry assay with Epstein-Barr 
virus-transformed lymphocytes to detect reduced LDL ligand function by 
competitive binding with fluorescently conjugated LDL (DiI-LDL). The assay was 
tested and validated using LDL from patients heterozygous for the Arg(3500)-Gln 
mutation and their first-degree relatives. Knowing the actual apoB genotype of 
patients and relatives allowed us to assess the ability of the assay to predict 
the results of DNA analysis. The results were compared to measurements of LDL 
ligand function in unrelated healthy control subjects to characterize 
functionally the Arg(3500)-Gln mutation.
RESULTS: Fluorescence was significantly increased in cells incubated with 
DiI-LDL in competition with unlabeled LDL from FDB(R3500Q) heterozygotes 
compared with cells incubated with DiI-LDL in competition with unlabeled LDL 
from relatives or unrelated healthy control subjects. Thus, patients 
heterozygous for the Arg(3500)-Gln mutation had significantly reduced LDL ligand 
function. The binding affinity of LDL from FDB(R3500Q) heterozygotes was 32% of 
that in non-FDB relatives and healthy controls. The assay had a diagnostic 
sensitivity of 0.95 and diagnostic specificity of 0.89.
CONCLUSIONS: The diagnostic accuracy of the assay was too low to allow reliable 
diagnosis of individual cases of heterozygous FDB(R3500Q). However, fluorescence 
flow cytometry may supplement genetic identification of FDB and functionally 
characterize gene mutations associated with major reductions in LDL ligand 
function.

PMID: 10657378 [Indexed for MEDLINE]