1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Sep 1;275(35):27069-74. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M004951200.

The PDZ-interacting domain of cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance 
regulator is required for functional expression in the apical plasma membrane.

Moyer BD(1), Duhaime M, Shaw C, Denton J, Reynolds D, Karlson KH, Pfeiffer J, 
Wang S, Mickle JE, Milewski M, Cutting GR, Guggino WB, Li M, Stanton BA.

Author information:
(1)Dartmouth Medical School, Department of Physiology, Hanover, New Hampshire 
03755, USA.

Polarization of cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR), a 
cAMP-activated chloride channel to the apical plasma membrane in epithelial 
cells is critical for vectorial chloride transport. Previously, we reported that 
the C terminus of CFTR constitutes a PDZ-interacting domain that is required for 
CFTR polarization to the apical plasma membrane and interaction with the PDZ 
domain-containing protein EBP50 (NHERF). PDZ-interacting domains are typically 
composed of the C-terminal three to five amino acids, which in CFTR are QDTRL. 
Our goal was to identify the key amino acid(s) in the PDZ-interacting domain of 
CFTR with regard to its apical polarization, interaction with EBP50, and ability 
to mediate transepithelial chloride secretion. Point substitution of the 
C-terminal leucine (Leu at position 0) with alanine abrogated apical 
polarization of CFTR, interaction between CFTR and EBP50, efficient expression 
of CFTR in the apical membrane, and chloride secretion. Point substitution of 
the threonine (Thr at position -2) with alanine or valine had no effect on the 
apical polarization of CFTR, but reduced interaction between CFTR and EBP50, 
efficient expression of CFTR in the apical membrane as well as chloride 
secretion. By contrast, individual point substitution of the other C-terminal 
amino acids (Gln at position -4, Asp at position -3 and Arg at position -1) with 
alanine had no effect on measured parameters. We conclude that the 
PDZ-interacting domain, in particular the leucine (position 0) and threonine 
(position -2) residues, are required for the efficient, polarized expression of 
CFTR in the apical plasma membrane, interaction of CFTR with EBP50, and for the 
ability of CFTR to mediate chloride secretion. Mutations that delete the C 
terminus of CFTR may cause cystic fibrosis because CFTR is not polarized, 
complexed with EBP50, or efficiently expressed in the apical membrane of 
epithelial cells.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M004951200
PMID: 10852925 [Indexed for MEDLINE]