1. J Endocrinol. 2000 Oct;167(1):175-82. doi: 10.1677/joe.0.1670175.

Functional inactivation of the IGF-I receptor delays differentiation of skeletal 
muscle cells.

Cheng ZQ(1), Adi S, Wu NY, Hsiao D, Woo EJ, Filvaroff EH, Gustafson TA, 
Rosenthal SM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Francisco, California 
94143, USA.

Skeletal myoblasts are inherently programmed to leave the cell cycle and begin 
the differentiation process following removal of exogenous growth factors. Serum 
withdrawal results in a marked induction of IGF production which is essential 
for skeletal muscle differentiation in vitro. However, the potential role of the 
tyrosine kinase IGF-I receptor (thought to be the principal mediator of both 
IGF-I and II signaling in skeletal muscle) in the decision of myoblasts to begin 
differentiation following serum withdrawal is unknown. To explore the role of 
the IGF-I receptor in this decision by skeletal myoblasts, we functionally 
inactivated endogenous IGF-I receptors in mouse C2C12 cells using a dominant 
negative, kinase-inactive IGF-I receptor in which the ATP-binding site lysine 
(K) at residue 1003 has been mutated to alanine (A). Cell lines with the 
greatest degree of mutant IGF-I receptor expression (A/K cells) demonstrated 
functional inactivation of endogenous IGF-I receptors as determined by their 
impaired ability to phosphorylate the principal substrate of the IGF-I receptor, 
IRS-1, in response to treatment with IGF-I. In addition, the proliferative 
response of myoblasts to IGF-I was completely abolished in A/K cells. Following 
withdrawal of exogenous growth factors, A/K cells demonstrated a marked delay in 
the induction of the gene expression of myogenin, a skeletal muscle-specific 
transcription factor essential for differentiation, and a subsequent delay in 
the induction of muscle creatine kinase activity. Delayed differentiation in A/K 
cells was associated with prolonged phosphorylation of the cell cycle regulatory 
retinoblastoma (Rb) protein; it is the un- (or hypo-) phosphorylated form of Rb 
which is known to promote differentiation in skeletal myoblasts. Thus, the IGF-I 
receptor regulates the timing of myoblast differentiation induced by serum 
withdrawal. The delayed differentiation of skeletal myoblasts with functionally 
inactive IGF-I receptors may result, at least in part, from delayed induction of 
myogenin gene expression and prolonged phosphorylation of the Rb protein.

DOI: 10.1677/joe.0.1670175
PMID: 11018765 [Indexed for MEDLINE]