1. Biochemistry. 2000 Oct 10;39(40):12365-74. doi: 10.1021/bi000775k.

Thermodynamic and structural studies of cavity formation in proteins suggest 
that loss of packing interactions rather than the hydrophobic effect dominates 
the observed energetics.

Ratnaparkhi GS(1), Varadarajan R.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Biophysics Unit, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560 012, 
India.

The hydrophobic effect is widely believed to be an important determinant of 
protein stability. However, it is difficult to obtain unambiguous experimental 
estimates of the contribution of the hydrophobic driving force to the overall 
free energy of folding. Thermodynamic and structural studies of large to small 
substitutions in proteins are the most direct method of measuring this 
contribution. We have substituted the buried residue Phe8 in RNase S with 
alanine, methionine, and norleucine. Binding thermodynamics and structures were 
characterized by titration calorimetry and crystallography, respectively. The 
crystal structures of the RNase S F8A, F8M, and F8Nle mutants indicate that the 
protein tolerates the changes without any main chain adjustments. The 
correlation of structural and thermodynamic parameters associated with large to 
small substitutions was analyzed for nine mutants of RNase S as well as 32 
additional cavity-containing mutants of T4 lysozyme, human lysozyme, and 
barnase. Such substitutions were typically found to result in negligible changes 
in DeltaC(p)() and positive values of both DeltaDeltaH degrees and DeltaDeltaS 
of folding. Enthalpic effects were dominant, and the sign of DeltaDeltaS is the 
opposite of that expected from the hydrophobic effect. Values of DeltaDeltaG 
degrees and DeltaDeltaH degrees correlated better with changes in packing 
parameters such as residue depth or occluded surface than with the change in 
accessible surface area upon folding. These results suggest that the loss of 
packing interactions rather than the hydrophobic effect is a dominant 
contributor to the observed energetics for large to small substitutions. Hence, 
estimates of the magnitude of the hydrophobic driving force derived from earlier 
mutational studies are likely to be significantly in excess of the actual value.

DOI: 10.1021/bi000775k
PMID: 11015216 [Indexed for MEDLINE]