1. J Investig Med. 2001 Jan;49(1):112-8. doi: 10.2310/6650.2001.34107.

Hepatic lipase as a focal point for the development and treatment of coronary 
artery disease.

Zambon A(1), Brown BG, Deeb SS, Brunzell JD.

Author information:
(1)Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology, and Nutrition, University of 
Washington, Seattle, USA. iodza@tin.it

Recent epidemiological evidence suggests that although lowering low-density 
lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol is important in decreasing cardiovascular disease 
morbidity and mortality, it accounts only for part of the coronary artery 
disease (CAD) improvement with lipid-lowering therapy. In the last decade, it 
has become evident that the atherogenicity of LDL particles is associated not 
only with their plasma levels, but also with their size and density. The 
presence of small, dense LDL particles is associated with a three fold increase 
in CAD risk. Hepatic lipase (HL), a key enzyme in the formation of small, dense 
LDL particles, modulates their phospholipid and triglyceride contents. The 
higher the HL activity, the smaller, denser, and more atherogenic the resulting 
lipoprotein particle. It is, therefore, plausible to hypothesize that at least 
part of the CAD benefits observed in the recent CAD-prevention pharmacological 
trials, which are not accounted for by the decrease in LDL-C (LDL-cholesterol), 
might be explained by a pharmacological effect on LDL size and density, possibly 
mediated by changes in hepatic lipase activity. By studying patients with 
dyslipidemia and CAD, we have been able to provide strong evidence that 
regression of coronary atherosclerosis results from at least two independent 
effects of lipid-lowering therapy on lipoprotein metabolism: the well known one 
that leads to changes in LDL-C and apo B levels, and a new pathway of 
HL-mediated improvement in LDL buoyancy. Finally, HL activity and LDL density 
appear to be significantly affected by the presence of a common C-->T 
substitution at position -514 with respect to the transcription start site of 
the HL gene, raising the possibility that the -514 C-->T polymorphism may 
significantly contribute to differences in individual CAD response to 
lipid-lowering treatment, as seen in the recent major primary and secondary 
CAD-prevention clinical trials.

DOI: 10.2310/6650.2001.34107
PMID: 11217140 [Indexed for MEDLINE]