1. J Rheumatol. 2001 May;28(5):1014-8.

Polymorphism at codon 469 of the intercellular adhesion molecule-1 locus is 
associated with protection against severe gastrointestinal complications in 
Henoch-Schönlein purpura.

Amoli MM(1), Mattey DL, Calviño MC, Garcia-Porrua C, Thomson W, Hajeer AH, 
Ollier WE, Gonzalez-Gay MA.

Author information:
(1)ARC Epidemiology Unit, Manchester University Medical School, UK.

OBJECTIVE: Henoch-Schonlein purpura (HSP) is a small sized vasculitis affecting 
mainly children. Intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) gene polymorphisms 
have recently been implicated in the susceptibility to some vasculitides. To 
further investigate the clinical implication of ICAM-1 polymorphisms in HSP, we 
examined their potential association and influence in the development of severe 
complications in an unselected series of patients with HSP.
METHODS: Fifty-two patients, of which 41 were children, were diagnosed with HSP 
using classification criteria of Michel, et al at the Hospital Xeral-Calde 
(Lugo, Spain); 129 ethnically matched controls were included. Patients had at 
least one year of followup. Patients and controls were genotyped by allelic 
oligonucleotide techniques for ICAM-I polymorphism at codon 241 and 469.
RESULTS: The frequency distribution of the alleles and genotypes for each ICAM-1 
polymorphism did not show significant differences between HSP patients and 
controls. Also, no differences between patients with or without renal 
manifestations were found. However, the frequency of the codon 469 K/E genotype 
was significantly decreased in patients without severe gastrointestinal 
manifestations compared to those with them (22.29 vs 65%, OR 0.1, p = 0.02, 
after correction for age, sex, and disease duration). None of the 11 adults 
exhibited the R/G genotype at codon 241 compared with 7 of 41 children (OR 0.0, 
95% CI 0.0-2.9, p = 0.14). Patients with the R/G genotype were associated with 
low incidence of renal manifestations and none developed permanent renal 
involvement (renal sequelae); however, this finding did not achieve statistical 
significance.
CONCLUSION: ICAM-1 polymorphisms alone are not associated with development of 
HSP, but patients not carrying the codon 469 K/E genotype are at decreased risk 
of developing severe gastrointestinal complications. The R/G polymorphism at 
codon 241 may reduce the risk of renal sequelae in the development of HSP in 
adulthood.

PMID: 11361181 [Indexed for MEDLINE]