1. Mol Carcinog. 2001 Sep;32(1):1-8. doi: 10.1002/mc.1058.

Incidence and effects of Ha-ras codon 12 G-->A transition mutations in 
preneoplastic lesions induced by N-nitrosomethylbenzylamine in the rat 
esophagus.

Liston BW(1), Gupta A, Nines R, Carlton PS, Kresty LA, Harris GK, Stoner GD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

N-nitrosomethylbenzylamine (NMBA)-induced rat esophageal tumorigenesis is an 
important model for squamous cell carcinoma of the human esophagus. In this 
model, previous studies have shown that the GGA-->GAA Ha-ras codon 12 mutation 
is present in the majority of papillomas. No other Ha-ras mutation has been 
identified. Studies using other models of chemical carcinogenesis suggest that 
Ha-ras activation has a critical role during tumor initiation. We have used 
laser-capture microdissection and polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment 
length polymorphism analysis to study the role of codon 12 Ha-ras mutation at 
various stages of tumor development in the rat esophagus. Our results indicate 
that Ha-ras mutation was present infrequently (4.3%) in premalignant lesions. 
The incidence of Ha-ras mutation was high in papillomas (57.1%), however, and 
50% of papillomas expressed mutant Ha-ras RNA message. Additionally, there was a 
linear trend correlating increased incidence of Ha-ras mutation with later 
papilloma stage. These data suggest the role of ras activation later in 
neoplastic development. To evaluate the potential mechanism of action by which 
Ha-ras contributes to promotion and progression in this model, we compared mRNA 
expression of cyclin D1 and p27 in Ha-ras mutant and Ha-ras normal papillomas. 
We found no differences in mRNA expression of either cyclin D1 or p27 between 
these two papilloma populations. Our data suggest an important paradigm shift 
for the role of ras mutations in this model of chemical carcinogenesis, 
indicating a functional role of Ha-ras activation in promotion/progression and 
not in the initiation phase of NMBA-induced papillomagenesis.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/mc.1058
PMID: 11568970 [Indexed for MEDLINE]