1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jan 18;277(3):1949-56. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109932200. Epub
2001  Nov 13.

Kinked collagen VI tetramers and reduced microfibril formation as a result of 
Bethlem myopathy and introduced triple helical glycine mutations.

Lamandé SR(1), Mörgelin M, Selan C, Jöbsis GJ, Baas F, Bateman JF.

Author information:
(1)Cell and Matrix Biology Research Unit, Department of Paediatrics, University 
of Melbourne, the Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Royal Children's 
Hospital, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia. 
lamandes@ccryptic.rch.unimelb.edu.au

Mutations in the genes that code for collagen VI subunits, COL6A1, COL6A2, and 
COL6A3, are the cause of the dominantly inherited disorder, Bethlem myopathy. 
Glycine mutations that interrupt the Gly-X-Y repetitive amino acid sequence that 
forms the characteristic collagen triple helix have been defined in four 
families; however, the effects of these mutations on collagen VI biosynthesis, 
assembly, and structure have not been determined. In this study, we examined the 
consequences of Bethlem myopathy triple helical glycine mutations in the 
alpha1(VI) and alpha2(VI) chains, as well as engineered alpha3(VI) triple 
helical glycine mutations. Although the Bethlem myopathy and introduced 
mutations that are toward the N terminus of the triple helix did not measurably 
affect collagen VI intracellular monomer, dimer, or tetramer assembly, or 
secretion, the introduced mutation toward the C terminus of the helix severely 
impaired association of the mutant alpha3(VI) chain with alpha1(VI) and 
alpha2(VI). Association of the three chains was not completely prevented, 
however; and some non-disulfide bonded tetramers were secreted. Examination of 
the secreted Bethlem myopathy and engineered mutant collagen VI by negative 
staining electron microscopy revealed the striking finding that in all the cell 
lines a significant proportion of the tetramers contained a kink in the 
supercoiled triple helical region. Collagen VI tetramers from all of the mutant 
cell lines also showed a reduced ability to form microfibrils. These results 
provide the first evidence of the biosynthetic consequences of collagen VI 
triple helical glycine mutations and indicate that Bethlem myopathy results not 
only from the synthesis of reduced amounts of structurally normal protein but 
also from the presence of mutant collagen VI in the extracellular matrix.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109932200
PMID: 11707460 [Indexed for MEDLINE]