1. Arch Neurol. 2002 Feb;59(2):296-300. doi: 10.1001/archneur.59.2.296.

Intrafamilial phenotypic variability in Friedreich ataxia associated with a 
G130V mutation in the FRDA gene.

McCabe DJ(1), Wood NW, Ryan F, Hanna MG, Connolly S, Moore DP, Redmond J, Barton 
DE, Murphy RP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neurology, Institute of Neurology, National Hospital 
for Neurology and Neurosurgery, Queen Square, London WC1N 3BG, England. 
d.mccabe@ion.ucl.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Most patients with Friedreich ataxia (FA) have a GAA trinucleotide 
repeat expansion in intron 1 of the FA gene (FRDA) on both arms of chromosome 9. 
However, some patients are compound heterozygotes and harbor a GAA expansion on 
one allele and a point mutation on the other. Compound heterozygous patients 
with FA who have a GAA expansion and a G130V mutation have been reported to have 
an atypical phenotype with a slow disease progression, minimal or no ataxia, or 
gait spasticity.
OBJECTIVE: To describe intrafamilial phenotypic variability in a GAA 
expansion/G130V mutation compound heterozygous family with FA.
SETTING: Tertiary referral university hospital setting.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A 34-year-old man presented to our hospital with a 24-year 
history of stiff legs and mild unsteadiness of gait. Clinical examination showed 
a spastic paraparesis with normal to pathologically brisk deep tendon reflexes 
and mild left upper limb ataxia. His 27-year-old sister presented with a slowly 
progressive early-onset ataxic syndrome. She had ataxia of gait, mild to severe 
limb ataxia, and reduced or absent deep tendon reflexes, but no evidence of 
spasticity on examination.
RESULTS: Neurophysiologic investigations showed evidence of a sensory axonal 
neuropathy, and molecular genetic analysis showed that both siblings were 
compound heterozygotes with a GAA expansion and a G130V mutation.
CONCLUSIONS: This report confirms that compound heterozygous patients with FA 
who have a GAA expansion and a G130V mutation may present with an ataxic 
phenotype and that intrafamilial phenotypic variability in these pedigrees can 
occur. It also emphasizes the importance of performing molecular genetic 
analysis for the GAA trinucleotide expansion in patients presenting with a 
spastic paraparesis of undetermined etiology, especially when there is 
neurophysiologic evidence of a sensory axonal neuropathy.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.59.2.296
PMID: 11843702 [Indexed for MEDLINE]