1. Blood. 2002 Sep 15;100(6):2145-52.

The immunophenotypic and immunogenotypic B-cell differentiation arrest in bone 
marrow of RAG-deficient SCID patients corresponds to residual recombination 
activities of mutated RAG proteins.

Noordzij JG(1), de Bruin-Versteeg S, Verkaik NS, Vossen JM, de Groot R, 
Bernatowska E, Langerak AW, van Gent DC, van Dongen JJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam, 
dr. Molewaterplein 50, 3015 GE Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

The protein products of the recombination activating genes (RAG1 and RAG2) 
initiate the formation of immunoglobulin (Ig) and T-cell receptors, which are 
essential for B- and T-cell development, respectively. Mutations in the RAG 
genes result in severe combined immunodeficiency disease (SCID), generally 
characterized by the absence of mature B and T lymphocytes, but presence of 
natural killer (NK) cells. Biochemically, mutations in the RAG genes result 
either in nonfunctional proteins or in proteins with partial recombination 
activity. The mutated RAG genes of 9 patients from 7 families were analyzed for 
their recombination activity using extrachromosomal recombination substrates, 
rearrangement of endogenous Ig loci in RAG gene-transfected nonlymphoid cells, 
or the presence of Ig gene rearrangements in bone marrow (BM). Recombination 
activity was virtually absent in all 6 patients with mutations in the RAG core 
domains, but partial activity was present in the other 3 RAG-deficient patients, 
2 of them having Omenn syndrome with oligoclonal T lymphocytes. Using 4-color 
flow cytometry, we could define the exact stage at which B-cell differentiation 
was arrested in the BM of 5 RAG-deficient SCID patients. In 4 of 5 patients, the 
absence of recombination activity was associated with a complete B-cell 
differentiation arrest at the transition from cytoplasmic (Cy) Igmu(-) pre-B-I 
cells to CyIgmu(+) pre-B-II cells. However, the fifth patient showed low 
frequencies of precursor B cells with CyIgmu and surface membrane IgM, in line 
with the partial recombination activity of the patient's mutated RAG gene and 
the detection of in-frame Ig gene rearrangements in BM.

PMID: 12200379 [Indexed for MEDLINE]