1. Plant Cell. 2002 Sep;14(9):2175-90. doi: 10.1105/tpc.003038.

The regulation of actin organization by actin-depolymerizing factor in 
elongating pollen tubes.

Chen CY(1), Wong EI, Vidali L, Estavillo A, Hepler PK, Wu HM, Cheung AY.

Author information:
(1)Molecular and Cell Biology Program, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, 
Massachusetts 01003, USA.

Pollen tube elongation is a polarized cell growth process that transports the 
male gametes from the stigma to the ovary for fertilization inside the ovules. 
Actomyosin-driven intracellular trafficking and active actin remodeling in the 
apical and subapical regions of pollen tubes are both important aspects of this 
rapid tip growth process. Actin-depolymerizing factor (ADF) and cofilin are 
actin binding proteins that enhance the depolymerization of microfilaments at 
their minus, or slow-growing, ends. A pollen-specific ADF from tobacco, NtADF1, 
was used to dissect the role of ADF in pollen tube growth. Overexpression of 
NtADF1 resulted in the reduction of fine, axially oriented actin cables in 
transformed pollen tubes and in the inhibition of pollen tube growth in a 
dose-dependent manner. Thus, the proper regulation of actin turnover by NtADF1 
is critical for pollen tube growth. When expressed at a moderate level in pollen 
tubes elongating in in vitro cultures, green fluorescent protein (GFP)-tagged 
NtADF1 (GFP-NtADF1) associated predominantly with a subapical actin mesh 
composed of short actin filaments and with long actin cables in the shank. 
Similar labeling patterns were observed for GFP-NtADF1-expressing pollen tubes 
elongating within the pistil. A Ser-6-to-Asp conversion abolished the 
interaction between NtADF1 and F-actin in elongating pollen tubes and reduced 
its inhibitory effect on pollen tube growth significantly, suggesting that 
phosphorylation at Ser-6 may be a prominent regulatory mechanism for this pollen 
ADF. As with some ADF/cofilin, the in vitro actin-depolymerizing activity of 
recombinant NtADF1 was enhanced by slightly alkaline conditions. Because a pH 
gradient is known to exist in the apical region of elongating pollen tubes, it 
seems plausible that the in vivo actin-depolymerizing activity of NtADF1, and 
thus its contribution to actin dynamics, may be regulated spatially by 
differential H(+) concentrations in the apical region of elongating pollen 
tubes.

DOI: 10.1105/tpc.003038
PMCID: PMC150764
PMID: 12215514 [Indexed for MEDLINE]