1. Mol Endocrinol. 2002 Nov;16(11):2582-91. doi: 10.1210/me.2002-0032.

An activated human follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) receptor stimulates 
FSH-like activity in gonadotropin-deficient transgenic mice.

Haywood M(1), Tymchenko N, Spaliviero J, Koch A, Jimenez M, Gromoll J, Simoni M, 
Nordhoff V, Handelsman DJ, Allan CM.

Author information:
(1)Andrology Laboratory, ANZAC Research Institute, Sydney, New South Wales 2139, 
Australia.

FSH mediates its testicular actions via a specific Sertoli cell G 
protein-coupled receptor. We created a novel transgenic model to investigate a 
mutant human FSH receptor (FSHR(+)) containing a single amino acid substitution 
(Asp567Gly) equivalent to activating mutations in related glycoprotein hormone 
receptors. To examine the ligand-independent gonadal actions of FSHR(+), the rat 
androgen-binding protein gene promoter was used to direct FSHR(+) transgene 
expression to Sertoli cells of gonadotropin-deficient hypogonadal (hpg) mice. 
Both normal and hpg mouse testes expressed FSHR(+) mRNA. Testis weights of 
transgenic FSHR(+) hpg mice were increased approximately 2-fold relative to hpg 
controls (P < 0.02) and contained mature Sertoli cells and postmeiotic germ 
cells absent in controls, revealing FSHR(+)-initiated autonomous FSH-like 
testicular activity. Isolated transgenic Sertoli cells had significantly higher 
basal ( approximately 2-fold) and FSH-stimulated ( approximately 50%) cAMP 
levels compared with controls, demonstrating constitutive signaling and 
cell-surface expression of FSHR(+), respectively. Transgenic FSHR(+) also 
elevated testosterone production in hpg testes, in the absence of circulating LH 
(or FSH), and it was not expressed functionally on steroidogenic cells, 
suggesting a paracrine effect mediated by Sertoli cells. The FSHR(+) response 
was additive with a maximal testosterone dose on hpg testicular development, 
demonstrating FSHR(+) activity independent of androgen-specific actions. The 
FSHR(+) response was male specific as ovarian expression of FSHR(+) had no 
effect on hpg ovary size. These findings reveal transgenic FSHR(+) stimulated a 
constitutive FSH-like Sertoli cell response in gonadotropin-deficient testes, 
and pathways that induced LH-independent testicular steroidogenesis. This novel 
transgenic paradigm provides a unique approach to investigate the in vivo 
actions of mutated activating gonadotropin receptors.

DOI: 10.1210/me.2002-0032
PMID: 12403847 [Indexed for MEDLINE]