1. Brain. 2003 Aug;126(Pt 8):1814-20. doi: 10.1093/brain/awg174. Epub 2003 Jun 4.

Clinical and molecular findings in a patient with a novel mutation in the 
deafness-dystonia peptide (DDP1) gene.

Binder J(1), Hofmann S, Kreisel S, Wöhrle JC, Bäzner H, Krauss JK, Hennerici MG, 
Bauer MF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University Hospital Mannheim, University of 
Heidelberg, Germany.

The Mohr-Tranebjaerg syndrome (MTS) is a rare neurodegenerative disorder 
characterized by early-onset deafness, dystonia and further neurological 
abnormalities such as cortical blindness, spasticity, dementia and mental 
retardation. Causative mutations were identified within the deafness-dystonia 
peptide (DDP1/TIMM8a) gene on the X-chromosome. The DDP1 protein is located in 
the intermembrane space of human mitochondria. Here, it acts in a complex 
together with its partner protein Tim13 in a chaperone-like manner to facilitate 
the import of nuclear-encoded precursor proteins into the mitochondrial inner 
membrane. Thus, MTS is a novel type of mitochondrial disorder. To obtain more 
insight into the pathophysiology of this neurodegenerative disorder, we 
performed for the first time a comprehensive clinical and functional 
characterization of a patient suffering from MTS. This patient exhibited a 
typical combination of deafness, dystonia and visual loss. Sequence analysis of 
the patient's DDP1 gene revealed a G to C transversion at nucleotide position 38 
of the first exon. The mutation affects the ATG start codon, thereby changing 
methionine to isoleucine (M1I), and leads to a complete absence of the DDP1 
protein. In addition, the partner protein Tim13 was found to be significantly 
reduced, suggesting that Tim13 requires the presence of DDP1 for its 
stabilization. The assessment of mitochondrial functions showed the enzyme 
activities of the mitochondrial energy-generating systems to be normal in the 
muscle biopsy. Structural abnormalities or aggregations of mitochondria were 
absent. Electron microscopy revealed only a mild neurogenic atrophy. 
Neurophysiological investigations showed cochlear dysfunction and disturbance of 
visual pathways. PET and MRI studies revealed a multifocal pattern of 
neurodegeneration with hypometabolic areas predominantly located over the right 
striatum and parietal cortex and marked atrophy of the occipital lobes. Although 
the visual loss is caused predominantly by neurodegeneration of the visual 
cortex, degeneration of the retina and the optic nerve contributes to the visual 
impairment. The pathological changes in basal ganglia and sensory cortex 
demonstrate the disintegration of subcortico-cortical circuits and correlate 
well with the clinical presentation of multifocal dystonia. The data presented 
here showed that, in contrast to most of the known mitochondrial disorders, MTS 
appears not to be associated with a functional defect of the energy generation 
system of the mitochondria. Whereas the specific mitochondrial dysfunction 
leading to neuronal loss in MTS remains to be clarified, the 
electrophysiological and neuroimaging findings allowed the multifocal 
manifestation of neurodegenerative lesions in MTS to be characterized 
specifically.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awg174
PMID: 12805099 [Indexed for MEDLINE]