1. Cancer Res. 2003 Oct 15;63(20):6735-43.

Identification of a colorectal tumor-associated antigen (COA-1) recognized by 
CD4(+) T lymphocytes.

Maccalli C(1), Li YF, El-Gamil M, Rosenberg SA, Robbins PF.

Author information:
(1)Surgery Branch, National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland 
20892-1502, USA.

Only a limited number of target molecules have been shown to be recognized by 
colon tumor-reactive T cells, limiting the options for the development of 
immunotherapies for patients with colon cancer. The current studies were 
undertaken in an attempt to generate tumor-reactive T cells that could be used 
to identify and characterize novel colon tumor-associated antigens. Multiple 
CD4(+) T-cell clones isolated either from tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes or 
peripheral blood mononuclear cells that were sensitized in vitro with autologous 
tumor cells from a colon cancer patient, 1869, recognized autologous tumor cells 
in a class II HLA-DR-restricted manner. One of the peripheral blood mononuclear 
cell clones, clone C111, was used to screen pools of clones that were generated 
from an autologous colon tumor cell line cDNA library. A cDNA clone that was 
isolated encoded a protein that was termed colorectal tumor-associated antigen-1 
(COA-1). This product was recognized in the context of the two autologous 
HLA-DRbeta1 alleles, HLA-DRbeta1*0402 and DRbeta1*1301. The nucleotide sequence 
of the COA-1 transcript was nearly identical to multiple expressed sequence tag 
sequences that encode variants of Socius, a protein that was found recently to 
bind to members of the Rnd family of GTPases. The COA-1 gene was expressed at 
relatively comparable levels in colorectal and melanoma tumor cells, 
EBV-infected B cells, normal B cells, and cultured fibroblast cell lines. 
However, the gene that was isolated from normal cell types contained a single 
nucleotide substitution, resulting in an amino acid change near the COOH 
terminus of the protein. Although the minimal epitope recognized by CD4(+) cells 
was encoded by sequences that were upstream from this substitution, C111 T cells 
did not appear to recognize the normal gene product. Therefore, this alteration 
may either affect the localization or the processing of this gene product, which 
may at least in part be responsible for the differential recognition of tumor 
and normal cells.

PMCID: PMC2275323
PMID: 14583468 [Indexed for MEDLINE]