1. Apoptosis. 1999 Jun;4(3):197-211. doi: 10.1023/a:1009666707307.

Adenosine-induced cell death: evidence for receptor-mediated signalling.

Jacobson KA(1), Hoffmann C, Cattabeni F, Abbracchio MP.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Recognition Section, Laboratory of Bioorganic Chemistry, National 
Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Adenosine modulates the proliferation, survival and apoptosis of many different 
cell types, ranging from epithelial, endothelial and smooth muscle cells, to 
cells of the immune and neural lineages. In this review, we critically discuss 
the available in vitro and in vivo data which support a role for adenosine in 
both development-associated apoptosis, and in diseases characterized by either 
pathologically increased cell death (e.g., ischemia, trauma and aging-associated 
neurodegeneration) or abnormally reduced spontaneous apoptosis (e.g., cancer). 
Particular emphasis is given to the possible role of extracellular adenosine 
receptors, since these may represent novel and attractive molecular targets for 
the pharmacological modulation of apoptosis. In some instances, 
adenosine-induced cell death has been demonstrated to require entry of the 
nucleoside inside cells; however, in many other cases, activation of specific 
adenosine extracellular receptors has been demonstrated. Of the four G 
protein-coupled adenosine receptors so far identified, the A2A and the A3 
receptors have been specifically implicated in modulation of cell death. For the 
A3 receptor, results obtained by exposing both cardiomyocytes and brain 
astrocytes to graded concentrations of selective agonists suggest induction of 
both cell protection and cell death. Such opposite effects, which likely depend 
on the degree of receptor activation, may have important therapeutic 
implications in the pharmacological modulation of cardiac and brain ischemia. 
For the A2A receptor, recent intriguing data suggest a specific role in immune 
cell death and immunosuppression, which may be relevant to both 
adenosine-deaminase-immunodeficiency syndrome (a pathology characterized by 
accumulation of adenosine to toxic levels) and in tumors where induction of 
apoptosis via activation of specific extracellular receptors may be desirable. 
Finally, preliminary data suggest that, in a similar way to the 
adenosine-deaminase-immunodeficiency syndrome, the abnormal accumulation of 
adenosine in degenerative muscular diseases may contribute to muscle cell death. 
Although the role of adenosine receptors in this effect still remains to be 
determined, these data suggest that adenosine-induced apoptosis may also 
represent a novel pathogenic pathway in muscular dystrophies.

DOI: 10.1023/a:1009666707307
PMID: 14634282