1. Br J Anaesth. 2004 Jan;92(1):93-101. doi: 10.1093/bja/aeh026.

Local anaesthetic sensitivities of cloned HERG channels from human heart: 
comparison with HERG/MiRP1 and HERG/MiRP1 T8A.

Friederich P(1), Solth A, Schillemeit S, Isbrandt D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anaesthesiology, University Hospital Hamburg Eppendorf, 
Martinistr. 52, D-20251 Hamburg, Germany. patrick.friederich@zmnh.uni-hamburg.de

BACKGROUND: Myocardial potassium channels are complexes formed by different 
subunits. The subunit composition may influence the cardiotoxic action of local 
anaesthetics. The effects of amide local anaesthetics on HERG channels 
co-expressed with the putative subunit MiRP1 have not been established. It is 
also unclear if the common polymorphism MiRP1(T8A) that predisposes individuals 
to drug-induced cardiac arrhythmia increases local-anaesthetic sensitivity of 
HERG/MiRP1 channels. This may suggest the presence of genetic risk factors for 
local-anaesthetic-induced cardiac arrhythmia.
METHODS: Whole-cell patch-clamp recordings and site-directed mutagenesis were 
combined to compare local anaesthetic sensitivities of cloned and mutated human 
potassium channel subunits. The ion channels were activated by a protocol that 
approximated ventricular action potentials.
RESULTS: The amide local anaesthetics bupivacaine, levobupivacaine and 
ropivacaine inhibited HERG channels at toxicologically relevant concentrations, 
with IC(50) values of 20 (SEM 2) micro M (n=29), 10 (1) micro M (n=40) and 20 
(2) micro M (n=49), respectively. Hill coefficients were close to unity. There 
were no indications of qualitative differences in channel inhibition between the 
three anaesthetics. The putative subunit MiRP1 did not alter local anaesthetic 
sensitivity of HERG channels. The common single nucleotide polymorphism 
producing MiRP1(T8A) did not increase local anaesthetic sensitivity of 
HERG/MiRP1 channels.
CONCLUSIONS: Amide local anaesthetics target HERG and HERG/MiRP1 channels with 
identical potency. The effects on these ion currents may significantly 
contribute to local-anaesthetic-induced cardiac arrhythmia. MiRP1(T8A) does not 
seem to confer an increased risk of severe cardiac side-effects to carriers of 
this common polymorphism.

DOI: 10.1093/bja/aeh026
PMID: 14665560 [Indexed for MEDLINE]