1. Arch Ophthalmol. 2004 Jan;122(1):70-5. doi: 10.1001/archopht.122.1.70.

Novel mutations in the cellular retinaldehyde-binding protein gene (RLBP1) 
associated with retinitis punctata albescens: evidence of interfamilial genetic 
heterogeneity and fundus changes in heterozygotes.

Fishman GA(1), Roberts MF, Derlacki DJ, Grimsby JL, Yamamoto H, Sharon D, 
Nishiguchi KM, Dryja TP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, UIC Eye Center, University 
of Illinois at Chicago, 60612, USA. gerafish@uic.edu

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the molecular genetic defects associated with retinitis 
punctata albescens (RPA) in 5 patients from 3 families with this disease.
METHODS: We examined 3 probands and 2 clinically affected relatives with RPA. 
Clinical examinations included best-corrected visual acuity, visual field 
testing, electroretinography, dilated fundus examination, and fundus 
photography. Leukocyte DNA was analyzed for mutations in the exons of the genes 
encoding cellular retinaldehyde-binding protein 1 (RLBP1), 11-cis-retinol 
dehydrogenase (RDH5), interphotoreceptor retinoid-binding protein (RBP3), and 
photoreceptor all-trans-retinol dehydrogenase (RDH8). Not all patients were 
evaluated for mutations in each gene. The exons were individually amplified and 
screened for mutations by single-stranded conformational polymorphism analysis 
or direct genomic sequencing.
RESULTS: The 3 probands had similar clinical findings, including a history of 
poor night vision, the presence of punctate white deposits in the retina, and 
substantially reduced or absent rod responses on electroretinogram testing. One 
of the probands (patient 2:III:2) had 2 novel mutations in the RLBP1 gene 
(Arg151Trp and Gly31[2-base pair deletion], [GGA-->G-]). Segregation analysis 
showed that the 2 mutations were allelic and that the patient was a compound 
heterozygote. Both parents of the proband manifested round white deposits in the 
retina. The other 2 probands had no detected pathogenic mutations in RLBP1 or in 
the other 3 genes evaluated.
CONCLUSIONS: The identification of novel RLBP1 mutations in 1 of our 3 probands, 
all with RPA, is further evidence of genetic (nonallelic) heterogeneity in this 
disease. The presence of round white deposits in the retina may be observed in 
those heterozygous for RLBP1. Clinical Relevance Patients with a clinical 
presentation of RPA can have genetically different mutations. Drusen-like 
lesions may be observed in heterozygotes in families with this disease and a 
mutation in RLBP1.

DOI: 10.1001/archopht.122.1.70
PMID: 14718298 [Indexed for MEDLINE]