1. Arch Neurol. 2004 Feb;61(2):269-72. doi: 10.1001/archneur.61.2.269.

Revelation of a new mitochondrial DNA mutation (G12147A) in a MELAS/MERFF 
phenotype.

Melone MA(1), Tessa A, Petrini S, Lus G, Sampaolo S, di Fede G, Santorelli FM, 
Cotrufo R.

Author information:
(1)First Division of Neurology, Department of Neurological Sciences, Second 
University of Naples, School of Medicine, Poclinico Universitario Federico II, 
Italy. marina.melone@unina2.it

BACKGROUND: A 26-year-old man presented at onset with the syndrome of 
mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis, and strokelike episodes 
(MELAS) and later with a phenotype for MELAS and myoclonic epilepsy and ragged 
red fiber disease (MELAS/MERRF).
OBJECTIVE: To identify the possible defects in the mitochondrial genome in blood 
and muscle samples of the patient.
DESIGN: Case study of a patient clinically exhibiting strokelike episodes and 
then epilepsy with myoclonic features, ataxia, and dementia.
SETTING: Research unit of a university hospital.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Electromyographic, morphologic, and biochemical studies 
of muscle and molecular analysis of blood and muscle to investigate 
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) size and quantity.
RESULTS: Morphologically, we found abnormal mitochondrial proliferation with 
several cytochrome-c oxidase (COX)-negative fibers in muscle biopsy specimens; 
the analysis of serial sections showed a decreased immunoreactivity for the 
mtDNA-encoded subunits COXII and, partially, COXI. Biochemically, we found a 
partial and isolated COX deficiency. The complete mtDNA sequence analysis 
identified 3 sequence changes, 2 of which were reported polymorphisms. The 
remaining change, a G12147A transition in the transfer RNA(His) gene, appeared 
to be the likely pathogenic mutation.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data propose that the G12147A change, the first mutation in the 
transfer RNA(His) gene associated with an overlapped MELAS/MERFF phenotype, is 
the cause of the encephalomyopathy in this patient interfering with the overall 
mitochondrial protein synthesis.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.61.2.269
PMID: 14967777 [Indexed for MEDLINE]