1. PLoS Biol. 2004 Apr;2(4):E81. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0020081. Epub 2004 Apr
 13.

Segmentally variable genes: a new perspective on adaptation.

Zheng Y(1), Roberts RJ, Kasif S.

Author information:
(1)Bioinformatics Graduate Program, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts, 
USA. zhengyu@bu.edu

Comment in
    PLoS Biol. 2:e94.

Genomic sequence variation is the hallmark of life and is key to understanding 
diversity and adaptation among the numerous microorganisms on earth. Analysis of 
the sequenced microbial genomes suggests that genes are evolving at many 
different rates. We have attempted to derive a new classification of genes into 
three broad categories: lineage-specific genes that evolve rapidly and appear 
unique to individual species or strains; highly conserved genes that frequently 
perform housekeeping functions; and partially variable genes that contain highly 
variable regions, at least 70 amino acids long, interspersed among 
well-conserved regions. The latter we term segmentally variable genes (SVGs), 
and we suggest that they are especially interesting targets for biochemical 
studies. Among these genes are ones necessary to deal with the environment, 
including genes involved in host-pathogen interactions, defense mechanisms, and 
intracellular responses to internal and environmental changes. For the most 
part, the detailed function of these variable regions remains unknown. We 
propose that they are likely to perform important binding functions responsible 
for protein-protein, protein-nucleic acid, or protein-small molecule 
interactions. Discerning their function and identifying their binding partners 
may offer biologists new insights into the basic mechanisms of adaptation, 
context-dependent evolution, and the interaction between microbes and their 
environment.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0020081
PMCID: PMC387263
PMID: 15094797 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no conflicts of 
interest exist.