1. BMC Ophthalmol. 2004 Jun 4;4:5. doi: 10.1186/1471-2415-4-5.

Autoantibodies against retinal proteins in paraneoplastic and autoimmune 
retinopathy.

Adamus G(1), Ren G, Weleber RG.

Author information:
(1)Neurological Sciences Institute, Oregon Health & Science University, 
Beaverton, Oregon, USA. adamusg@ohsu.edu

BACKGROUND: Autoimmune retinal degeneration may occur in patients who present 
with sudden or, less commonly, subacute loss of vision of retinal origin, 
associated with an abnormal ERG, through the action of autoantibodies against 
retinal proteins. Often the patients are initially diagnosed with or suspected 
of having a paraneoplastic retinopathy (PR), such as cancer-associated 
retinopathy (CAR). However, there is limited information on the occurrence, the 
specificity of autoantibodies in these patients, and their association with 
clinical symptoms.
METHODS: Sera were obtained from 193 retinopathy patients who presented with 
clinical symptoms resembling PR or autoimmune retinopathy (AR), including sudden 
painless loss of vision, typically associated with visual field defects and 
photopsias, and abnormal rod and/or cone responses on the electroretinogram 
(ERG). Sera were tested for the presence of anti-retinal autoantibodies by 
Western blot analysis using proteins extracted from human retina and by 
immunohistochemistry. Autoantibody titers against recoverin and enolase were 
measured by ELISA.
RESULTS: We identified a higher prevalence of anti-retinal autoantibodies in 
retinopathy patients. Ninety-one patients' sera (47.1%) showed autoantibodies of 
various specificities with a higher incidence of antibodies present in 
retinopathy patients diagnosed with cancer (33/52; 63.5%; p = 0.009) than in 
retinopathy patients without cancer (58/141; 41.1%). The average age of PR 
patients was 62.0 years, and that of AR patients was 55.9 years. Autoantibodies 
against recoverin (p23) were only present in the sera of PR patients, 
autoantibodies against unknown p35 were more common in patients with AR, while 
anti-enolase (anti-p46) autoantibodies were nearly equally distributed in the 
sera of patients with PR and those with AR. In the seropositive patients, the 
autoantibodies persisted over a long period of time--from months to years. A 
rebound in anti-recoverin autoantibody titer was found to be associated with 
exacerbations in visual symptoms but not in the recurrence of cancer. When 
compared to sera from healthy subjects, autoantibodies against retinal proteins 
from both groups of patients were cytotoxic to retinal cells, indicating their 
pathogenic potential.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies showed that patients with sudden or subacute, 
unexplained loss of vision of retinal origin have anti-retinal antibodies in a 
broad range of specificity and indicate the need for autoantibody screening. 
Follow-up tests of antibody levels may be useful as a biomarker of disease 
activity associated with worsening of vision. Moreover, the heterogeneity in 
autoantibody specificity may explain the variation and complexity of clinical 
symptoms in retinopathy patients.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2415-4-5
PMCID: PMC446200
PMID: 15180904 [Indexed for MEDLINE]