1. BMC Blood Disord. 2004 Jun 22;4(1):3. doi: 10.1186/1471-2326-4-3.

A mutation in a functional Sp1 binding site of the telomerase RNA gene (hTERC) 
promoter in a patient with Paroxysmal Nocturnal Haemoglobinuria.

Keith WN(1), Vulliamy T, Zhao J, Ar C, Erzik C, Bilsland A, Ulku B, Marrone A, 
Mason PJ, Bessler M, Serakinci N, Dokal I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Haematology-Division of Investigative Science, Imperial College 
London, Hammersmith Hospital, London, UK. Pmason@im.wustl.edu

BACKGROUND: Mutations in the gene coding for the RNA component of telomerase, 
hTERC, have been found in autosomal dominant dyskeratosis congenita (DC) and 
aplastic anemia. Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH) is a clonal blood 
disorder associated with aplastic anemia and characterized by the presence of 
one or more clones of blood cells lacking glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) 
anchored proteins due to a somatic mutation in the PIGA gene. METHODS: We 
searched for mutations in DNA extracted from PNH patients by amplification of 
the hTERC gene and denaturing high performance liquid chromatography (dHPLC). 
After a mutation was found in a potential transcription factor binding site in 
one patient electrophoretic mobility shift assays were used to detect binding of 
transcription factors to that site. The effect of the mutation on the function 
of the promoter was tested by transient transfection constructs in which the 
promoter is used to drive a reporter gene. RESULTS: Here we report the finding 
of a novel promoter mutation (-99C->G) in the hTERC gene in a patient with PNH. 
The mutation disrupts an Sp1 binding site and destroys its ability to bind Sp1. 
Transient transfection assays show that mutations in this hTERC site including 
C-99G cause either up- or down-regulation of promoter activity and suggest that 
the site regulates core promoter activity in a context dependent manner in 
cancer cells. CONCLUSIONS: These data are the first report of an hTERC promoter 
mutation from a patient sample which can modulate core promoter activity in 
vitro, raising the possibility that the mutation may affect the transcription of 
the gene in hematopoietic stem cells in vivo, and that dysregulation of 
telomerase may play a role in the development of bone marrow failure and the 
evolution of PNH clones.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2326-4-3
PMCID: PMC442127
PMID: 15212690