1. J Neurosci Res. 2004 Aug 15;77(4):573-82. doi: 10.1002/jnr.20191.

Antisense peptide nucleic acid targeting GluR3 delays disease onset and 
progression in the SOD1 G93A mouse model of familial ALS.

Rembach A(1), Turner BJ, Bruce S, Cheah IK, Scott RL, Lopes EC, Zagami CJ, Beart 
PM, Cheung NS, Langford SJ, Cheema SS.

Author information:
(1)Howard Florey Institute of Experimental Physiology and Medicine, University 
of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

Glutamate excitotoxicity is strongly implicated as a major contributing factor 
in motor neuron degeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). 
Excitotoxicity results from elevated intracellular calcium ion (Ca(2+)) levels, 
which in turn recruit cell death signaling pathways. Recent evidence suggests 
that alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid (AMPA) receptor 
subunit (GluR) stoichiometry is a dominant factor leading to excess Ca(2+) 
loading in neurodegeneration. In particular, the Ca(2+) permeable glutamate 
receptor subunit 3 (GluR3) has been implicated in several neurologic conditions 
such as bipolar disorder and epilepsy. Recent proteomic analysis within our 
group on the copper zinc superoxide dismutase (SOD1)(G93A) transgenic mouse 
model of familial ALS (FALS) reveals a potentially deleterious upregulation of 
GluR3 in spinal cord compared to that in wild-type littermates. Based on this 
finding we designed a 12mer antisense peptide nucleic acid (PNA) directed 
against GluR3. This sequence significantly reduced levels of GluR3 protein and 
protected neuroblastoma x spinal cord (NSC-34) cells against death induced by 
the AMPA receptor-specific agonist (S)-5-fluorowillardiine. We subsequently 
treated SOD1(G93A) mice thrice weekly with intraperitoneal injections of the 
antisense PNA (2.5 mg/kg) commencing at postnatal day 50. Mice treated with the 
antisense sequence had significantly extended survival compared to mice injected 
with a nonsense sequence. Western blot analysis, however, did not reveal a 
significant reduction in GluR3 protein levels in whole extracts of the lumbar 
spinal cord. These results suggest that interference with the GluR3 component of 
the AMPA receptor assembly may be a novel strategy for controlling excitotoxic 
destruction of motor neurons and may lead to new therapeutic opportunities for 
the treatment of human ALS.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jnr.20191
PMID: 15264227 [Indexed for MEDLINE]