1. Biochemistry. 2004 Aug 10;43(31):10050-7. doi: 10.1021/bi049667e.

Role of disulfide bonds for the structure and folding of proguanylin.

Lauber T(1), Schulz A, Rösch P, Marx UC.

Author information:
(1)Lehrstuhl für Biopolymere, Universität Bayreuth, Universitätstrasse 30, 95447 
Bayreuth, Germany. thomas.lauber@gmx.de

The intestinal peptide hormone guanylin circulates mainly as its corresponding 
prohormone of 94 amino acids and is the first identified endogenous ligand of 
intestinal guanylyl cyclase C. While the prohormone is biologically inactive, it 
is processed to the fully functional form with 15 amino acid residues 
corresponding to the COOH terminus of the precursor protein. In addition to this 
inactivation of the hormone region, the prosequence makes an essential 
contribution to the disulfide-coupled folding of the hormone. On the basis of 
the recently determined solution structure of proguanylin, explanations for 
these functions of the prosequence were found, indicating that interstrand 
contacts between the NH2-terminal beta-hairpin of the prosequence and the 
COOH-terminal hormone region are crucial for formation of the correct disulfide 
bonds of guanylin. To further investigate the role of individual disulfide bonds 
upon stabilization of the overall three-dimensional structure of proguanylin and 
to test the assumption of a direct effect of the prosequence on the structure of 
the hormone region, we studied the cysteine double mutant proteins 
proguanylin-C48S/C61S and proguanylin-C86S/C94S. Disulfide determination as well 
as CD and NMR spectroscopy of proguanylin-C48S/C61S reveals an essential 
function of the Cys48-Cys61 disulfide bond for the stability of the hydrophobic 
core and thereby for the stability of the overall three-dimensional structure of 
proguanylin. Furthermore, sequence specific resonance assignment of the second 
disulfide deletion mutant, proguanylin-C86S/C94S, and comparison of the NMR 
spectra of this protein with those of the wild-type protein demonstrate that the 
rigid helical core structure of proguanylin is not affected by the mutation. 
Additionally, analysis of the interstrand contacts between the termini reveals a 
direct effect of the prosequence on the conformation of the hormone region. On 
the basis of these results, we propose a cooperative mechanism that leads to 
formation of the correct disulfide pattern of guanylin.

DOI: 10.1021/bi049667e
PMID: 15287732 [Indexed for MEDLINE]