1. Yakugaku Zasshi. 2004 Aug;124(8):531-9. doi: 10.1248/yakushi.124.531.

[Creation of functional muteins using phage libraries for 
pharmacoproteomic-based drug discovery and development of DDS].

[Article in Japanese]

Yoshioka Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biopharmaceutics, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Osaka University, Yamadaoka, Suita, Japan. y-yoshioka@nihs.go.jp

Tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) has been expected to be a promising new 
antitumor agent, but toxic side effects by the systemic administration of 
TNF-alpha limit its clinical application. In this study, we attempted to improve 
the therapeutic potency of TNF-alpha by using our protein-drug innovation 
systems. Among phage libraries displaying various mutant TNF-alphas, we isolated 
some lysine-deficient super mutant TNF-alphas, typified by mTNF-alpha-K90R, with 
higher TNF-receptor affinities and stronger bioactivity in vitro, in spite of 
the importance of lysine residues for trimer formation and receptor binding. 
mTNF-alpha-K90R showed more than 10 times stronger in vivo antitumor effects and 
1.3 times less toxicity than wild-type TNF-alpha (wTNF-alpha). Site-specifically 
mono-PEGylated mTNF-alpha-K90R (sp-PEG-mTNF-alpha-K90R) at N-terminus showed 
higher in vitro bioactivity than unmodified wTNF-alpha, whereas randomly 
mono-PEGylated wTNF-alpha at a lysine residue (ran-PEG-wTNF-alpha) had less than 
6% of the bioactivity of wTNF-alpha. The antitumor therapeutic window of 
sp-PEG-mTNF-alpha-K90R was extended by about 5 times, 60 times and 18 times 
compared with those of mTNF-alpha-K90R, wTNF-alpha and ran-PEG-wTNF-alpha, 
respectively. sp-PEG-mTNF-alpha-K90R may, thus, be a potential systemic 
anti-tumor therapeutic agent. These data suggested that our fusion protein-drug 
innovation system composed of a creation system of functional mutant proteins 
based on phage display technique and a site-specific PEGylation system may open 
up a new avenue to the optimal protein therapy.

DOI: 10.1248/yakushi.124.531
PMID: 15297722 [Indexed for MEDLINE]