1. Hum Mol Genet. 2004 Nov 1;13(21):2709-23. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddh281. Epub 2004
Sep  2.

Mutation in saposin D domain of sphingolipid activator protein gene causes 
urinary system defects and cerebellar Purkinje cell degeneration with 
accumulation of hydroxy fatty acid-containing ceramide in mouse.

Matsuda J(1), Kido M, Tadano-Aritomi K, Ishizuka I, Tominaga K, Toida K, Takeda 
E, Suzuki K, Kuroda Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The Institute of Health Bioscience, The University 
of Tokushima Graduate School, 3-18-15, Kuramoto-cho, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan. 
junko@clin.med.tokushima-u.ac.jp

The sphingolipid activator proteins (saposins A, B, C and D) are small 
homologous glycoproteins that are encoded by a single gene in tandem within a 
large precursor protein (prosaposin) and are required for in vivo degradation of 
some sphingolipids with relatively short carbohydrate chains. Human patients 
with prosaposin or specific saposin B or C deficiency are known, and prosaposin- 
and saposin A-deficient mouse lines have been generated. Experimental evidence 
suggests that saposin D may be a lysosomal acid ceramidase activator. However, 
no specific saposin D deficiency state is known in any mammalian species. We 
have generated a specific saposin D(-/-) mouse by introducing a mutation (C509S) 
into the saposin D domain of the mouse prosaposin gene. Saposin D(-/-) mice 
developed progressive polyuria at around 2 months and ataxia at around 4 months. 
Pathologically, the kidney of saposin D(-/-) mice showed renal tubular 
degeneration and eventual hydronephrosis. In the nervous system, progressive and 
selective loss of the cerebellar Purkinje cells in a striped pattern was 
conspicuous, and almost all Purkinje cells disappeared by 12 months. 
Biochemically, ceramides, particularly those containing hydroxy fatty acids 
accumulated in the kidney and the brain, most prominently in the cerebellum. 
These results not only indicate the role of saposin D in in vivo ceramide 
metabolism, but also suggest possible cytotoxicity of ceramide underlying the 
cerebellar Purkinje cell and renal tubular cell degeneration.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddh281
PMID: 15345707 [Indexed for MEDLINE]