1. Am J Hum Genet. 1992 Apr;50(4):795-800.

Mucopolysaccharidosis type VI: identification of three mutations in the 
arylsulfatase B gene of patients with the severe and mild phenotypes provides 
molecular evidence for genetic heterogeneity.

Jin WD(1), Jackson CE, Desnick RJ, Schuchman EH.

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, 
New York, NY 10029.

Mucopolysaccharidosis type VI (MPS VI; Maroteaux-Lamy disease) results from the 
deficient activity of the lysosomal enzyme, arylsulfatase B (ASB; 
N-acetylgalactosamine-4-sulfatase E.C.3.1.6.1). The enzymatic defect leads to 
the accumulation of the glycosaminoglycan, dermatan sulfate, primarily in 
connective tissue and reticuloendothelial cell lysosomes. Although MPS VI 
patients have normal intelligence and no neurologic abnormalities, the disease 
is clinically heterogeneous: severely affected individuals expire in childhood 
or early adolescence while those with the mild or intermediate phenotypes have a 
slower, milder disease course and a longer life span. The recent isolation of 
the full-length cDNA-encoding human ASB permitted an investigation of the 
molecular lesions underlying the phenotypic heterogeneity in MPS VI. The ASB 
cDNA-coding sequences were determined from two unrelated MPS VI patients with 
the severe (proband 1) and mild (proband 2) phenotypes. These patients had about 
2% and 7% of normal ASB activity in cultured fibroblasts, respectively. Proband 
1 was homoallelic for a T-to-C transition in nucleotide (nt) 349, which 
predicted a cysteine-to-arginine substitution in the ASB polypeptide at residue 
117 (C117R). Proband 2 was heteroallelic, having a T-to-C transition in nt 707, 
which predicted a leucine-to-proline replacement at ASB residue 236 (L236P), and 
having a G-to-A transition in nt 1214, which predicted a cysteine-to-tyrosine 
substitution at ASB residue 405 (C405Y). These mutations did not occur in three 
other unrelated MPS VI patients or in 120 ASB alleles from normal individuals, 
indicating that they were not polymorphisms. The identification of these three 
ASB mutations documents the first evidence of molecular heterogeneity in MPS VI 
and provides an initial basis for genotype/phenotype correlations in this 
lysosomal storage disease.

PMCID: PMC1682624
PMID: 1550123 [Indexed for MEDLINE]