1. BMC Biochem. 2004 Nov 17;5:16. doi: 10.1186/1471-2091-5-16.

The "Transport Specificity Ratio": a structure-function tool to search the 
protein fold for loci that control transition state stability in membrane 
transport catalysis.

King SC(1).

Author information:
(1)Integrative Biosciences, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, Oregon 
97239-3097, USA. kingst@ohsu.edu

BACKGROUND: In establishing structure-function relationships for membrane 
transport proteins, the interpretation of phenotypic changes can be problematic, 
owing to uncertainties in protein expression levels, sub-cellular localization, 
and protein-folding fidelity. A dual-label competitive transport assay called 
"Transport Specificity Ratio" (TSR) analysis has been developed that is simple 
to perform, and circumvents the "expression problem," providing a reliable TSR 
phenotype (a constant) for comparison to other transporters.
RESULTS: Using the Escherichia coli GABA (4-aminobutyrate) permease (GabP) as a 
model carrier, it is demonstrated that the TSR phenotype is largely independent 
of assay conditions, exhibiting: (i) indifference to the particular substrate 
concentrations used, (ii) indifference to extreme changes (40-fold) in 
transporter expression level, and within broad limits (iii) indifference to 
assay duration. The theoretical underpinnings of TSR analysis predict all of the 
above observations, supporting that TSR has (i) applicability in the analysis of 
membrane transport, and (ii) particular utility in the face of incomplete 
information on protein expression levels and initial reaction rate intervals 
(e.g., in high-throughput screening situations). The TSR was used to identify 
gab permease (GabP) variants that exhibit relative changes in catalytic 
specificity (kcat/Km) for [14C]GABA (4-aminobutyrate) versus [3H]NA (nipecotic 
acid).
CONCLUSIONS: The TSR phenotype is an easily measured constant that reflects 
innate molecular properties of the transition state, and provides a reliable 
index of the difference in catalytic specificity that a carrier exhibits toward 
a particular pair of substrates. A change in the TSR phenotype, called a 
Delta(TSR), represents a specificity shift attributable to underlying changes in 
the intrinsic substrate binding energy (DeltaGb) that translocation catalysts 
rely upon to decrease activation energy (Delta G(T)(++). TSR analysis is 
therefore a structure-function tool that enables parsimonious scanning for 
positions in the protein fold that couple to the transition state, creating 
stability and thereby serving as functional determinants of catalytic power 
(efficiency, or specificity).

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2091-5-16
PMCID: PMC535561
PMID: 15548327 [Indexed for MEDLINE]