1. J Mass Spectrom. 2004 Dec;39(12):1474-83. doi: 10.1002/jms.750.

Characterization of covalently inhibited extracellular lipase from Streptomyces 
rimosus by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight and 
matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization quadrupole ion trap reflectron 
time-of-flight mass spectrometry: localization of the active site serine.

Zehl M(1), Lescić I, Abramić M, Rizzi A, Kojić-Prodić B, Allmaier G.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Chemical Technologies and Analysis, Vienna University of 
Technology, Getreidemarkt 9/164-IAC, A-1060 Vienna, Austria.

A chemical modification approach combined with matrix-assisted laser 
desorption/ionization (MALDI) mass spectrometry was used to identify the active 
site serine residue of an extracellular lipase from Streptomyces rimosus 
R6-554W. The lipase, purified from a high-level overexpressing strain, was 
covalently modified by incubation with 3,4-dichloroisocoumarin, a general 
mechanism-based serine protease inhibitor. MALDI time-of-flight (TOF) mass 
spectrometry was used to probe the nature of the intact inhibitor-modified 
lipase and to clarify the mechanism of lipase inhibition by 
3,4-dichloroisocoumarin. The stoichiometry of the inhibition reaction revealed 
that specifically one molecule of inhibitor was bound to the lipase. The MALDI 
matrix 2,6-dihydroxyacetophenone facilitated the formation of highly abundant [M 
+ 2H](2+) ions with good resolution compared to other matrices in a linear TOF 
instrument. This allowed the detection of two different inhibitor-modified 
lipase species. Exact localization of the modified amino acid residue was 
accomplished by tryptic digestion followed by low-energy collision-induced 
dissociation peptide sequencing of the detected 
2-(carboxychloromethyl)benzoylated peptide by means of a MALDI quadrupole ion 
trap reflectron TOF instrument. The high sequence coverage obtained by this 
approach allowed the confirmation of the site specificity of the inhibition 
reaction and the unambiguous identification of the serine at position 10 as the 
nucleophilic amino acid residue in the active site of the enzyme. This result is 
in agreement with the previously obtained data from multiple sequence alignment 
of S. rimosus lipase with different esterases, which indicated that this enzyme 
exhibits a characteristic Gly-Asp-Ser-(Leu) motif located close to the 
N-terminus and is harboring the catalytically active serine residue. Therefore, 
this study experimentally proves the classification of the S. rimosus lipase as 
GDS(L) lipolytic enzyme.

DOI: 10.1002/jms.750
PMID: 15578758 [Indexed for MEDLINE]