1. Acta Neuropathol. 2005 Mar;109(3):247-55. doi: 10.1007/s00401-004-0939-7. Epub
 2004 Dec 22.

Ultrastructural study of aggregates in the spinal cord of transgenic mice with a 
G93A mutant SOD1 gene.

Sasaki S(1), Warita H, Murakami T, Shibata N, Komori T, Abe K, Kobayashi M, 
Iwata M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Tokyo Women's Medical University, 8-1 Kawada-cho, 
Shinjuku-ku, 162-8666, Tokyo, Japan. ssasaki@nij.twmu.ac.jp

The ultrastructural features of SOD1-positive aggregates were determined to 
clarify whether these aggregates are associated with the pathogenesis of SOD1 
mutant mice. We examined the spinal cord of transgenic mice expressing a G93A 
mutant human SOD1 gene with fewer copies (gene copy 10). At the early 
presymptomatic stage (age 24 weeks), SOD1- and ubiquitin-positive granular, 
linear, or round deposits were found occasionally in the neuropil of the 
anterior horns. Ultrastructurally, small filamentous aggregates were observed 
occasionally in the neuronal processes including the axons in the anterior 
horns. At the late presymptomatic stage (28 weeks), SOD1- and ubiquitin-positive 
deposits and Lewy body-like inclusions (LIs) were frequently demonstrated in the 
neuronal processes including cord-like swollen axons and in some remaining 
anterior horn neurons. Ultrastructurally, larger filamentous aggregates were 
frequent, predominating in the neuronal processes of the anterior horns 
including the proximal axons, but were rare in the somata and dendrites. The 
aggregates usually consisted of interwoven intermediate filaments (about 10-15 
nm in diameter) and frequently contained electron-dense cores in the center 
resembling LIs. Occasionally the aggregates consisted mainly of granular, 
amorphous, or vesicular substance, showing fewer filamentous structures. At the 
symptomatic stages (32 and 35 weeks), LIs were frequently demonstrated within 
the neuronal processes in the anterior horns, particularly in the cord-like 
swollen axons. Many more prominent SOD1- and ubiquitin-positive deposits were 
observed over the whole white matter columns and in the gray matter of the 
anterior and posterior horns than at the previous stage. Ultrastructurally, 
aggregates frequently contained electron-dense cores, and were frequently 
observed in cord-like swollen axons consisting of accumulated neurofilaments. A 
high level of human SOD1-and ubiquitin-immunogold labeling was present in small 
to large aggregates even at the presymptomatic stages, and the aggregates 
increased in size and frequency with time. Compactly packed filaments and 
electron-dense cores of aggregates showed SOD1-and ubiquitin-immunogold labeling 
more prominently than in loosely packed filaments. These findings suggest that 
the accumulation of SOD1-positive aggregates in the neuronal processes, 
predominantly in the axons, constitutes an important determinant of 
neurotoxicity and the pathogenesis of this animal model, probably causing 
impairment of axonal transport by the sequestration of mutant SOD1 protein 
within aggregates, or in part by physically blocking the axonal transport.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-004-0939-7
PMID: 15614580 [Indexed for MEDLINE]