1. J Pept Sci. 2005 Jul;11(8):481-90. doi: 10.1002/psc.641.

Influenza A virus protein PB1-F2: synthesis and characterization of the 
biologically active full length protein and related peptides.

Henklein P(1), Bruns K, Nimtz M, Wray V, Tessmer U, Schubert U.

Author information:
(1)Humboldt University, Institute of Biochemistry, Berlin, Germany. 
peter.henklein@charite.de

Recently the discovery of a novel 87 amino acid influenza A virus (IAV) protein, 
named PB1-F2, has been reported that originates from an alternative reading 
frame in the PB1 polymerase gene and is encoded in most of the known human IAV 
isolates. Using optimized protocols, full length biologically active sPB1-F2 and 
a number of fragments have been synthesized by following either the standard 
elongation SPPS method or by native chemical ligation of unprotected N- and 
C-terminal peptide fragments at the histidine and cysteine residues located in 
position 41 and 42 of the native sequence, respectively. The ligation procedure 
afforded the most efficient synthesis of sPB1-F2 and facilitated the generation 
of various mutants of sPB1-F2 from pre-synthesized peptide fragments. During the 
synthesis of sPB1-F2, the formation of succinimide and subsequent conversion to 
the piperidine derivative at the aspartic acid residue in position 23 was 
observed. This reaction was forestalled by applying specific modifications to 
the SPPS protocol. The chain-elongation SPPS protocol is optimal for producing 
small peptides of sPB1-F2, their derivatives and precursors for a subsequent 
ligation protocol, while the full length protein, mutants and labelled 
derivatives are more conveniently and efficiently synthesized by SPPS protocols 
that include native chemical ligation. The molecular identity of sPB1-F2 was 
confirmed by peptide mapping, mass spectrometry, N-terminal sequencing, (1)H NMR 
spectroscopy and Western blot analysis. The latter analysis afforded direct 
evidence of the inherent tendency of sPB1-F2 to undergo oligomerization, a 
phenomenon observed both for full length sPB1-F2 and fragments thereof, as well 
as for its full length viral counterpart. Our synthesis protocols open the field 
for multiple biological and structural studies on sPB1-F2 that, similar to the 
molecule expressed in an IAV context, induces apoptosis and interacts with 
membranes in vitro and in vivo, as shown in previous studies.

Copyright 2005 European Peptide Society and John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/psc.641
PMID: 15641124 [Indexed for MEDLINE]