1. Biol Chem. 2004 Dec;385(12):1193-5. doi: 10.1515/BC.2004.154.

Functional characterization of the postulated intramolecular sphingolipid 
activator protein domain of human acid sphingomyelinase.

Kölzer M(1), Ferlinz K, Bartelsen O, Hoops SL, Lang F, Sandhoff K.

Author information:
(1)Kekulé-Institut für Organische Chemie und Biochemie, Universität Bonn, 
Gerhard-Domagk-Str. 1, D-53121 Bonn, Germany.

Degradation of membrane-bound sphingomyelin to phosphorylcholine and ceramide is 
catalyzed by the water-soluble lysosomal acid sphingomyelinase (A-SMase). The 
presence of sphingolipid activator proteins (Saps: saposins A-D; GM2 activator) 
is not essential to mediate this reaction at the water-lipid interface in vivo . 
A hypothesis based on amino acid sequence alignments suggests that the enzyme 
possesses an N-terminal saposin-homologous domain, which may facilitate the 
enzymatic reaction at the interface. We mutated one homologous and three 
conserved amino acid residues of this domain and studied the activity of the 
variant enzymes using different sphingomyelin degradation assays. A variant with 
an exchange of a conserved amino acid residue, Pro153Ala, still exhibited enzyme 
activity of approximately 52% of normal in a detergent-containing micellar 
assay, but only 13% of normal in a detergent-free liposomal assay system, which 
suggests that the Sap-homologous domain fulfills membrane-disturbing functions. 
Addition of saposin C to the liposomal assay mixtures increased the Pro153Ala 
variant sphingomyelinase activity to 46% of normal, indicating that the variant 
saposin-like domain can be substituted by the presence of the sphingolipid 
activator protein. On the other hand, the addition of saposin C did not result 
in complete restoration of the variant activity. Thus, the Sap-like domain may 
also have another role, e.g., to stabilize the fold of acid sphingomyelinase, 
which cannot be compensated by the presence of saposin C or a detergent. Such an 
essential second function of the saposin-like domain as an integral part of acid 
sphingomyelinase is confirmed by our observation that the Lys118Glu, Cys120Ser 
and Cys131Ser variants were almost completely devoid of activity in the 
detergent-containing micellar assay system as well as in the liposomal assay 
system in the presence of saposin C.

DOI: 10.1515/BC.2004.154
PMID: 15653433 [Indexed for MEDLINE]