1. Am J Hum Genet. 1992 May;50(5):1086-103.

DNA mutation associated with the human butyrylcholinesterase K-variant and its 
linkage to the atypical variant mutation and other polymorphic sites.

Bartels CF(1), Jensen FS, Lockridge O, van der Spek AF, Rubinstein HM, Lubrano 
T, La Du BN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Michigan School of Medicine, Ann 
Arbor.

Genomic DNA from two families exhibiting the K-variant phenotype of serum 
butyrylcholinesterase was amplified by PCR and sequenced to determine the 
molecular basis of this variant. The K-variant phenotype was found to be 
associated with a DNA transition from guanine to adenine at nucleotide 1615, 
which caused an amino acid change from alanine 539 to threonine (GCA----ACA; 
Ala539----Thr). There was a 30% reduction of serum butyrylcholinesterase 
activity associated with this mutation. Amplification and sequencing of DNA from 
a random sample of 47 unrelated people gave a frequency of .128 for the 
K-variant allele. Thus, 1 person in 63 should be homozygous for the K-variant, 
making the K-variant the most common butyrylcholinesterase variant. The 
K-variant mutation was also found to be present in 17 (89%) of 19 
butyrylcholinesterase genes containing the point mutation which causes the 
atypical phenotype of butyrylcholinesterase (GAT----GGT; Asp70----Gly). The 
presence of the K-variant in the same molecule as the atypical variant does not 
contribute to the qualitative change in the atypical enzyme, but it most likely 
accounts for the approximately one-third reduction in Vmax of 
butyrylcholinesterase activity in atypical serum. Two additional point mutations 
located in noncoding regions of the gene were also observed to be in linkage 
disequilibrium with the K-variant mutation. As many as four different point 
mutations have been identified within a single butyrylcholinesterase gene. 
Inhibition tests of the enzyme in plasma are usually used to distinguish the 
K-variant from the usual enzyme when the former is present with the heterozygous 
atypical variant (AK phenotype vs. UA phenotype). Inhibition tests were 
performed on plasma enzyme from the four possible genotypic combinations of the 
heterozygous atypical mutation with or without the K-variant mutation on either 
allele; we found that the AK phenotype was caused by three genotypes (A/K, AK/K, 
and U/A) and that the UA phenotype was caused by two genotypes (U/A and U/AK).

PMCID: PMC1682596
PMID: 1570838 [Indexed for MEDLINE]