1. Biochemistry. 2005 Mar 1;44(8):3082-90. doi: 10.1021/bi048125u.

Swapping core residues in homologous proteins swaps folding mechanism.

Dalessio PM(1), Boyer JA, McGettigan JL, Ropson IJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State 
University College of Medicine, Hershey, Pennsylvania 17033, USA.

Rat intestinal fatty acid binding protein (IFABP) displays an intermediate with 
little if any secondary structure during unfolding, while the structurally 
homologous rat ileal lipid binding protein (ILBP) displays an intermediate 
during unfolding with nativelike secondary structure. Double-jump experiments 
indicate that these intermediates are on the folding path for each protein. To 
test the hypothesis that differences in the number of buried hydrophobic atoms 
in a folding initiating site are responsible for the different types of 
intermediates observed for these proteins, two mutations (F68C-IFABP and 
C69F-ILBP) were made that swapped a more hydrophobic residue for a more 
hydrophilic residue in the respective cores of these two proteins. F68C-IFABP 
followed an unfolding path identical to that of WT-ILBP with an intermediate 
that showed nativelike secondary structure, whereas C69F-ILBP followed an 
unfolding path that was identical to that of WT-IFABP with an intermediate that 
lacked secondary structure. Further, a hydrophilic residue was introduced at an 
identical hydrophobic structural position in both proteins (F93S-IFABP and 
F94S-ILBP). Replacement of phenylalanine with serine at this site led to the 
appearance of an intermediate during refolding that lacked secondary structure 
for both proteins that was not detected for either parental protein. Altering 
the chemical characteristics and/or size of residues within an initiating core 
of hydrophobic interactions is critical to the types of intermediates that are 
observed during the folding of these proteins.

DOI: 10.1021/bi048125u
PMID: 15723553 [Indexed for MEDLINE]