1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2005 May 15;1669(1):17-25. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbamem.2005.02.002.

Regeneration and inhibition of proton pumping activity of bacteriorhodopsin blue 
membrane by cationic amine anesthetics.

Shibata A(1), Sakata A, Ueno S, Hori T, Minami K, Baba Y, Kamo N.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, The University of Tokushima, Shomachi, 
Tokushima 770-8505, Japan. ashibata@ph.tokushima-u.ac.jp

Bacteriorhodopsin (bR) is the prototype of an integral membrane protein with 
seven membrane-spanning alpha-helices and serves as a model of the 
G-protein-coupled drug receptors. This study is aimed at reaching a greater 
understanding of the role of amine local anesthetic cations on the proton 
transport in the bR protein, and furthermore, the functional role of "the 
cation" in the proton pumping mechanism. The effect of the amine anesthetic 
cations on the proton pump in the bR blue membrane was compared with those by 
divalent (Ca2+, Mg2+ and Mn2+) and monovalent metal cations (Li+, Na+, K+ and 
Cs+), which are essential for the correct functioning of the proton pumping of 
the bR protein. The results suggest that the interacting site of the divalent 
cation to the bR membrane may differ from that of the monovalent metal cation. 
The electric current profile of the bR blue membrane in the presence of the 
amine anesthetic cations was biphasic, involving the generation and inhibition 
of the proton pumping activity in a concentration-dependent manner. The extent 
of the regeneration of the proton pump by the additives increased in the order 
of monovalent metal cation<monovalent amine anesthetic cation<divalent metal 
cation. We found that organic cations such as the amine anesthetics can also 
regenerate the proton pump in the bR protein. The inhibition of proton transport 
in the bR protein by the anesthetic cations was elucidated using the wild type, 
the E204Q and the D96N mutated bRs. The hydrophobic interaction of the amine 
anesthetics with the bR protein plays an important part in inhibiting the bR 
proton pump.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamem.2005.02.002
PMID: 15842995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]