1. BMC Struct Biol. 2005 Aug 10;5:13. doi: 10.1186/1472-6807-5-13.

Crystal structure of nitrogen regulatory protein IIANtr from Neisseria 
meningitidis.

Ren J(1), Sainsbury S, Berrow NS, Alderton D, Nettleship JE, Stammers DK, 
Saunders NJ, Owens RJ.

Author information:
(1)The Oxford Protein Production Facility, Henry Wellcome Building for Genomic 
Medicine, University of Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford, OX3 7BN, UK. 
ren@strubi.ox.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: The NMB0736 gene of Neisseria meningitidis serogroup B strain MC58 
encodes the putative nitrogen regulatory protein, IIANtr (abbreviated to 
NM-IIANtr). The homologous protein present in Escherichia coli is implicated in 
the control of nitrogen assimilation. As part of a structural proteomics 
approach to the study of pathogenic Neisseria spp., we have selected this 
protein for structure determination by X-ray crystallography.
RESULTS: The NM-IIANtr was over-expressed in E. coli and was shown to be 
partially mono-phosphorylated, as assessed by mass spectrometry of the purified 
protein. Crystals of un-phosphorylated protein were obtained and diffraction 
data collected to 2.5 A resolution. The structure of NM-IIANtr was solved by 
molecular replacement using the coordinates of the E. coli nitrogen regulatory 
protein IIAntr [PDB: 1A6J] as the starting model. The overall fold of the 
Neisseria enzyme shows a high degree of similarity to the IIANtr from E. coli, 
and the position of the phosphoryl acceptor histidine residue (H67) is 
conserved. The orientation of an adjacent arginine residue (R69) suggests that 
it may also be involved in coordinating the phosphate group. Comparison of the 
structure with that of E. coli IIAmtl complexed with HPr [PDB: 1J6T] indicates 
that NM-IIANtr binds in a similar way to the HPr-like enzyme in Neisseria.
CONCLUSION: The structure of NM-IIANtr confirms its assignment as a homologue of 
the IIANtr proteins found in a range of other Gram-negative bacteria. We 
conclude that the NM- IIANtr protein functions as part of a phosphorylation 
cascade which, in contrast to E. coli, shares the upstream phosphotransfer 
protein with the sugar uptake phosphoenolpyruvate:sugar phosphotransferase 
system (PTS), but in common with E. coli has a distinct downstream effector 
mechanism.

DOI: 10.1186/1472-6807-5-13
PMCID: PMC1201152
PMID: 16092953 [Indexed for MEDLINE]