1. Korean J Gastroenterol. 2005 Nov;46(5):358-67.

[Hereditary pancreatitis].

[Article in Korean]

Lee SK(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan 
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. sklee@amc.seoul.kr

The first family of hereditary pancreatitis was described in 1952. The mode of 
inheritance is autosomal dominant trait with an 80% of penetrance rate. Although 
hereditary pancreatitis is rare, this disorder has provided valuable insights in 
understanding the pathophysiology of pancreatitis and pancreatic cancer. The 
causative gene of hereditary pancreatitis was identified in 1996 through 
mutational analysis of genes within chromosome 7q35. Most forms of hereditary 
pancreatitis are caused by one of two common mutations, R122H in the third exon 
or N29I in the second exon of the cationic trypsinogen gene (protease serine 1, 
PRSS1). R122H mutation is the most common PRSS1 mutation. Additional mutations 
of the cationic trypsinogen gene have been described. In Korea, first family of 
hereditary pancreatitis with cationic trypsinogen gene mutation revealed an 
arginine to histidine amino acid substitution at the residue 122. Patients with 
hereditary pancreatitis present with symptoms at an early age and have 
significant risk for the development of chronic pancreatitis and pancreatic 
cancer. The risk of pancreatic cancer is estimated to be 53-fold higher after 
the age of 50 years than the general population. The risk of pancreatic cancer 
is not related to the type of mutation. Since hereditary pancreatitis is a 
strong risk factor for pancreatic cancer, it is important to establish a 
diagnostic criteria for diagnosis and surveillance. However, there are potential 
benefits, risks and limitations in genetic testing for hereditary pancreatitis. 
It is difficult to provide the proper treatment, but recent developments in 
therapeutic approaches may be helpful in caring hereditary pancreatitis. This 
article includes the current status, pathogenesis, clinical features, and 
management of hereditary pancreatitis including the aspects of pancreatic 
cancer.

PMID: 16301849 [Indexed for MEDLINE]