1. Mol Vis. 2005 Nov 17;11:996-1001.

Clinical and genetic features of Hungarian achromatopsia patients.

Varsányi B(1), Wissinger B, Kohl S, Koeppen K, Farkas A.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Genetics Laboratory, University Eye Hospital, University of 
Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. varsika@axelero.hu

PURPOSE: To describe the clinical features and molecular genetic findings in a 
collection of Hungarian achromatopsia patients.
METHODS: Twelve patients with congenital achromatopsia from nine Hungarian 
families were analyzed in this study. The patients underwent standard 
ophthalmological examination including detailed full-field electroretinography 
and color vision testing. In two patients, dark adaptation and spectral 
luminosity tests were also performed. PCR/RFLP analysis and DNA sequencing was 
applied for mutation screening of CNGA3 and CNGB3. Heterologous minigene 
expression was used to evaluate transcript splicing of a new intronic mutation 
in CNGB3.
RESULTS: Mutations in CNGA3 were present in four families and mutations in CNGB3 
in the remaining five families, including mutations known from Western European 
patient samples and two new CNGB3 mutations: c.112C>T/Gln38X and c.1663-5T>G. 
Heterologous expression in COS7 cells shows that the latter induces a splicing 
defect through the activation of a cryptic splice site 4 bases upstream of the 
genuine splice site. The patients presented with a clinical picture typical for 
congenital achromatopsia and there was no significant difference in the 
phenotype of subjects with either CNGA3 or CNGB3 mutations based on standard 
ophthalmological examination. However, we assume residual cone function in a 
subject homozygous for the Phe547Leu mutation in CNGA3 based on prior detailed 
psychophysical testing (i.e., dark adaptation and spectral luminosity).
CONCLUSIONS: Mutations in CNGA3 and CNGB3 account for achromatopsia in Hungarian 
patients including known mutations and a few new CNGB3 mutations. While standard 
ophthalmological examination revealed a phenotype of complete achromatopsia, we 
show that thorough psychophysical testing can help to identify subjects with 
some minute cone function.

PMID: 16319819 [Indexed for MEDLINE]