1. Am J Hum Genet. 2006 Jan;78(1):112-24. doi: 10.1086/498880. Epub 2005 Nov 15.

Mutational spectrum of D-bifunctional protein deficiency and structure-based 
genotype-phenotype analysis.

Ferdinandusse S(1), Ylianttila MS, Gloerich J, Koski MK, Oostheim W, Waterham 
HR, Hiltunen JK, Wanders RJ, Glumoff T.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory Genetic Metabolic Diseases, Academic Medical Center at University 
of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. S.Ferdinandusse@amc.uva.nl

D-bifunctional protein (DBP) deficiency is an autosomal recessive inborn error 
of peroxisomal fatty acid oxidation. The clinical presentation of DBP deficiency 
is usually very severe, but a few patients with a relatively mild presentation 
have been identified. In this article, we report the mutational spectrum of DBP 
deficiency on the basis of molecular analysis in 110 patients. We identified 61 
different mutations by DBP cDNA analysis, 48 of which have not been reported 
previously. The predicted effects of the different disease-causing amino acid 
changes on protein structure were determined using the crystal structures of the 
(3R)-hydroxyacyl-coenzyme A (CoA) dehydrogenase unit of rat DBP and the 
2-enoyl-CoA hydratase 2 unit and liganded sterol carrier protein 2-like unit of 
human DBP. The effects ranged from the replacement of catalytic amino acid 
residues or residues in direct contact with the substrate or cofactor to 
disturbances of protein folding or dimerization of the subunits. To study 
whether there is a genotype-phenotype correlation for DBP deficiency, these 
structure-based analyses were combined with extensive biochemical analyses of 
patient material (cultured skin fibroblasts and plasma) and available clinical 
information on the patients. We found that the effect of the mutations 
identified in patients with a relatively mild clinical and biochemical 
presentation was less detrimental to the protein structure than the effect of 
mutations identified in those with a very severe presentation. These results 
suggest that the amount of residual DBP activity correlates with the severity of 
the phenotype. From our data, we conclude that, on the basis of the predicted 
effect of the mutations on protein structure, a genotype-phenotype correlation 
exists for DBP deficiency.

DOI: 10.1086/498880
PMCID: PMC1380208
PMID: 16385454 [Indexed for MEDLINE]