1. Brain. 2006 Apr;129(Pt 4):996-1013. doi: 10.1093/brain/awl023. Epub 2006 Feb
14.

Nuclear envelope dystrophies show a transcriptional fingerprint suggesting 
disruption of Rb-MyoD pathways in muscle regeneration.

Bakay M(1), Wang Z, Melcon G, Schiltz L, Xuan J, Zhao P, Sartorelli V, Seo J, 
Pegoraro E, Angelini C, Shneiderman B, Escolar D, Chen YW, Winokur ST, Pachman 
LM, Fan C, Mandler R, Nevo Y, Gordon E, Zhu Y, Dong Y, Wang Y, Hoffman EP.

Author information:
(1)Research Center for Genetic Medicine, Children's National Medical Center, 
Washington DC 20010, USA.

Mutations of lamin A/C (LMNA) cause a wide range of human disorders, including 
progeria, lipodystrophy, neuropathies and autosomal dominant Emery-Dreifuss 
muscular dystrophy (EDMD). EDMD is also caused by X-linked recessive 
loss-of-function mutations of emerin, another component of the inner nuclear 
lamina that directly interacts with LMNA. One model for disease pathogenesis of 
LMNA and emerin mutations is cell-specific perturbations of the mRNA 
transcriptome in terminally differentiated cells. To test this model, we studied 
125 human muscle biopsies from 13 diagnostic groups (125 U133A, 125 U133B 
microarrays), including EDMD patients with LMNA and emerin mutations. A Visual 
and Statistical Data Analyzer (VISDA) algorithm was used to statistically model 
cluster hierarchy, resulting in a tree of phenotypic classifications. 
Validations of the diagnostic tree included permutations of U133A and U133B 
arrays, and use of two probe set algorithms (MAS5.0 and MBEI). This showed that 
the two nuclear envelope defects (EDMD LMNA, EDMD emerin) were highly related 
disorders and were also related to fascioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy 
(FSHD). FSHD has recently been hypothesized to involve abnormal interactions of 
chromatin with the nuclear envelope. To identify disease-specific transcripts 
for EDMD, we applied a leave-one-out (LOO) cross-validation approach using LMNA 
patient muscle as a test data set, with reverse transcription-polymerase chain 
reaction (RT-PCR) validations in both LMNA and emerin patient muscle. A high 
proportion of top-ranked and validated transcripts were components of the same 
transcriptional regulatory pathway involving Rb1 and MyoD during muscle 
regeneration (CRI-1, CREBBP, Nap1L1, ECREBBP/p300), where each was specifically 
upregulated in EDMD. Using a muscle regeneration time series (27 time points) we 
develop a transcriptional model for downstream consequences of LMNA and emerin 
mutations. We propose that key interactions between the nuclear envelope and Rb 
and MyoD fail in EDMD at the point of myoblast exit from the cell cycle, leading 
to poorly coordinated phosphorylation and acetylation steps. Our data is 
consistent with mutations of nuclear lamina components leading to 
destabilization of the transcriptome in differentiated cells.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awl023
PMID: 16478798 [Indexed for MEDLINE]