1. Cell Signal. 2006 Oct;18(10):1616-25. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2006.01.013. Epub
 2006 Mar 9.

Novel, isotype-specific sensors for protein kinase A subunit interaction based 
on bioluminescence resonance energy transfer (BRET).

Prinz A(1), Diskar M, Erlbruch A, Herberg FW.

Author information:
(1)University of Kassel, Department of Biochemistry, Heinrich Plett Str. 40, 
D-34132 Kassel, Germany. ankeprinz@uni-kassel.de

Homogeneous protein-protein interaction assays without the need of a separation 
step are an essential tool to unravel signal transduction events in live cells. 
We have established an isoform specific protein kinase A (PKA) subunit 
interaction assay based on bioluminescence resonance energy transfer (BRET). 
Tagging human Ralpha(I)-, Ralpha(II)-, as well as Calpha-subunits of PKA with 
Renilla luciferase (Rluc) as the bioluminescent donor or with green fluorescent 
protein (GFP2) as the energy acceptor, respectively, allows to directly probe 
PKA subunit interaction in living cells as well as in total cell extracts in 
order to study side by side PKA type I versus type II holoenzyme dynamics. 
Several novel, genetically encoded cAMP sensors and-for the first time PKA type 
I sensors-were generated. When C- and R-subunits are assembled to the respective 
holoenzyme complexes inside the cell, BRET occurs with a signal up to three 
times above the background. An increase of endogenous cAMP levels as well as 
treatment with the cAMP analog 8-Br-cAMP is reflected by a dose-dependent BRET 
signal reduction in cells expressing wild type proteins. In contrast to type II, 
the dissociation of the PKA type I holoenzyme complex was never complete in 
cells with maximally elevated cAMP levels. Both sensors dissociated completely 
upon treatment with 8-Br-cAMP after cell lysis, consistent with in vitro 
activation assays using holoenzymes assembled from purified PKA subunits. 
Interestingly, incubation of cells with the PKA antagonist Rp-8-Br-cAMPS leads 
to a significant BRET signal increase in cells expressing PKA type I or type II 
isoforms, indicating a stabilization of the holoenzyme complexes in vivo. Mutant 
RI subunits with reduced (hRIalpha-R210K) or abolished (hRIalpha-G200E/G324E) 
cAMP binding capability were studied to quantify maximal signal to noise ratios 
for the RI-BRET sensor. Utilizing BRET we demonstrate that PKA type II 
holoenzyme was rendered insensitive to beta-adrenergic receptor stimulation with 
isoproterenol when anchoring to the plasma membrane of COS-7 cells was disrupted 
by either using Ht31 peptide or by depletion of membrane cholesterol.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2006.01.013
PMID: 16524697 [Indexed for MEDLINE]