1. Amino Acids. 2006 Mar;30(2):163-71. doi: 10.1007/s00726-005-0253-2. Epub 2006 
Mar 10.

In silico assessment of gene function involved in cysteine biosynthesis in 
Arabidopsis: expression analysis of multiple isoforms of serine 
acetyltransferase.

Noji M(1), Goulart Kawashima C, Obayashi T, Saito K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Graduate School of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Chiba University, Inage-ku, Chiba, Japan.

In plants, the inorganic sulfur is first fixed into cysteine by the cysteine 
biosynthetic pathway. This biosynthetic pathway of cysteine involves several 
enzymatic reactions. In Arabidopsis thaliana, multiple isoforms seem to 
participate in each enzymatic step for cysteine biosynthesis. To obtain more 
insights on the specific role of each isoform involved in the cysteine 
biosynthesis, in silico analysis of these isoforms using Arabidopsis expressed 
sequence tags (EST) database was carried out. This EST database analysis 
revealed distinct population distribution of ESTs among multiple isoforms, 
suggesting that each isoform has its particular expression pattern, presumably 
associated with its specific role in cysteine biosynthesis. As another in silico 
analysis, co-expression analysis of genes involved in sulfur metabolism in 
Arabidopsis was performed using a public transcriptome database of DNA 
microarrays. This co-expression analysis also suggested specific function and 
co-regulation of some isoform genes for cysteine biosynthesis by consideration 
on the clustering of co-expressed genes. From the results of sensitivity to 
feedback regulation, subcellular localization and expression of mRNA analyses, 
each serine acetyltransferase (SATase) isoform seems to have its specific role 
for cysteine biosynthesis. Similar expression patterns were observed between the 
experimental results of expression data for SATase isoforms and the in silico 
results of "digital northern" analysis using EST database.

DOI: 10.1007/s00726-005-0253-2
PMID: 16525754 [Indexed for MEDLINE]