1. Zhongguo Dang Dai Er Ke Za Zhi. 2006 Apr;8(2):125-8.

[A difficult and complicated case study: neonatal intrahepatic cholestasis 
caused by citrin deficiency].

[Article in Chinese]

Song YZ(1), Hao H, Ushikai M, Liu GS, Xiao X, Saheki T, Kobayashi K, Wang ZN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, First Affiliated Hospital, Jinan University, 
Guangzhou 510632, China. songyuanzong@tom.com

Neonatal intrahepatic cholestasis caused by citrin deficiency (NICCD) is a kind 
of inborn errors of metabolism, with the main clinic manifestations of jaundice, 
hepatomegaly, and abnormal liver function indices. As a mitochondrial solute 
carrier protein, citrin plays important roles in aerobic glycolysis, 
gluconeogenesis, urea cycle, and protein and nucleotide syntheses. Therefore 
citrin deficiency causes various and complicated metabolic disturbances, such as 
hypoglycemia, hyperlactic acidemia, hyperammonemia, hypoproteinemia, 
hyperlipidemia, and galactosemia. This paper reported a case of NICCD confirmed 
by mutation analysis of SLC25A13, the gene encoding citrin. The baby (male, 6 
months old) was referred to the First Affiliated Hospital with the complaint of 
jaundice of the skin and sclera, which it had suffered from for nearly 6 months. 
Physical examination showed obvious jaundice and a palpable liver 5 cm below the 
right subcostal margin. Liver function tests revealed elevated enzymatic 
activities, like GGT, ALP, AST, and ALT, together with increased levels of TBA, 
bilirubin (especially conjugated bilirubin), and decreased levels of total 
protein/albumin and fibrinogen. Blood levels of ammonia, lactate, cholesterol, 
and triglyceride were also increased, and in particular, the serum AFP level 
reached 319,225.70 microg/L, a extremely elevated value that has rarely been 
found in practice before. Tandem mass analysis of a dried blood sample revealed 
increased levels of free fatty acids and tyrosine, methionine, citrulline, and 
threonine as well. UP-GC-MS analysis of the urine sample showed elevated 
galactose and galactitol. The baby was thus diagnosed with suspected NICCD based 
on the findings. It was then treated with oral arginine and multiple vitamins 
(including fat-soluble vitamins A, D, E, and K), and was fed with lactose-free 
and medium-chain fatty acids enriched formula instead of breast feeding. After 
half a month of treatment, the jaundice disappeared, and the laboratory 
findings, including liver function indices, blood levels of ammonia, lactate and 
AFP, were returned to normal level. The baby was followed up for 6 months. It 
developed well, and the abnormal laboratory findings, including MS-MS and 
UP-GC-MS analysis results, have been corrected, except a slightly elevated 
lactate level sometimes. SLC25A13 gene mutation analysis for the patient 
revealed a compound heterozygote of mutation 851del4 and 1638ins23 and therefore 
NICCD was definitely diagnosed.

PMID: 16613706 [Indexed for MEDLINE]