1. Biomed Chromatogr. 2006 Oct;20(10):1120-5. doi: 10.1002/bmc.657.

Identification of the commonest cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator gene 
DeltaF508 mutation: evaluation of PCR--single-strand conformational polymorphism 
and polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis.

Kakavas KV(1), Noulas AV, Kanakis I, Bonanou S, Karamanos NK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, School of Medical Laboratories, Faculty of 
Health and Care, Highest Technological Educational Institution, Larissa, Greece.

In the present study we investigated whether single-strand conformational 
polymorphism (SSCP) and polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) could be used 
for the identification of the CFTR DeltaF508 gene mutation, which is commonest 
in the Greek population. Using DNA from patients carrying this mutation, the 
appropriate 98 bp region of the CFTR gene was amplified by PCR and the reaction 
products were analysed by non-radioactive SSCP-electrophoresis using silver 
staining for band visualization and non-denaturating PAGE to confirm the 
results. SSCP electrophoretic analysis has been optimized for several parameters 
in order to achieve the best resolution. Single-strand DNA fragments gave a 
reproducible pattern of bands, characteristic for the particular mutation. 
Comparison of the obtain patterns with control samples allowed the detection of 
the DeltaF508 mutation in the patients studied by SSCP assay and these results 
were confirmed by the independent method of PAGE. Although SSCP and PAGE can be 
used for detection of this mutation, PAGE resulted in more distinct patterns 
than SSCP. It is, therefore, proposed that PAGE can be reliably used for the 
detection and identification of such a mutation in patients provided that 
suitable controls are available. The applicability of PAGE to identification of 
the mutation in carriers, particularly useful for population screening, is also 
discussed.

DOI: 10.1002/bmc.657
PMID: 16708396 [Indexed for MEDLINE]