1. BMC Biotechnol. 2006 Jun 16;6:27. doi: 10.1186/1472-6750-6-27.

Insulated piggyBac vectors for insect transgenesis.

Sarkar A(1), Atapattu A, Belikoff EJ, Heinrich JC, Li X, Horn C, Wimmer EA, 
Scott MJ.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Functional Genomics, Institute of Molecular BioSciences, Massey 
University, Private Bag 11222, Palmerston North, New Zealand. 
A.Sarkar@massey.ac.nz

BACKGROUND: Germ-line transformation of insects is now a widely used method for 
analyzing gene function and for the development of genetically modified strains 
suitable for pest control programs. The most widely used transposable element 
for the germ-line transformation of insects is piggyBac. The site of integration 
of the transgene can influence gene expression due to the effects of nearby 
transcription enhancers or silent heterochromatic regions. Position effects can 
be minimized by flanking a transgene with insulator elements. The scs/scs' and 
gypsy insulators from Drosophila melanogaster as well as the chicken beta-globin 
HS4 insulator function in both Drosophila and mammalian cells.
RESULTS: To minimize position effects we have created a set of piggyBac 
transformation vectors that contain either the scs/scs', gypsy or chicken 
beta-globin HS4 insulators. The vectors contain either fluorescent protein or 
eye color marker genes and have been successfully used for germ-line 
transformation of Drosophila melanogaster. A set of the scs/scs' vectors 
contains the coral reef fluorescent protein marker genes AmCyan, ZsGreen and 
DsRed that have not been optimized for translation in human cells. These marker 
genes are controlled by a combined GMR-3xP3 enhancer/promoter that gives 
particularly strong expression in the eyes. This is also the first report of the 
use of the ZsGreen and AmCyan reef fluorescent proteins as transformation 
markers in insects.
CONCLUSION: The insulated piggyBac vectors should protect transgenes against 
position effects and thus facilitate fine control of gene expression in a wide 
spectrum of insect species. These vectors may also be used for transgenesis in 
other invertebrate species.

DOI: 10.1186/1472-6750-6-27
PMCID: PMC1525164
PMID: 16776846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]