1. BMC Biochem. 2006 Jun 28;7:19. doi: 10.1186/1471-2091-7-19.

Influence of simulated microgravity on the activation of the small GTPase Rho 
involved in cytoskeletal formation--molecular cloning and sequencing of bovine 
leukemia-associated guanine nucleotide exchange factor.

Higashibata A(1), Imamizo-Sato M, Seki M, Yamazaki T, Ishioka N.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Space and Astronautical Science, Japan Aerospace Exploration 
Agency, Tsukuba Space Center, 2-1-1 Sengen, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8505, Japan. 
higashibata.akira@jaxa.jp

BACKGROUND: The irregular formation of cytoskeletal fibers in spaceflown 
experimental cells has been observed, but the disorganization process of fibers 
is still poorly understood. It is well known that the activation of the small 
GTPase Rho leads to actin stress fibers assembly. This study was performed to 
evaluate the effect of simulated microgravity on the activation of Rho that is 
involved in actin fiber remodeling in cells.
RESULTS: Clinorotation influences actin fiber remodeling and its related 
signaling pathways that involve the small GTPase Rho. Actin stress fiber 
remodeling was significantly inhibited to a greater extent in cells cultured 
under clinorotation than in static cultured cells. From the gene and protein 
expression analyses, we found that the expression level of leukemia-associated 
Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factor (LARG), which activates Rho, was 
downregulated under clinorotation. Moreover, we identified the full-length LARG 
cDNA. The amount of GTP-bound RhoA, that is, the active form of RhoA, decreased 
under this condition.
CONCLUSION: The activation of the small GTPase Rho was influenced by simulated 
microgravity generated by a three-dimensional (3D) clinostat. Furthermore, the 
full-length cDNA of bovine LARG, a member of the Rho guanine nucleotide exchange 
factor (GEF) family, was identified, and its gene expression was observed to be 
downregulated under clinorotation. This downregulation subsequently resulted in 
the repression of RhoA activation. These results indicated that the 
disorganization of the actin fibers was caused by the inhibition of Rho 
activation by 3D clinorotation.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2091-7-19
PMCID: PMC1524780
PMID: 16803636 [Indexed for MEDLINE]