1. Genome Biol. 2006;7(7):R65. doi: 10.1186/gb-2006-7-7-R65.

Phylogenetically widespread alternative splicing at unusual GYNGYN donors.

Hiller M(1), Huse K, Szafranski K, Rosenstiel P, Schreiber S, Backofen R, 
Platzer M.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Computer Science, Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, 
Georges-Koehler-Allee 106, 79110 Freiburg, Germany. 
hiller@informatik.uni-freiburg.de

BACKGROUND: Splice donor sites have a highly conserved GT or GC dinucleotide and 
an extended intronic consensus sequence GTRAGT that reflects the sequence 
complementarity to the U1 snRNA. Here, we focus on unusual donor sites with the 
motif GYNGYN (Y stands for C or T; N stands for A, C, G, or T).
RESULTS: While only one GY functions as a splice donor for the majority of these 
splice sites in human, we provide computational and experimental evidence that 
110 (1.3%) allow alternative splicing at both GY donors. The resulting splice 
forms differ in only three nucleotides, which results mostly in the 
insertion/deletion of one amino acid. However, we also report the insertion of a 
stop codon in four cases. Investigating what distinguishes alternatively from 
not alternatively spliced GYNGYN donors, we found differences in the binding to 
U1 snRNA, a strong correlation between U1 snRNA binding strength and the 
preferred donor, over-represented sequence motifs in the adjacent introns, and a 
higher conservation of the exonic and intronic flanks between human and mouse. 
Extending our genome-wide analysis to seven other eukaryotic species, we found 
alternatively spliced GYNGYN donors in all species from mouse to Caenorhabditis 
elegans and even in Arabidopsis thaliana. Experimental verification of a 
conserved GTAGTT donor of the STAT3 gene in human and mouse reveals a remarkably 
similar ratio of alternatively spliced transcripts in both species.
CONCLUSION: In contrast to alternative splicing in general, GYNGYN donors in 
addition to NAGNAG acceptors enable subtle protein variations.

DOI: 10.1186/gb-2006-7-7-R65
PMCID: PMC1779574
PMID: 16869967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]