1. Hum Mutat. 2007 Jan;28(1):92-6. doi: 10.1002/humu.20419.

Mutations in the C7orf11 (TTDN1) gene in six nonphotosensitive 
trichothiodystrophy patients: no obvious genotype-phenotype relationships.

Botta E(1), Offman J, Nardo T, Ricotti R, Zambruno G, Sansone D, Balestri P, 
Raams A, Kleijer WJ, Jaspers NG, Sarasin A, Lehmann AR, Stefanini M.

Author information:
(1)Istituto di Genetica Molecolare, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche (CNR), 
Pavia, Italy.

Trichothiodystrophy (TTD) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder whose defining 
feature is brittle hair. Associated clinical symptoms include physical and 
mental retardation of different severity, ichthyosis, premature aging, and, in 
half of the patients, photosensitivity. Recently, C7orf11 (TTDN1) was identified 
as the first disease gene for the nonphotosensitive form of TTD, being mutated 
in two unrelated cases and in an Amish kindred. We have evaluated the 
involvement of TTDN1 in 44 unrelated nonphotosensitive TTD cases of different 
geographic origin and with different disease severity. Mutations were found in 
six patients, five of whom are homozygous and one of whom is a compound 
heterozygote. All five identified mutations are deletions that have not been 
described before. Three are deletions of a few bases, resulting in frameshifts 
and premature termination codons. The other two include the whole TTDN1 gene, 
suggesting that TTDN1 is not essential for cell proliferation and viability. The 
severity of the clinical features does not correlate with the type of mutation, 
indicating that other factors besides TTDN1 mutations influence the severity of 
the disorder. Since only a small proportion of the analyzed cases were mutated 
in TTDN1, the nonphotosensitive form of TTD is genetically heterogeneous. 
Mutations in TTDN1 do not affect the response to ultraviolet (UV) light or the 
steady state level of the repair/transcription factor IIH (TFIIH), which is 
central to the onset of the photosensitive form of TTD.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.20419
PMID: 16977596 [Indexed for MEDLINE]