1. Br J Ophthalmol. 2007 May;91(5):655-9. doi: 10.1136/bjo.2006.104406. Epub 2006
 Oct 11.

Clinical characterisation and molecular analysis of Wagner syndrome.

Meredith SP(1), Richards AJ, Flanagan DW, Scott JD, Poulson AV, Snead MP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

AIM: To detail the clinical findings in a British family with molecularly 
characterised Wagner syndrome.
BACKGROUND: Only in the last year has the specific genetic defect in Wagner 
syndrome been identified, and the background literature of the molecular 
genetics is outlined. Clinical and laboratory findings in a second case of 
Wagner syndrome are included to highlight difficulties that can be encountered 
when identifying pathogenic mutations for disorders arising in complex genes.
METHODS: Mutation screening was performed using PCR and RT-PCR.
RESULTS: A heterozygous mutation was found converting the donor splice site of 
exon 8 of the chondroitin sulphate proteoglycan 2 (CSPG2). This is the same 
mutation that has been reported in the original Wagner pedigree. The main 
clinical features of Wagner syndrome are vitreous syneresis, thickening and 
incomplete separation of the posterior hyaloid membrane, chorioretinal changes 
accompanied by subnormal electroretinographic responses, an ectopic fovea and 
early-onset cataract. A clinical feature present in this family, but previously 
undescribed, is anterior uveitis without formation of synechiae. Wagner syndrome 
has a progressive course, resulting in loss of vision even in the absence of 
retinal detachment.
CONCLUSION: On a background of considerable confusion regarding the distinction 
between Wagner syndrome and predominantly ocular Stickler syndrome, it is now 
apparent the that two conditions are both clinically and genetically distinct. 
This report summarises the clinical findings in Wagner syndrome and extends the 
phenotypic characteristics.

DOI: 10.1136/bjo.2006.104406
PMCID: PMC1954774
PMID: 17035272 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None.