1. Mol Cancer Res. 2006 Oct;4(10):779-92. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-06-0077.

Role of the mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling pathway in the regulation 
of human melanocytic antigen expression.

Kono M(1), Dunn IS, Durda PJ, Butera D, Rose LB, Haggerty TJ, Benson EM, Kurnick 
JT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, and Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA.

Heterogeneous expression of melanocytic antigens occurs frequently in melanomas 
and represents a potent barrier to immunotherapy. We previously showed that 
coordinated losses of several melanocytic antigens are generally attributable to 
down-regulation of antigen gene expression rather than irreversible mutation. 
Treatment of melanoma cells with mitogen-activated protein kinase 
(MAPK)/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) kinase (MEK) inhibitors 
blocks ERK activation and increases steady-state levels of mRNAs and 
corresponding protein expression for the melanocytic antigens Melan-A/MART-1, 
gp100, and tyrosinase. Although the degree of MEK inhibitor enhancement of 
antigen expression varied among different cell lines irrespective of their 
antigen expression status, all showed detectable responses. Notably, the 
antigen-enhancing effects of the MEK inhibitors could not be attributed to the 
master melanocytic regulator MITF-M. Because MAPK pathway activation via 
constitutively active mutant forms of BRAF is common in melanomas, correlation 
between BRAF function and antigen expression was investigated. No simple 
correlation of endogenous BRAF mutational status and antigen levels was 
observed, but transient overexpression of V600E BRAF increased ERK activation 
and reduced Melan-A/MART-1 levels in antigen-positive cell lines. These data 
indicate that whereas multiple factors may regulate antigen expression in 
melanomas, enhancement of MAPK signaling can act as a negative influence. 
Blocking such signaling with MEK inhibitors accordingly augments antigen levels, 
thereby enhancing Melan-A/MART-1-specific cytotoxic T-cell responses to 
antigen-negative cells following MEK inhibition treatment. Consequently, MAPK 
inhibition may assist targeting of melanomas for immunotherapy.

DOI: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-06-0077
PMID: 17050671 [Indexed for MEDLINE]