1. Int J Cancer. 2007 Mar 1;120(5):1005-12. doi: 10.1002/ijc.22368.

Disease-associated casein kinase I delta mutation may promote adenomatous polyps 
formation via a Wnt/beta-catenin independent mechanism.

Tsai IC(1), Woolf M, Neklason DW, Branford WW, Yost HJ, Burt RW, Virshup DM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of 
Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

The Wnt signaling pathway is critical for embryonic development and is 
dysregulated in multiple cancers. Two closely related isoforms of casein kinase 
I (CKIdelta and epsilon) are positive regulators of this pathway. We speculated 
that mutations in the autoinhibitory domain of CKIdelta/epsilon might upregulate 
CKIdelta/epsilon activity and hence Wnt signaling and increase the risk of 
adenomatous polyps and colon cancer. Exons encoding the CKIepsilon and CKIdelta 
regulatory domains were sequenced from DNA obtained from individuals with 
adenomatous polyps and a family history of colon cancer unaffected by familial 
adenomatous polyposis or hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC). A 
CKIdelta missense mutation, changing a highly conserved residue, Arg324, to His 
(R324H), was found in an individual with large and multiple polyps diagnosed at 
a relatively young age. Two findings indicate that this mutation is biologically 
active. First, ectopic ventral expression of CKIdelta(R324H) in Xenopus embryos 
results in secondary axis formation with an additional distinctive phenotype 
(altered morphological movements) similar to that seen with unregulated 
CKIepsilon. Second, CKIdelta(R324H) is more potent than wildtype CKIdelta in 
transformation of RKO colon cancer cells. Although the R324H mutation does not 
significantly change CKIdelta kinase activity in an in vitro kinase assay or 
Wnt/beta-catenin signal transduction as assessed by a beta-catenin reporter 
assay, it alters morphogenetic movements via a beta-catenin-independent 
mechanism in early Xenopus development. This novel human CKIdelta mutation may 
alter the physiological role and enhance the transforming ability of CKIdelta 
through a Wnt/beta-catenin independent mechanism and thereby influence colonic 
adenoma development.

Copyright 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.22368
PMID: 17131344 [Indexed for MEDLINE]