1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1991 Nov 15;88(22):10272-6. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.88.22.10272.

Defective membrane expression of human growth hormone (GH) receptor causes 
Laron-type GH insensitivity syndrome.

Duquesnoy P(1), Sobrier ML, Amselem S, Goossens M.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Institut National de la Santé et de la 
Recherche Médicale U.91, Hôpital Henri Mondor, Créteil, France.

Mutations in the growth hormone receptor (GHR) gene can cause growth hormone 
(GH) resistance. Given the sequence homology between the extracellular domain of 
the GHR and a soluble GH-binding protein (GH-BP), it is remarkable that GH-BP 
binding activity is absent from the serum of patients with Laron-type GH 
insensitivity, a hereditary form of severe dwarfism. We have previously 
identified a mutation within the extracellular domain of this receptor, 
replacing phenylalanine by serine at position 96 of the mature protein, in a 
patient with Laron syndrome. We have now investigated the effect of this 
Phe----Ser substitution on hormone binding activity by expressing the total 
human GHR cDNA and mutant form in eukaryotic cells. The wild-type protein 
expressed was able to bind GH but no plasma membrane binding was detectable on 
cells transfected with the mutant cDNA; this was also the case of cells 
transfected with a Phe96----Ala mutant cDNA, suggesting that the lack of binding 
activity is not due to a posttranslational modification of serine. Examination 
of the variant proteins in subcellular fractions revealed the presence of 
specific GH binding activity in the lysosomal fraction, whereas 
immunofluorescence studies located mutant proteins in the cytosol. Our findings 
suggest that these mutant GHRs fail to follow the correct intracellular 
transport pathway and underline the potential importance of this phenylalanine 
residue, which is conserved among the GH, prolactin, and erythropoietin 
receptors that belong to the same cytokine receptor superfamily.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.88.22.10272
PMCID: PMC52910
PMID: 1719554 [Indexed for MEDLINE]