1. Blood. 1992 Jan 15;79(2):439-46.

Mutation of leucine-57 to phenylalanine in a platelet glycoprotein Ib alpha 
leucine tandem repeat occurring in patients with an autosomal dominant variant 
of Bernard-Soulier disease.

Miller JL(1), Lyle VA, Cunningham D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, SUNY Health Science Center, Syracuse 13210.

The primary sequences of the three individual glycoprotein (GP) chains, GPIb 
alpha, GPIb beta, and GPIX, comprising the normal platelet GPIb/IX receptor for 
von Willebrand factor (vWF) have recently been determined, opening the 
possibility for characterization of disorders of this receptor at the molecular 
level. The presence of a leucine tandem repeat in each of these chains is of 
particular interest, because such repeats may be involved in associations 
between polypeptide segments. We now report an autosomal dominant variant of 
Bernard-Soulier disease associated with the heterozygous substitution of 
phenylalanine for a highly conserved leucine residue within the GPIb alpha 
leucine tandem repeat. Affected individuals experienced a moderate bleeding 
tendency, thrombocytopenia, and an increased mean platelet volume. Platelet 
aggregation was decreased only in response to ristocetin or to asialo-vWF. The 
kd for 125I-vWF binding to patients platelets was significantly increased over 
control values at 0.5 mg/mL ristocetin, but was normal at 1.0 or 1.5 mg/mL 
ristocetin. While sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis 
showed an essentially normal complement of all components of the GPIb/IX 
complex, a minor amount of a putative proteolytic fragment was identified that 
migrated faster than GPIb and was immunoreactive with polyclonal anti-GPIb alpha 
antibody, but not with a monoclonal antibody directed against the 45-Kd 
amino-terminal region of GPIb alpha. However, because the great majority of 
patient GPIb alpha comigrates with normal GPIb alpha, the major functional 
abnormalities of the patient platelets are most likely a consequence of the 
altered structure of the nonproteolyzed protein. Full concordance within the 
studied family between phenotypic expression and a heterozygous single 
nucleotide substitution in genomic DNA coding for a phenylalanine in place of 
the wild-type leucine at residue 57 of the mature GPIb alpha, absence of this 
substitution in 266 alleles from the normal population, and the lack of any 
other abnormality of patient DNA throughout the entire coding sequence for GPIb 
alpha provide strong support that this substitution may constitute a pathologic 
point mutation responsible for the observed phenotypic abnormalities. While the 
roles that leucine tandem repeats may normally play within the GPIb/IX complex 
are not yet known, the perturbation of such a repeat in GPIb alpha may impair 
interaction with other components of the complex and/or with the binding of vWF.

PMID: 1730088 [Indexed for MEDLINE]