1. Neoplasma. 2007;54(2):101-7.

STK11/LKB1 germline mutations in the first Peutz-Jeghers syndrome patients 
identified in Slovakia.

Bartosova Z(1), Zavodna K, Krivulcik T, Usak J, Mlkva I, Kruzliak T, Hromec J, 
Usakova V, Kopecka I, Veres P, Bartosova Z, Bujalkova M.

Author information:
(1)Cancer Research Institute of Slovak Academy of Science, Bratislava, Slovakia. 
Zdena. Bartosova@savba.sk

Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS) is characterized by number of hamartomatous polyps 
in the gastrointestinal tract and by mucocutaneous hypermelanocytic lesions at 
different sites. Older patients have an increased risk of the cancers of small 
intestine, stomach, pancreas, colon, esophagus, ovary, testis, uterus, breast 
and lung. In majority of PJS cases, the germline mutations in serine/threonine 
kinase STK11/LKB1 gene were found to be associated with disease. Here we report 
the results of a first mutational screen of STK11/LKB1 in PJS patients 
characterized in Slovak population. The first patient with unusual carcinoma of 
duodenum was a sporadic case and carried c.842delC change residing in a 
mutational C6 repeat hotspot. Neither the polyp nor the tumor of the patient 
displayed the loss of heterozygosity at the site of mutation suggesting 
different mechanism involved in the formation of polyp and tumor in this case. 
The second patient belonged to a three-generation family with typical PJS 
features but not cancers. Interestingly, the patient displayed concomitant 
occurrence of adenomatous and hamartomatous polyps. Molecular analysis revealed 
an IVS2+1A>G mutation that alters the second intron 5' splice site and was shown 
to lead to aberrant splicing mediated by the U12-dependent spliceosome. The same 
mutation was present in the 9 affected members of the family but in none of 
their normal relatives. We also observed novel c. IVS2+61G>A unclassified 
variant, and recurrent IVS2+24G>T and 3UTR+129C>T polymorphisms. Based on the 
achieved results, we could offer predictive genetic testing and counseling to 
other members of the patient's families.

PMID: 17319781 [Indexed for MEDLINE]