1. J Biol Chem. 1992 Feb 5;267(4):2388-92.

Site-directed mutagenesis of the phosphate-binding consensus sequence in 
Escherichia coli adenylosuccinate synthetase.

Liu F(1), Dong Q, Fromm HJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Iowa State University, Ames 50011.

Adenylosuccinate synthetases from different sources contain an N-terminal 
glycine-rich sequence GDEGKGK, which is homologous to the conserved sequence 
GXXXXGK found in many other guanine nucleotide-binding proteins or enzymes. To 
determine the role of this sequence in the structure and function of Escherichia 
coli adenylosuccinate synthetase, site-directed mutagenesis was performed to 
generate five mutant enzymes: G12V (Gly12----Val), G15V (Gly15----Val), G17V 
(Gly17----Val), K18R (Lys18----Arg), and I19T (Ile19----Thr). Comparison of the 
kinetic properties of the wild-type enzyme and those of the mutant enzymes 
revealed that the sequence is critical for enzyme activity. Replacement of 
Gly12, Gly15, or Gly17 with Val, or replacement of Lys18 with Arg, resulted in 
significant decreases in the kcat/Km values of the enzyme. Because the consensus 
sequence GXXXXGK(T/S) has been found in many GTP-binding proteins, isoleucine at 
position 19 in the E. coli adenylosuccinate synthetase was changed to threonine 
to produce the sequence GDEGKGKT. This mutation, which more closely resembles 
the consensus sequence, resulted in a 160-fold increase in the Km value for 
substrate GTP; however, there were no great changes for the other two 
substrates, IMP and aspartate. Based on these data, we suggest that the 
N-terminal glycinerich sequence in E. coli adenylosuccinate synthetase plays a 
more important role in enzyme catalysis than in substrate binding. In addition, 
a hydrophobic amino acid residue such as isoleucine, leucine, or valine, rather 
than threonine, may play a critical role in GTP binding in adenosuccinate 
synthetase. These findings suggest that the glycine-rich sequence in 
adenylosuccinate synthetase functions differently relative to those in other GTP 
binding proteins or enzymes.

PMID: 1733940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]