1. BMC Syst Biol. 2007 Jan 31;1:10. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-1-10.

In silico pathway reconstruction: Iron-sulfur cluster biogenesis in 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Alves R(1), Sorribas A.

Author information:
(1)Departament de Ciencies Mediques Basiques, Universidad de Lleida, Montserrat 
Roig 2, 25008 Lleida, Spain. ralves@cmb.udl.es

BACKGROUND: Current advances in genomics, proteomics and other areas of 
molecular biology make the identification and reconstruction of novel pathways 
an emerging area of great interest. One such class of pathways is involved in 
the biogenesis of Iron-Sulfur Clusters (ISC).
RESULTS: Our goal is the development of a new approach based on the use and 
combination of mathematical, theoretical and computational methods to identify 
the topology of a target network. In this approach, mathematical models play a 
central role for the evaluation of the alternative network structures that arise 
from literature data-mining, phylogenetic profiling, structural methods, and 
human curation. As a test case, we reconstruct the topology of the reaction and 
regulatory network for the mitochondrial ISC biogenesis pathway in S. 
cerevisiae. Predictions regarding how proteins act in ISC biogenesis are 
validated by comparison with published experimental results. For example, the 
predicted role of Arh1 and Yah1 and some of the interactions we predict for Grx5 
both matches experimental evidence. A putative role for frataxin in directly 
regulating mitochondrial iron import is discarded from our analysis, which 
agrees with also published experimental results. Additionally, we propose a 
number of experiments for testing other predictions and further improve the 
identification of the network structure.
CONCLUSION: We propose and apply an iterative in silico procedure for predictive 
reconstruction of the network topology of metabolic pathways. The procedure 
combines structural bioinformatics tools and mathematical modeling techniques 
that allow the reconstruction of biochemical networks. Using the Iron Sulfur 
cluster biogenesis in S. cerevisiae as a test case we indicate how this 
procedure can be used to analyze and validate the network model against 
experimental results. Critical evaluation of the obtained results through this 
procedure allows devising new wet lab experiments to confirm its predictions or 
provide alternative explanations for further improving the models.

DOI: 10.1186/1752-0509-1-10
PMCID: PMC1839888
PMID: 17408500 [Indexed for MEDLINE]