1. Brain. 2007 Apr;130(Pt 4):1043-9. doi: 10.1093/brain/awm028.

Abnormal folate metabolism in foetuses affected by neural tube defects.

Dunlevy LP(1), Chitty LS, Burren KA, Doudney K, Stojilkovic-Mikic T, Stanier P, 
Scott R, Copp AJ, Greene ND.

Author information:
(1)Neural Development Unit, Institute of Child Health, University College 
London, UK.

Folic acid supplementation can prevent many cases of neural tube defects (NTDs), 
whereas suboptimal maternal folate status is a risk factor, suggesting that 
folate metabolism is a key determinant of susceptibility to NTDs. Despite 
extensive genetic analysis of folate cycle enzymes, and quantification of 
metabolites in maternal blood, neither the protective mechanism nor the 
relationship between maternal folate status and susceptibility are understood in 
most cases. In order to investigate potential abnormalities in folate metabolism 
in the embryo itself, we derived primary fibroblastic cell lines from foetuses 
affected by NTDs and subjected them to the dU suppression test, a sensitive 
metabolic test of folate metabolism. Significantly, a subset of NTD cases 
exhibited low scores in this test, indicative of abnormalities in folate cycling 
that may be causally linked to the defect. Susceptibility to NTDs may be 
increased by suppression of the methylation cycle, which is interlinked with the 
folate cycle. However, reduced efficacy in the dU suppression test was not 
associated with altered abundance of the methylation cycle intermediates, 
s-adenosylmethionine and s-adenosylhomocysteine, suggesting that a methylation 
cycle defect is unlikely to be responsible for the observed abnormality of 
folate metabolism. Genotyping of samples for known polymorphisms in genes 
encoding folate-associated enzymes did not reveal any correlation between 
specific genotypes and the observed abnormalities in folate metabolism. These 
data suggest that as yet unrecognized genetic variants result in embryonic 
abnormalities of folate cycling that may be causally related to NTDs.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awm028
PMCID: PMC7614420
PMID: 17438019 [Indexed for MEDLINE]