1. Cancer. 2007 Jun 1;109(11):2349-56. doi: 10.1002/cncr.22697.

Biallelic germline mutations of mismatch-repair genes: a possible cause for 
multiple pediatric malignancies.

Poley JW(1), Wagner A, Hoogmans MM, Menko FH, Tops C, Kros JM, Reddingius RE, 
Meijers-Heijboer H, Kuipers EJ, Dinjens WN; Rotterdam Initiative on 
Gastrointestinal Hereditary Tumors.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Erasmus MC University Medical 
Center, Rotterdam, the Netherlands. j.poley@erasmusmc.nl

BACKGROUND: Heterozygous defects in mismatch-repair (MMR) genes cause hereditary 
nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC). In this syndrome, tumors typically arise 
from age 25 years onward. Case reports have shown that homozygosity or compound 
heterozygosity for MMR gene mutations can cause multiple tumors in childhood, 
sometimes combined with neurofibromatosis type I (NF1)-like features. Therefore, 
the authors studied the role of homozygosity or compound heterozygosity (CZ) for 
MMR gene defects in children with multiple primary tumors.
METHODS: A database that contained all pediatric oncology patients who were seen 
between 1982 and 2003 at the author's institution was queried to identify 
patients aged <16 years with more than 1 tumor for whom tissue of at least 1 
tumor was available. On isolated DNA, microsatellite instability (MSI) and 
immunohistochemistry of MMR proteins were assessed.
RESULTS: In total, 15 patients with more than 1 tumor were identified. Abnormal 
test results were obtained in 2 of them, including 1 patient who was diagnosed 
at age 4 years with a glioblastoma (MSI-stable; no human mutL homolog 1 [MLH1] 
or postmeiotic segregation increased, Saccharomyces cerevisiae 2 [PMS2] 
expression) and a Wilms tumor (high MSI; no MLH1 or PMS2 expression). Apart from 
>6 cafe-au-lait spots, he had no other signs of NF1. The patient had CZ 
identified for a pathogenic MLH1 mutation (593delAG frameshift) and an 
unclassified MLH1 variant (Met35Asn). There was strong evidence that this 
unclassified variant was a pathogenic mutation. The second patient was diagnosed 
with a non-Hodgkin lymphoma (no tissue available) and an anaplastic 
oligodendroglioma (low MSI; no MSH6 expression) at age 4 years and 6 years, 
respectively. His brother had died of a medulloblastoma at age 6 years (low MSI, 
no MSH6 expression). Both boys had cafe-au-lait spots. Further genetic testing 
was not possible.
CONCLUSIONS: Carriage of biallelic MMR gene defects can be associated with 
multiple malignancies in childhood that may differ from the standard spectrum of 
HNPCC tumor types. In 15 pediatric patients with multiple malignancies, the 
authors identified 1 clear case and 1 possible case of biallelic MMR gene 
defect. Recognition of the inherited nature of the tumors in these patients is 
important for counseling these patients and their families.

(c) 2007 American Cancer Society.

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.22697
PMID: 17440981 [Indexed for MEDLINE]