1. PLoS One. 2007 May 9;2(5):e436. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0000436.

A recurrent stop-codon mutation in succinate dehydrogenase subunit B gene in 
normal peripheral blood and childhood T-cell acute leukemia.

Baysal BE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, University of 
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania, United States of America. baysalb@mwri.magee.edu

BACKGROUND: Somatic cytidine mutations in normal mammalian nuclear genes occur 
during antibody diversification in B lymphocytes and generate an isoform of 
apolipoprotein B in intestinal cells by RNA editing. Here, I describe that 
succinate dehydrogenase (SDH; mitochondrial complex II) subunit B gene (SDHB) is 
somatically mutated at a cytidine residue in normal peripheral blood mononuclear 
cells (PBMCs) and T-cell acute leukemia. Germ line mutations in the SDHB, SDHC 
or SDHD genes cause hereditary paraganglioma (PGL) tumors which show 
constitutive activation of homeostatic mechanisms induced by oxygen deprivation 
(hypoxia).
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: To determine the prevalence of a mutation identified in the 
SDHB mRNA, 180 samples are tested. An SDHB stop-codon mutation c.136C>T (R46X) 
is present in a significant fraction (average = 5.8%, range = less than 1 to 
30%, n = 52) of the mRNAs obtained from PBMCs. In contrast, the R46X mutation is 
present in the genomic DNA of PBMCs at very low levels. Examination of the PBMC 
cell-type subsets identifies monocytes and natural killer (NK) cells as primary 
sources of the mutant transcript, although lesser contributions also come from B 
and T lymphocytes. Transcript sequence analyses in leukemic cell lines derived 
from monocyte, NK, T and B cells indicate that the mutational mechanism 
targeting SDHB is operational in T-cell acute leukemia. Accordingly, substantial 
levels (more than 3%) of the mutant SDHB transcripts are detected in five of 20 
primary childhood T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) bone marrow 
samples, but in none of 20 B-ALL samples. In addition, distinct heterozygous 
SDHB missense DNA mutations are identified in Jurkat and TALL-104 cell lines 
which are derived from T-ALLs.
CONCLUSIONS: The identification of a recurrent, inactivating stop-codon mutation 
in the SDHB gene in normal blood cells suggests that SDHB is targeted by a 
cytidine deaminase enzyme. The SDHB mutations in normal PBMCs and leukemic T 
cells might play a role in cellular pre-adaptation to hypoxia.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0000436
PMCID: PMC1855983
PMID: 17487275 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The author has declared 
that no competing interests exist.