1. PLoS One. 2007 May 30;2(5):e474. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0000474.

Human ClC-6 is a late endosomal glycoprotein that associates with 
detergent-resistant lipid domains.

Ignoul S(1), Simaels J, Hermans D, Annaert W, Eggermont J.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Membrane Transport, Department of Molecular Cell Biology, 
University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: The mammalian CLC protein family comprises nine members (ClC-1 to -7 
and ClC-Ka, -Kb) that function either as plasma membrane chloride channels or as 
intracellular chloride/proton antiporters, and that sustain a broad spectrum of 
cellular processes, such as membrane excitability, transepithelial transport, 
endocytosis and lysosomal degradation. In this study we focus on human ClC-6, 
which is structurally most related to the late endosomal/lysomal ClC-7.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Using a polyclonal affinity-purified antibody directed 
against a unique epitope in the ClC-6 COOH-terminal tail, we show that human 
ClC-6, when transfected in COS-1 cells, is N-glycosylated in a region that is 
evolutionary poorly conserved between mammalian CLC proteins and that is located 
between the predicted helices K and M. Three asparagine residues (N410, N422 and 
N432) have been defined by mutagenesis as acceptor sites for N-glycosylation, 
but only two of the three sites seem to be simultaneously N-glycosylated. In a 
differentiated human neuroblastoma cell line (SH-SY5Y), endogenous ClC-6 
colocalizes with LAMP-1, a late endosomal/lysosomal marker, but not with 
early/recycling endosomal markers such as EEA-1 and transferrin receptor. In 
contrast, when transiently expressed in COS-1 or HeLa cells, human ClC-6 mainly 
overlaps with markers for early/recycling endosomes (transferrin receptor, 
EEA-1, Rab5, Rab4) and not with late endosomal/lysosomal markers (LAMP-1, Rab7). 
Analogously, overexpression of human ClC-6 in SH-SY5Y cells also leads to an 
early/recycling endosomal localization of the exogenously expressed ClC-6 
protein. Finally, in transiently transfected COS-1 cells, ClC-6 copurifies with 
detergent-resistant membrane fractions, suggesting its partitioning in lipid 
rafts. Mutating a juxtamembrane string of basic amino acids (amino acids 71-75: 
KKGRR) disturbs the association with detergent-resistant membrane fractions and 
also affects the segregation of ClC-6 and ClC-7 when cotransfected in COS-1 
cells.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that human ClC-6 is an endosomal glycoprotein that 
partitions in detergent resistant lipid domains. The differential sorting of 
endogenous (late endosomal) versus overexpressed (early and recycling endosomal) 
ClC-6 is reminiscent of that of other late endosomal/lysosomal membrane proteins 
(e.g. LIMP II), and is consistent with a rate-limiting sorting step for ClC-6 
between early endosomes and its final destination in late endosomes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0000474
PMCID: PMC1868598
PMID: 17534424 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.