1. Virol J. 2007 Jun 6;4:53. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-4-53.

Clearance of an immunosuppressive virus from the CNS coincides with immune 
reanimation and diversification.

Lauterbach H(1), Truong P, McGavern DB.

Author information:
(1)Molecular and Integrative Neurosciences Department, The Scripps Research 
Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. hlauter@scripps.edu

Once a virus infection establishes persistence in the central nervous system 
(CNS), it is especially difficult to eliminate from this specialized 
compartment. Therefore, it is of the utmost importance to fully understand 
scenarios during which a persisting virus is ultimately purged from the CNS by 
the adaptive immune system. Such a scenario can be found following infection of 
adult mice with an immunosuppressive variant of lymphocytic choriomeningitis 
virus (LCMV) referred to as clone 13. In this study we demonstrate that 
following intravenous inoculation, clone 13 rapidly infected peripheral tissues 
within one week, but more slowly innundated the entire brain parenchyma over the 
course of a month. During the establishment of persistence, we observed that 
genetically tagged LCMV-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) progressively 
lost function; however, the severity of this loss in the CNS was never as 
substantial as that observed in the periphery. One of the most impressive 
features of this model system is that the peripheral T cell response eventually 
regains functionality at ~60-80 days post-infection, and this was associated 
with a rapid decline in virus from the periphery. Coincident with this 
"reanimation phase" was a massive influx of CD4 T and B cells into the CNS and a 
dramatic reduction in viral distribution. In fact, olfactory bulb neurons served 
as the last refuge for the persisting virus, which was ultimately purged from 
the CNS within 200 days post-infection. These data indicate that a functionally 
revived immune response can prevail over a virus that establishes widespread 
presence both in the periphery and brain parenchyma, and that therapeutic 
enhancement of an existing response could serve as an effective means to thwart 
long term CNS persistence.

DOI: 10.1186/1743-422X-4-53
PMCID: PMC1899484
PMID: 17553158 [Indexed for MEDLINE]