1. PLoS Biol. 2007 Jun;5(6):e152. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0050152.

Principles of genome evolution in the Drosophila melanogaster species group.

Ranz JM(1), Maurin D, Chan YS, von Grotthuss M, Hillier LW, Roote J, Ashburner 
M, Bergman CM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. 
jmr68@mole.bio.cam.ac.uk

That closely related species often differ by chromosomal inversions was 
discovered by Sturtevant and Plunkett in 1926. Our knowledge of how these 
inversions originate is still very limited, although a prevailing view is that 
they are facilitated by ectopic recombination events between inverted repetitive 
sequences. The availability of genome sequences of related species now allows us 
to study in detail the mechanisms that generate interspecific inversions. We 
have analyzed the breakpoint regions of the 29 inversions that differentiate the 
chromosomes of Drosophila melanogaster and two closely related species, D. 
simulans and D. yakuba, and reconstructed the molecular events that underlie 
their origin. Experimental and computational analysis revealed that the 
breakpoint regions of 59% of the inversions (17/29) are associated with inverted 
duplications of genes or other nonrepetitive sequences. In only two cases do we 
find evidence for inverted repetitive sequences in inversion breakpoints. We 
propose that the presence of inverted duplications associated with inversion 
breakpoint regions is the result of staggered breaks, either isochromatid or 
chromatid, and that this, rather than ectopic exchange between inverted 
repetitive sequences, is the prevalent mechanism for the generation of 
inversions in the melanogaster species group. Outgroup analysis also revealed 
evidence for widespread breakpoint recycling. Lastly, we have found that 
expression domains in D. melanogaster may be disrupted in D. yakuba, bringing 
into question their potential adaptive significance.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0050152
PMCID: PMC1885836
PMID: 17550304 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests. The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.