1. Pathobiology. 2007;74(2):121-32. doi: 10.1159/000101711.

Mastocytosis: state of the art.

Horny HP(1), Sotlar K, Valent P.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pathology, Ansbach, Germany. horny@pathologie-ansbach.com

Mastocytosis is a neoplastic disease involving mast cells (MC) and their CD34+ 
progenitors. Symptoms in mastocytosis are caused by biological mediators 
released from MC and/or the infiltration of neoplastic MC in various organs, the 
skin and the bone marrow being predominantly involved. A WHO consensus 
classification for mastocytosis exists, which is widely accepted and includes 
three major categories: (1) Cutaneous mastocytosis (CM), a benign disease in 
which MC infiltration is confined to the skin, is preferentially seen in young 
children and exhibits a marked tendency to regress spontaneously. (2) Systemic 
mastocytosis (SM) which is commonly diagnosed in adults and includes four major 
subtypes: (i) indolent SM (ISM, the most common form involving mainly skin and 
bone marrow); (ii) a unique subcategory termed SM with an associated non-mast 
cell clonal hematological disease (SM-AHNMD); (iii) aggressive SM usually 
presenting without skin lesions, and (iv) MC leukemia, probably representing the 
rarest variant of human leukemias. (3) The extremely rare localized 
extracutaneous MC neoplasms, either presenting as malignancy (MC sarcoma) or as 
benign tumor termed extracutaneous mastocytoma. Diagnostic criteria for 
mastocytosis are available and are widely accepted. SM criteria include one 
major criterion (multifocal compact tissue infiltration by MC) and four minor 
criteria: (1) prominent spindling of MC; (2) atypical immunophenotype of MC with 
coexpression of CD2 and/or CD25 (antigens which have not been found to be 
expressed on normal/reactive MC); (3) activating (somatic) point mutations of 
the c-kit proto-oncogene usually involving exon 17, with the imatinib-resistant 
type D816V being most frequent, and (4) persistently elevated serum tryptase 
level (>20 ng/ml). To establish the diagnosis of SM, at least one major and one 
minor criterion, or at least three minor criteria, have to be fulfilled. The 
natural clinical course of mastocytosis is variable. Most patients, in 
particular those with CM and ISM, remain in an indolent stage over many years or 
even decades, while others, in particular those with aggressive SM, SM-AHNMD, or 
mast cell leukemia, show a progressive course, usually with a fatal outcome.

DOI: 10.1159/000101711
PMID: 17587883 [Indexed for MEDLINE]