1. BMC Genomics. 2007 Jul 2;8:208. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-8-208.

Differential gene expression in femoral bone from red junglefowl and domestic 
chicken, differing for bone phenotypic traits.

Rubin CJ(1), Lindberg J, Fitzsimmons C, Savolainen P, Jensen P, Lundeberg J, 
Andersson L, Kindmark A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University, Sweden. 
carl-johan.rubin@medsci.uu.se <carl-johan.rubin@medsci.uu.se>

BACKGROUND: Osteoporosis is frequently observed among aging hens from 
egg-producing strains (layers) of domestic chicken. White Leghorn (WL) has been 
intensively selected for egg production and it manifests striking phenotypic 
differences for a number of traits including several bone phenotypes in 
comparison with the wild ancestor of chicken, the red junglefowl (RJ). 
Previously, we have identified four Quantitative Trait Loci (QTL) affecting bone 
mineral density and bone strength in an intercross between RJ and WL. With the 
aim of further elucidating the genetic basis of bone traits in chicken, we have 
now utilized cDNA-microarray technology in order to compare global 
RNA-expression in femoral bone from adult RJ and WL (five of each sex and 
population).
RESULTS: When contrasting microarray data for all WL-individuals to that of all 
RJ-individuals we observed differential expression (False discovery rate 
adjusted p-values < 0.015) for 604 microarray probes. In corresponding male and 
female contrasts, differential expression was observed for 410 and 270 probes, 
respectively. Altogether, the three contrasts between WL and RJ revealed 
differential expression of 779 unique transcripts, 57 of which are located to 
previously identified QTL-regions for bone traits. Some differentially expressed 
genes have previously been attributed roles in bone metabolism and these were: 
WNT inhibitory factor 1 (WIF1), WD repeat-containing protein 5 (WDR5) and 
Syndecan 3 (SDC3). Among differentially expressed transcripts, those encoding 
structural ribosomal proteins were highly enriched and all 15 had lower 
expression in WL.
CONCLUSION: We report the identification of 779 differentially expressed 
transcripts, several residing within QTL-regions for bone traits. Among 
differentially expressed transcripts, those encoding structural ribosomal 
proteins were highly enriched and all had lower expression levels in WL. In 
addition, transcripts encoding four translation initiation and translation 
elongation factor proteins also had lower expression levels in WL, possibly 
indicating perturbation of protein biosynthesis pathways between the two 
populations. Information derived from this study could be relevant to the bone 
research field and may also aid in further inference of genetic changes 
accompanying animal domestication.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-8-208
PMCID: PMC1934367
PMID: 17605776 [Indexed for MEDLINE]