1. Medicina (B Aires). 2007;67(3):253-61.

Congenital adrenal hyperplasia clinical characteristics and genotype in newborn, 
childhood and adolescence.

Pasqualini T(1), Alonso G, Tomasini R, Galich AM, Buzzalino N, Fernandez C, 
Minutolo C, Alba L, Dain L.

Author information:
(1)Seccion de Endocrinología, Crecimiento y Desarrollo, Departamento de 
Pediatría, Hospital Italiano, Bueno Aires, Argentina. tpasqualin@intramed.net

Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency is a 
disorder which can adopt three clinical expressions: two classical forms 
-salt-wasting (SW), with residual enzymatic activity (EA) < or = 1% and simple 
virilizing (SV), with EA 1-2%- and a mild late onset or nonclassical (NC) form, 
with EA 10-60%. Our objective is to describe clinical characteristics, growth, 
and bone mass in a group of patients affected by 21-hydroxylase deficiency. 
Besides, molecular genetics studies were performed in patients, and also when 
available in their parents and siblings. Nine patients with neonatal diagnosis 
and 8 with pre or postpubertal diagnosis were studied. Analyses of 10-point 
mutations in the CYP21A2 gene were performed. We found that all the patients 
with the classical expression, except one with a de novo mutation R356W in one 
allele, were fully genotyped with predictive < 2% EA mutations. Signs of 
hyperandrogenism were present in 5/6 NC patients; one was diagnosed by searching 
for mutations in asymptomatic siblings. All the NC patients were compound 
heterozygotes carrying V281L mutation in one allele and a predictive low EA in 
the other, except for one not yet determined. In patients with neonatal 
diagnosis, mean height was low at one year of age, though it showed a 
significant increase before the onset of puberty. We conclude that neonatal 
diagnosis of classical CAH allows an adequate follow up enhancing growth. 
Molecular analyses of all members of an affected family may disclose 
asymptomatic patients. The presence of de novo mutations, as well as, the 
presence of mutations with low predicted EA in NC patients reinforces the 
importance of genotyping for appropriate genetic counseling. In fully genotyped 
NC patients, the lowest value of ACTH-stimulated 17OHP was 14 ng/ml. Lower 
cut-off values might overestimate the diagnosis of the NC form.

PMID: 17628913 [Indexed for MEDLINE]