1. Mol Vis. 2007 Jul 12;13:1114-20.

Mutations associated with retinopathies alter mitogen-activated protein 
kinase-induced phosphorylation of neural retina leucine-zipper.

Swain P(1), Kumar S, Patel D, Richong S, Oberoi P, Ghosh M, Swaroop A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Neuroscience, National Brain Research 
Center, Manesar, Haryana, India. prabodh@nbrc.ac.in

PURPOSE: Neural retina leucine-zipper (NRL), a member of the basic motif leucine 
zipper family of transcription factors, is preferentially expressed in rod 
photoreceptors of the mammalian retina. Mutations in NRL are associated with 
retinopathies; many of these are suggested to change phosphorylation status and 
alter NRL-mediated transactivation of rhodopsin promoter. The purpose of this 
study was to identify potential kinases responsible for the phosphorylation of 
NRL and determine if such kinase-dependent phosphorylation is altered in 
disease-associated NRL mutations.
METHODS: Metabolic labeling with 33P-orthophosphate was used to study 
phosphorylation of NRL in transfected COS-1 cells. NRL or NRL mutants were 
expressed as glutathione S-transferase (GST)-fusion proteins and used as 
substrate to screen various kinases by in vitro phosphorylation assays. CV-1 
cells were co-transfected with rhodopsin promoter-reporter construct and 
expression plasmids, with or without specific mitogen-activated protein kinase 
(MAPK) inhibitors, to examine their effect on NRL-mediated transactivation. 
Expression of activated MAPKs in postnatal mice retina was determined by 
immunoblot analysis.
RESULTS: Metabolic labeling of NRL produces multiple phosphorylated protein 
bands in transfected COS-1 cells. Fewer but more intense radiolabeled bands are 
observed for NRL-S50T, -S50A, and -P51L mutants compared to wild-type NRL. We 
show that MAPK2 and p38 induce specific phosphorylation of NRL, but this pattern 
is altered in NRL mutants. Immunoblot analysis of extracts from developing mouse 
retina reveals enhanced expression of activated MAPK2 at postnatal day 0-3, 
concordant with the reported phosphorylation pattern of NRL in vivo. Inhibition 
of MAPK signaling pathways decreases NRL and CRX-mediated synergistic activation 
of rhodopsin promoter in transfected CV-1 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that multiple MAPKs can phosphorylate NRL and 
this phosphorylation pattern is altered by disease-associated NRL mutations. As 
inhibition of MAPK signaling pathways decreases NRL-mediated transactivation of 
rhodopsin promoter, we propose that phosphorylation changes associated with NRL 
mutations perturb gene expression in rods, leading to photoreceptor degeneration 
in retinopathies.

PMCID: PMC2779144
PMID: 17653056 [Indexed for MEDLINE]