1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007;35(17):5717-28. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkm588. Epub 2007 Aug
 22.

Novel high-resolution characterization of ancient DNA reveals C > U-type base 
modification events as the sole cause of post mortem miscoding lesions.

Brotherton P(1), Endicott P, Sanchez JJ, Beaumont M, Barnett R, Austin J, Cooper 
A.

Author information:
(1)Australian Centre for Ancient DNA, School of Earth and Environmental 
Sciences, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia. 
paul.brotherton@virgin.net

Ancient DNA (aDNA) research has long depended on the power of PCR to amplify 
trace amounts of surviving genetic material from preserved specimens. While PCR 
permits specific loci to be targeted and amplified, in many ways it can be 
intrinsically unsuited to damaged and degraded aDNA templates. PCR amplification 
of aDNA can produce highly-skewed distributions with significant contributions 
from miscoding lesion damage and non-authentic sequence artefacts. As 
traditional PCR-based approaches have been unable to fully resolve the molecular 
nature of aDNA damage over many years, we have developed a novel single primer 
extension (SPEX)-based approach to generate more accurate sequence information. 
SPEX targets selected template strands at defined loci and can generate a 
quantifiable redundancy of coverage; providing new insights into the molecular 
nature of aDNA damage and fragmentation. SPEX sequence data reveals inherent 
limitations in both traditional and metagenomic PCR-based approaches to aDNA, 
which can make current damage analyses and correct genotyping of ancient 
specimens problematic. In contrast to previous aDNA studies, SPEX provides 
strong quantitative evidence that C > U-type base modifications are the sole 
cause of authentic endogenous damage-derived miscoding lesions. This new 
approach could allow ancient specimens to be genotyped with unprecedented 
accuracy.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkm588
PMCID: PMC2034480
PMID: 17715147 [Indexed for MEDLINE]