1. Ann Neurol. 2007 Dec;62(6):609-17. doi: 10.1002/ana.21221.

Angiogenin loss-of-function mutations in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

Wu D(1), Yu W, Kishikawa H, Folkerth RD, Iafrate AJ, Shen Y, Xin W, Sims K, Hu 
GF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Heterozygous missense mutations in the coding region of angiogenin 
(ANG), an angiogenic ribonuclease, have been reported in amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis (ALS) patients. However, the role of ANG in motor neuron physiology 
and the functional consequences of these mutations are unknown. We searched for 
new mutations and sought to define the functional consequences of these 
mutations.
METHODS: We sequenced the coding region of ANG in an independent cohort of North 
American ALS patients. Identified ANG mutations were then characterized using 
functional assays of angiogenesis, ribonucleolysis, and nuclear translocation. 
We also examined expression of ANG in normal human fetal and adult spinal cords.
RESULTS: We identified four mutations in the coding region of ANG from 298 ALS 
patients. Three of these mutations are present in the mature protein. Among the 
four mutations, P(-4)S, S28N, and P112L are novel, and K17I has been reported 
previously. Functional assays show that these ANG mutations result in complete 
loss of function. The mutant ANG proteins are unable to induce angiogenesis 
because of a deficiency in ribonuclease activity, nuclear translocation, or 
both. As a correlate, we demonstrate strong ANG expression in both endothelial 
cells and motor neurons of normal human spinal cords from the developing fetus 
and adult.
INTERPRETATION: We provide the first evidence that ANG mutations, identified in 
ALS patients, are associated with functional loss of ANG activity. Moreover, 
strong ANG expression, in normal human fetal and adult spinal cord neurons and 
endothelial cells, confirms the plausibility of ANG dysfunction being relevant 
to the pathogenesis of ALS.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.21221
PMCID: PMC2776820
PMID: 17886298 [Indexed for MEDLINE]