1. Brain. 2007 Dec;130(Pt 12):3275-84. doi: 10.1093/brain/awm247. Epub 2007 Oct
10.

Mechanisms underlying intranuclear rod formation.

Domazetovska A(1), Ilkovski B, Cooper ST, Ghoddusi M, Hardeman EC, Minamide LS, 
Gunning PW, Bamburg JR, North KN.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Neuromuscular Research, Children's Hospital at Westmead, NSW, 
Australia.

Specific mutations within the alpha-skeletal actin gene (ACTA1) result in 
intranuclear rod myopathy (IRM), characterized by rod-like aggregates containing 
actin and alpha-actinin-2 inside the nucleus of muscle cells. The mechanism 
leading to formation of intranuclear aggregates containing sarcomeric proteins 
and their impact on cell function and contribution to disease pathogenesis is 
unknown. In this study, we transfected muscle and non-muscle cells with mutants 
of alpha-skeletal actin (Val163Leu, Val163Met) associated with intranuclear rod 
myopathy. By live-cell imaging we demonstrate that nuclear aggregates of actin 
form within the nuclear compartment, rather than entering the nucleus after 
formation in the cytoplasm, and are highly motile and dynamic structures. Thus, 
the nuclear environment supports the polymerization of actin and the movement 
and coalescence of the polymerized actin into larger structures. We show that 
the organization of actin within these aggregates is influenced by the binding 
of alpha-actinin, and that alpha-actinin is normally present in the nucleus of 
muscle and non-muscle cells. Furthermore, we demonstrate that, under conditions 
of cell stress (cytoskeletal disruption and ATP depletion), WT skeletal actin 
forms aggregates within the nucleus that are similar in morphology to those 
formed by the mutant actin, suggesting a common pathogenic mechanism for 
aggregate formation. Finally, we show that the presence of intranuclear actin 
aggregates significantly decreases the mitotic index and hence impacts on the 
function of the cell. Intranuclear aggregates thus likely contribute to the 
pathogenesis of muscle weakness in intranuclear rod myopathy.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awm247
PMID: 17928315 [Indexed for MEDLINE]