1. PLoS One. 2007 Nov 7;2(11):e1088. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0001088.

Molecular variation at a candidate gene implicated in the regulation of fire ant 
social behavior.

Gotzek D(1), Shoemaker DD, Ross KG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolution, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, 
Switzerland.

The fire ant Solenopsis invicta and its close relatives display an important 
social polymorphism involving differences in colony queen number. Colonies are 
headed by either a single reproductive queen (monogyne form) or multiple queens 
(polygyne form). This variation in social organization is associated with 
variation at the gene Gp-9, with monogyne colonies harboring only B-like allelic 
variants and polygyne colonies always containing b-like variants as well. We 
describe naturally occurring variation at Gp-9 in fire ants based on 185 
full-length sequences, 136 of which were obtained from S. invicta collected over 
much of its native range. While there is little overall differentiation between 
most of the numerous alleles observed, a surprising amount is found in the 
coding regions of the gene, with such substitutions usually causing amino acid 
replacements. This elevated coding-region variation may result from a lack of 
negative selection acting to constrain amino acid replacements over much of the 
protein, different mutation rates or biases in coding and non-coding sequences, 
negative selection acting with greater strength on non-coding than coding 
regions, and/or positive selection acting on the protein. Formal selection 
analyses provide evidence that the latter force played an important role in the 
basal b-like lineages coincident with the emergence of polygyny. While our data 
set reveals considerable paraphyly and polyphyly of S. invicta sequences with 
respect to those of other fire ant species, the b-like alleles of the socially 
polymorphic species are monophyletic. An expanded analysis of colonies 
containing alleles of this clade confirmed the invariant link between their 
presence and expression of polygyny. Finally, our discovery of several unique 
alleles bearing various combinations of b-like and B-like codons allows us to 
conclude that no single b-like residue is completely predictive of polygyne 
behavior and, thus, potentially causally involved in its expression. Rather, all 
three typical b-like residues appear to be necessary.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0001088
PMCID: PMC2043488
PMID: 17987107 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.