1. PLoS Pathog. 2007 Nov;3(11):e170. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.0030170.

A paradigm for virus-host coevolution: sequential counter-adaptations between 
endogenous and exogenous retroviruses.

Arnaud F(1), Caporale M, Varela M, Biek R, Chessa B, Alberti A, Golder M, Mura 
M, Zhang YP, Yu L, Pereira F, Demartini JC, Leymaster K, Spencer TE, Palmarini 
M.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Comparative Medicine, University of Glasgow Veterinary School, 
Glasgow, Scotland.

Endogenous retroviruses (ERVs) are remnants of ancient retroviral infections of 
the host germline transmitted vertically from generation to generation. It is 
hypothesized that some ERVs are used by the host as restriction factors to block 
the infection of pathogenic retroviruses. Indeed, some ERVs efficiently 
interfere with the replication of related exogenous retroviruses. However, data 
suggesting that these mechanisms have influenced the coevolution of endogenous 
and/or exogenous retroviruses and their hosts have been more difficult to 
obtain. Sheep are an interesting model system to study retrovirus-host 
coevolution because of the coexistence in this animal species of two exogenous 
(i.e., horizontally transmitted) oncogenic retroviruses, Jaagsiekte sheep 
retrovirus and Enzootic nasal tumor virus, with highly related and biologically 
active endogenous retroviruses (enJSRVs). Here, we isolated and characterized 
the evolutionary history and molecular virology of 27 enJSRV proviruses. enJSRVs 
have been integrating in the host genome for the last 5-7 million y. Two enJSRV 
proviruses (enJS56A1 and enJSRV-20), which entered the host genome within the 
last 3 million y (before and during speciation within the genus Ovis), acquired 
in two temporally distinct events a defective Gag polyprotein resulting in a 
transdominant phenotype able to block late replication steps of related 
exogenous retroviruses. Both transdominant proviruses became fixed in the host 
genome before or around sheep domestication (approximately 9,000 y ago). 
Interestingly, a provirus escaping the transdominant enJSRVs has emerged very 
recently, most likely within the last 200 y. Thus, we determined sequentially 
distinct events during evolution that are indicative of an evolutionary 
antagonism between endogenous and exogenous retroviruses. This study strongly 
suggests that endogenization and selection of ERVs acting as restriction factors 
is a mechanism used by the host to fight retroviral infections.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.0030170
PMCID: PMC2065879
PMID: 17997604 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests. The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.