1. Biochemistry. 2007 Dec 25;46(51):14845-53. doi: 10.1021/bi701848w. Epub 2007
Dec  4.

Swiveling domain mechanism in pyruvate phosphate dikinase.

Lim K(1), Read RJ, Chen CC, Tempczyk A, Wei M, Ye D, Wu C, Dunaway-Mariano D, 
Herzberg O.

Author information:
(1)Center for Advanced Research in Biotechnology, University of Maryland 
Biotechnology Institute, Rockville, Maryland 20850, USA.

Pyruvate phosphate dikinase (PPDK) catalyzes the reversible conversion of 
phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP), AMP, and Pi to pyruvate and ATP. The enzyme contains 
two remotely located reaction centers: the nucleotide partial reaction takes 
place at the N-terminal domain, and the PEP/pyruvate partial reaction takes 
place at the C-terminal domain. A central domain, tethered to the N- and 
C-terminal domains by two closely associated linkers, contains a 
phosphorylatable histidine residue (His455). The molecular architecture suggests 
a swiveling domain mechanism that shuttles a phosphoryl group between the two 
reaction centers. In an early structure of PPDK from Clostridium symbiosum, the 
His445-containing domain (His domain) was positioned close to the nucleotide 
binding domain and did not contact the PEP/pyruvate-binding domain. Here, we 
present the crystal structure of a second conformational state of C. symbiosum 
PPDK with the His domain adjacent to the PEP-binding domain. The structure was 
obtained by producing a three-residue mutant protein (R219E/E271R/S262D) that 
introduces repulsion between the His and nucleotide-binding domains but 
preserves viable interactions with the PEP/pyruvate-binding domain. Accordingly, 
the mutant enzyme is competent in catalyzing the PEP/pyruvate half-reaction but 
the overall activity is abolished. The new structure confirms the swivel motion 
of the His domain. In addition, upon detachment from the His domain, the two 
nucleotide-binding subdomains undergo a hinge motion that opens the active-site 
cleft. A similar hinge motion is expected to accompany nucleotide binding (cleft 
closure) and release (cleft opening). A model of the coupled swivel and cleft 
opening motions was generated by interpolation between two end conformations, 
each with His455 positioned for phosphoryl group transfer from/to one of the 
substrates. The trajectory of the His domain avoids major clashes with the 
partner domains while preserving the association of the two linker segments.

DOI: 10.1021/bi701848w
PMID: 18052212 [Indexed for MEDLINE]