1. BMC Biotechnol. 2007 Dec 20;7:93. doi: 10.1186/1472-6750-7-93.

Improved functional expression of recombinant human ether-a-go-go (hERG) K+ 
channels by cultivation at reduced temperature.

Chen MX(1), Sandow SL, Doceul V, Chen YH, Harper H, Hamilton B, Meadows HJ, 
Trezise DJ, Clare JJ.

Author information:
(1)BR&AD, GlaxoSmithKline R&D, Stevenage, UK. mark.x.chen@gsk.com

BACKGROUND: HERG potassium channel blockade is the major cause for drug-induced 
long QT syndrome, which sometimes cause cardiac disrhythmias and sudden death. 
There is a strong interest in the pharmaceutical industry to develop high 
quality medium to high-throughput assays for detecting compounds with potential 
cardiac liability at the earliest stages of drug development. Cultivation of 
cells at lower temperature has been used to improve the folding and membrane 
localization of trafficking defective hERG mutant proteins. The objective of 
this study was to investigate the effect of lower temperature maintenance on 
wild type hERG expression and assay performance.
RESULTS: Wild type hERG was stably expressed in CHO-K1 cells, with the majority 
of channel protein being located in the cytoplasm, but relatively little on the 
cell surface. Expression at both locations was increased several-fold by 
cultivation at lower growth temperatures. Intracellular hERG protein levels were 
highest at 27 degrees C and this correlated with maximal 3H-dofetilide binding 
activity. In contrast, the expression of functionally active cell 
surface-associated hERG measured by patch clamp electrophysiology was optimal at 
30 degrees C. The majority of the cytoplasmic hERG protein was associated with 
the membranes of cytoplasmic vesicles, which markedly increased in quantity and 
size at lower temperatures or in the presence of the Ca2+-ATPase inhibitor, 
thapsigargin. Incubation with the endocytic trafficking blocker, nocodazole, led 
to an increase in hERG activity at 37 degrees C, but not at 30 degrees C.
CONCLUSION: Our results are consistent with the concept that maintenance of 
cells at reduced temperature can be used to boost the functional expression of 
difficult-to-express membrane proteins and improve the quality of assays for 
medium to high-throughput compound screening. In addition, these results shed 
some light on the trafficking of hERG protein under these growth conditions.

DOI: 10.1186/1472-6750-7-93
PMCID: PMC2241608
PMID: 18096051 [Indexed for MEDLINE]