1. Am J Med Genet A. 2008 Feb 1;146A(3):380-3. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32141.

Severe neonatal non-dystrophic myotonia secondary to a novel mutation of the 
voltage-gated sodium channel (SCN4A) gene.

Gay S(1), Dupuis D, Faivre L, Masurel-Paulet A, Labenne M, Colombani M, Soichot 
P, Huet F, Hainque B, Sternberg D, Fontaine B, Gouyon JB, Thauvin-Robinet C.

Author information:
(1)Service de Réanimation Pédiatrique et de Médecine Néonatale, Hôpital 
d'Enfants, CHU, Dijon, France.

We report on a patient with a severe, rare neonatal form of non-dystrophic 
myotonia. The patient presented with facial dysmorphism, muscle hypertrophy, 
severe constipation, psychomotor delay, and frequent cold-induced episodes of 
myotonia and muscle weakness leading to severe hypoxia and loss of 
consciousness. Muscle biopsy was non-specific and electromyography revealed 
intense generalized myotonia. The myotonic episodes improved after introducing 
oral mexiletine and maintaining room temperature at 28 degrees C. The patient 
died at 20 months of age following a bronchopulmonary infection. A previously 
undescribed de novo heterozygous c.3891C > A change, which predicts p.N1297K in 
the SCN4A gene. Mutations within the voltage-gated sodium channel alpha-subunit 
gene (SCN4A) have been described in association with several phenotypes 
including paramyotonia congenita, hyperkalemic or hypokalemic periodic 
paralysis, and potassium-aggravated myotonias. The cold-sensitive episodes of 
stiffness followed by weakness suggested the diagnosis of channelopathy in our 
patient. However, her neonatal onset, the triggering of severe episodes by 
exposure to modest decreases in temperature, involvement of respiratory muscles 
with prolonged apnea, early-onset muscle hypertrophy, psychomotor retardation, 
and fatal outcome are evocative of a distinct clinical subtype. Our observation 
expands the phenotypic spectrum of sodium channelopathies.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32141
PMID: 18203179 [Indexed for MEDLINE]