1. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2007;2(4):493-515.

Perioperative medical management of patients with COPD.

Licker M(1), Schweizer A, Ellenberger C, Tschopp JM, Diaper J, Clergue F.

Author information:
(1)Service d'Anesthésiologie, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Genève, Genève, 
Switzerland. marc-joseph.licker@hcuge.ch

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and heart diseases are considered 
independent risk factors for mortality and major cardiopulmonary complications 
after surgery. Coronary artery disease, heart failure and COPD share common risk 
factors and are often encountered,--isolated or combined--, in many surgical 
candidates. Perioperative optimization of these high-risk patients deserves a 
thorough understanding of the patient cardiopulmonary diseases as well as the 
respiratory consequences of surgery and anesthesia. In contrast with cardiac 
risk stratification where the extent of heart disease largely influences 
postoperative cardiac outcome, surgical-related factors (ie, upper abdominal and 
intra-thoracic procedures, duration of anesthesia, presence of a nasogastric 
tube) largely dominate patient's comorbidities as risk factors for postoperative 
pulmonary complications. Although most COPD patients tolerate tracheal 
intubation under "smooth" anesthetic induction without serious adverse effects, 
regional anesthetic blockade and application of laryngeal masks or non-invasive 
positive pressure ventilation should be considered whenever possible, in order 
to provide optimal pain control and to prevent upper airway injuries as well as 
lung baro-volotrauma. Minimally-invasive procedures and modern multimodal 
analgesic regimen are helpful to minimize the surgical stress response, to speed 
up the physiological recovery process and to shorten the hospital stay. 
Reflex-induced bronchoconstriction and hyperdynamic inflation during mechanical 
ventilation could be prevented by using bronchodilating volatile anesthetics and 
adjusting the ventilatory settings with long expiration times. Intraoperatively, 
the depth of anesthesia, the circulatory volume and neuromuscular blockade 
should be assessed with modem physiological monitoring tools to titrate the 
administration of anesthetic agents, fluids and myorelaxant drugs. The recovery 
of postoperative lung volume can be facilitated by patient's education and 
empowerment, lung recruitment maneuvers, non-invasive pressure support 
ventilation and early ambulation.

PMCID: PMC2699974
PMID: 18268924 [Indexed for MEDLINE]