1. PLoS One. 2008 Mar 19;3(3):e1828. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0001828.

A mouse model of pulmonary metastasis from spontaneous osteosarcoma monitored in 
vivo by Luciferase imaging.

Miretti S(1), Roato I, Taulli R, Ponzetto C, Cilli M, Olivero M, Di Renzo MF, 
Godio L, Albini A, Buracco P, Ferracini R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Morphophysiology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of 
Torino, Grugliasco, Turin, Italy. silvia.miretti@unito.it

BACKGROUND: Osteosarcoma (OSA) is lethal when metastatic after chemotherapy 
and/or surgical treatment. Thus animal models are necessary to study the OSA 
metastatic spread and to validate novel therapies able to control the systemic 
disease. We report the development of a syngeneic (Balb/c) murine OSA model, 
using a cell line derived from a spontaneous murine tumor.
METHODOLOGY: The tumorigenic and metastatic ability of OSA cell lines were 
assayed after orthotopic injection in mice distal femur. Expression profiling 
was carried out to characterize the parental and metastatic cell lines. Cells 
from metastases were propagated and engineered to express Luciferase, in order 
to follow metastases in vivo.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Luciferase bioluminescence allowed to monitor the primary 
tumor growth and revealed the appearance of spontaneous pulmonary metastases. In 
vivo assays showed that metastasis is a stable property of metastatic OSA cell 
lines after both propagation in culture and luciferase trasduction. When 
compared to parental cell line, both unmodified and genetically marked 
metastatic cells, showed comparable and stable differential expression of the 
enpp4, pfn2 and prkcd genes, already associated to the metastatic phenotype in 
human cancer.
CONCLUSIONS: This OSA animal model faithfully recapitulates some of the most 
important features of the human malignancy, such as lung metastatization. 
Moreover, the non-invasive imaging allows monitoring the tumor progression in 
living mice. A great asset of this model is the metastatic phenotype, which is a 
stable property, not modifiable after genetic manipulation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0001828
PMCID: PMC2265554
PMID: 18350164 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.