1. PLoS Pathog. 2008 Mar;4(3):e1000029.

Beyond PrP res type 1/type 2 dichotomy in Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.

Uro-Coste E(1), Cassard H, Simon S, Lugan S, Bilheude JM, Perret-Liaudet A, 
Ironside JW, Haik S, Basset-Leobon C, Lacroux C, Peoch K, Streichenberger N, 
Langeveld J, Head MW, Grassi J, Hauw JJ, Schelcher F, Delisle MB, Andréoletti O.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U858, Institut de Médecine Moléculaire de Rangueil and Service 
d'Anatomie Pathologique et Histologie-Cytologie, C.H.U. Rangueil, Toulouse, 
France.

Sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (sCJD) cases are currently subclassified 
according to the methionine/valine polymorphism at codon 129 of the PRNP gene 
and the proteinase K (PK) digested abnormal prion protein (PrPres)identified on 
Western blotting (type 1 or type 2). These biochemically distinct PrPres types 
have been considered to represent potential distinct prion strains. However, 
since cases of CJD show co-occurrence of type 1 and type 2 PrPres in the brain, 
the basis of this classification system and its relationship to agent strain are 
under discussion. Different brain are as from 41 sCJD and 12 iatrogenic CJD 
(iCJD) cases were investigated, using Western blotting for PrPres and two other 
biochemical assays reflecting the behaviour of the disease-associated form of 
the prion protein (PrPSc) under variable PK digestion conditions. In 30% of 
cases, both type 1 and type 2 PrPres were identified. Despite this, the other 
two biochemical assays found that PrPSc from an individual patient demonstrated 
uniform biochemical properties. Moreover, in sCJD, four distinct biochemical 
PrPSc subgroups were identified that correlated with the current sCJD 
clinico-pathological classification. In iCJD, four similar biochemical clusters 
were observed, but these did not correlate to any particular PRNP 129 
polymorphism or western blot PrPres pattern. The identification of four 
different PrPSc biochemical subgroups in sCJD and iCJD, irrespective of the PRNP 
polymorphism at codon 129 and the PrPres isoform provides an alternative 
biochemical definition of PrPSc diversity and new insight in the perception of 
Human TSE agents variability.

PMID: 18383623 [Indexed for MEDLINE]