1. Microb Cell Fact. 2008 Apr 4;7:13. doi: 10.1186/1475-2859-7-13.

Human granulocyte colony stimulating factor (hG-CSF): cloning, overexpression, 
purification and characterization.

Vanz AL(1), Renard G, Palma MS, Chies JM, Dalmora SL, Basso LA, Santos DS.

Author information:
(1)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Biologia Celular e Molecular, PUCRS, Av, 
Ipiranga, 6690, Partenon, Porto Alegre, 90610000, Brazil. luiz.basso@pucrs.br.

BACKGROUND: Biopharmaceutical drugs are mainly recombinant proteins produced by 
biotechnological tools. The patents of many biopharmaceuticals have expired, and 
biosimilars are thus currently being developed. Human granulocyte colony 
stimulating factor (hG-CSF) is a hematopoietic cytokine that acts on cells of 
the neutrophil lineage causing proliferation and differentiation of committed 
precursor cells and activation of mature neutrophils. Recombinant hG-CSF has 
been produced in genetically engineered Escherichia coli (Filgrastim) and 
successfully used to treat cancer patients suffering from chemotherapy-induced 
neutropenia. Filgrastim is a 175 amino acid protein, containing an extra 
N-terminal methionine, which is needed for expression in E. coli. Here we 
describe a simple and low-cost process that is amenable to scaling-up for the 
production and purification of homogeneous and active recombinant hG-CSF 
expressed in E. coli cells.
RESULTS: Here we describe cloning of the human granulocyte colony-stimulating 
factor coding DNA sequence, protein expression in E. coli BL21(DE3) host cells 
in the absence of isopropyl-beta-D-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) induction, 
efficient isolation and solubilization of inclusion bodies by a multi-step 
washing procedure, and a purification protocol using a single cationic exchange 
column. Characterization of homogeneous rhG-CSF by size exclusion and reverse 
phase chromatography showed similar yields to the standard. The immunoassay and 
N-terminal sequencing confirmed the identity of rhG-CSF. The biological activity 
assay, in vivo, showed an equivalent biological effect (109.4%) to the standard 
reference rhG-CSF. The homogeneous rhG-CSF protein yield was 3.2 mg of bioactive 
protein per liter of cell culture.
CONCLUSION: The recombinant protein expression in the absence of IPTG induction 
is advantageous since cost is reduced, and the protein purification protocol 
using a single chromatographic step should reduce cost even further for large 
scale production. The physicochemical, immunological and biological analyses 
showed that this protocol can be useful to develop therapeutic bioproducts. In 
summary, the combination of different experimental strategies presented here 
allowed an efficient and cost-effective protocol for rhG-CSF production. These 
data may be of interest to biopharmaceutical companies interested in developing 
biosimilars and healthcare community.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2859-7-13
PMCID: PMC2346455
PMID: 18394164