1. BMC Immunol. 2008 Apr 11;9:13. doi: 10.1186/1471-2172-9-13.

Coexpression of GM-CSF and antigen in DNA prime-adenoviral vector boost 
immunization enhances polyfunctional CD8+ T cell responses, whereas expression 
of GM-CSF antigen fusion protein induces autoimmunity.

Tenbusch M(1), Kuate S, Tippler B, Gerlach N, Schimmer S, Dittmer U, Uberla K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Medical Virology, Ruhr-University Bochum, 44801 
Bochum, Germany. matthias.tenbusch@rub.de

BACKGROUND: Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) has shown 
promising results as a cytokine adjuvant for antiviral vaccines and in various 
models of tumor gene therapy. To explore whether the targeting of antigens to 
GM-CSF receptors on antigen-presenting cells enhances antigen-specific CD8 
T-cell responses, fusion proteins of GM-CSF and ovalbumin (OVA) were expressed 
by DNA and adenoviral vector vaccines. In addition, bicistronic vectors allowing 
independent expression of the antigen and the cytokine were tested in parallel.
RESULTS: In vitro, the GM-CSF ovalbumin fusion protein (GM-OVA) led to the 
better stimulation of OVA-specific CD8+ T cells by antigen-presenting cells than 
OVA and GM-CSF given as two separate proteins. However, prime-boost 
immunizations of mice with DNA and adenoviral vector vaccines encoding GM-OVA 
suppressed CD8+ T-cell responses to OVA. OVA-specific IgG2a antibody levels were 
also reduced, while the IgG1 antibody response was enhanced. Suppression of CD8+ 
T cell responses by GM-OVA vaccines was associated with the induction of 
neutralizing antibodies to GM-CSF. In contrast, the coexpression of GM-CSF and 
antigens in DNA prime adenoviral boost immunizations led to a striking expansion 
of polyfunctional OVA-specific CD8+ T cells without the induction of 
autoantibodies.
CONCLUSION: The induction of autoantibodies suggests a general note of caution 
regarding the use of highly immunogenic viral vector vaccines encoding fusion 
proteins between antigens and host proteins. In contrast, the expansion of 
polyfunctional OVA-specific CD8+ T cells after immunizations with bicistronic 
vectors further support a potential application of GM-CSF as an adjuvant for 
heterologous prime-boost regimens with genetic vaccines. Since DNA prime 
adenoviral vector boost regimenes are presently considered as one of the most 
efficient ways to induce CD8+ T cell responses in mice, non-human primates and 
humans, further enhancement of this response by GM-CSF is a striking 
observation.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2172-9-13
PMCID: PMC2324072
PMID: 18405363 [Indexed for MEDLINE]