1. PLoS Genet. 2008 Apr 11;4(4):e1000049. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000049.

Cell-to-cell stochastic variation in gene expression is a complex genetic trait.

Ansel J(1), Bottin H, Rodriguez-Beltran C, Damon C, Nagarajan M, Fehrmann S, 
François J, Yvert G.

Author information:
(1)Université de Lyon, Lyon, France.

The genetic control of common traits is rarely deterministic, with many genes 
contributing only to the chance of developing a given phenotype. This incomplete 
penetrance is poorly understood and is usually attributed to interactions 
between genes or interactions between genes and environmental conditions. 
Because many traits such as cancer can emerge from rare events happening in one 
or very few cells, we speculate an alternative and complementary possibility 
where some genotypes could facilitate these events by increasing stochastic 
cell-to-cell variations (or 'noise'). As a very first step towards investigating 
this possibility, we studied how natural genetic variation influences the level 
of noise in the expression of a single gene using the yeast S. cerevisiae as a 
model system. Reproducible differences in noise were observed between divergent 
genetic backgrounds. We found that noise was highly heritable and placed under a 
complex genetic control. Scanning the genome, we mapped three Quantitative Trait 
Loci (QTL) of noise, one locus being explained by an increase in noise when 
transcriptional elongation was impaired. Our results suggest that the level of 
stochasticity in particular molecular regulations may differ between 
multicellular individuals depending on their genotypic background. The complex 
genetic architecture of noise buffering couples genetic to non-genetic 
robustness and provides a molecular basis to the probabilistic nature of complex 
traits.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000049
PMCID: PMC2289839
PMID: 18404214 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.