1. Mol Vis. 2008 Apr 18;14:727-31.

A novel nonsense mutation in CRYBB1 associated with autosomal dominant 
congenital cataract.

Yang J(1), Zhu Y, Gu F, He X, Cao Z, Li X, Tong Y, Ma X.

Author information:
(1)Biomedical Engineering Center of Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, Fujian, 
China.

PURPOSE: To identify the molecular defect underlying an autosomal dominant 
congenital nuclear cataract in a Chinese family.
METHODS: Twenty-two members of a three-generation pedigree were recruited, 
clinical examinations were performed, and genomic DNA was extracted from 
peripheral blood leukocytes. All members were genotyped with polymorphic 
microsatellite markers adjacent to each of the known cataract-related genes. 
Linkage analysis was performed after genotyping. Candidate genes were screened 
for mutation using direct sequencing. Individuals were screened for presence of 
a mutation by restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) analysis.
RESULTS: Linkage analysis identified a maximum LOD score of 3.31 (recombination 
fraction [theta]=0.0) with marker D22S1167 on chromosome 22, which flanks the 
beta-crystallin gene cluster (CRYBB3, CRYBB2, CRYBB1, and CRYBA4). Sequencing 
the coding regions and the flanking intronic sequences of these four candidate 
genes identified a novel, heterozygous C-->T transition in exon 6 of CRYBB1 in 
the affected individuals of the family. This single nucleotide change introduced 
a novel BfaI site and was predicted to result in a nonsense mutation at codon 
223 that changed a phylogenetically conserved amino acid to a stop codon 
(p.Q223X). RFLP analysis confirmed that this mutation co-segregated with the 
disease phenotype in all available family members and was not found in 100 
normal unrelated individuals from the same ethnic background.
CONCLUSIONS: This study has identified a novel nonsense mutation in CRYBB1 
(p.Q223X) associated with autosomal dominant congenital nuclear cataract.

PMCID: PMC2324115
PMID: 18432316 [Indexed for MEDLINE]