1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2008 Feb 29;4(2):e1000015. doi:
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000015.

Mutations of different molecular origins exhibit contrasting patterns of 
regional substitution rate variation.

Elango N(1), Kim SH, Vigoda E, Yi SV.

Author information:
(1)School of Biology, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.

Transitions at CpG dinucleotides, referred to as "CpG substitutions", are a 
major mutational input into vertebrate genomes and a leading cause of human 
genetic disease. The prevalence of CpG substitutions is due to their mutational 
origin, which is dependent on DNA methylation. In comparison, other single 
nucleotide substitutions (for example those occurring at GpC dinucleotides) 
mainly arise from errors during DNA replication. Here we analyzed high quality 
BAC-based data from human, chimpanzee, and baboon to investigate regional 
variation of CpG substitution rates. We show that CpG substitutions occur 
approximately 15 times more frequently than other single nucleotide 
substitutions in primate genomes, and that they exhibit substantial regional 
variation. Patterns of CpG rate variation are consistent with differences in 
methylation level and susceptibility to subsequent deamination. In particular, 
we propose a "distance-decaying" hypothesis, positing that due to the molecular 
mechanism of a CpG substitution, rates are correlated with the stability of 
double-stranded DNA surrounding each CpG dinucleotide, and the effect of local 
DNA stability may decrease with distance from the CpG dinucleotide.Consistent 
with our "distance-decaying" hypothesis, rates of CpG substitution are strongly 
(negatively) correlated with regional G+C content. The influence of G+C content 
decays as the distance from the target CpG site increases. We estimate that the 
influence of local G+C content extends up to 1,500 approximately 2,000 bps 
centered on each CpG site. We also show that the distance-decaying relationship 
persisted when we controlled for the effect of long-range homogeneity of 
nucleotide composition. GpC sites, in contrast, do not exhibit such 
"distance-decaying" relationship. Our results highlight an example of the 
distinctive properties of methylation-dependent substitutions versus 
substitutions mostly arising from errors during DNA replication. Furthermore, 
the negative relationship between G+C content and CpG rates may provide an 
explanation for the observation that GC-rich SINEs show lower CpG rates than 
other repetitive elements.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000015
PMCID: PMC2265638
PMID: 18463707 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.