1. Zhong Nan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2008 Apr;33(4):321-5.

[Cognitive function, serum BDNF levels and BDNF gene Val66Met polymorphism in 
amnestic mild cognitive impairment].

[Article in Chinese]

Yu H(1), Zhang ZJ, Shi YM, Bai F, Qian Y, Yuan YG, Deng LL.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Neuroscience Research Center, Clinical Medical College, Southeast 
University, Nanjing, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the relationship between serum brain-derived 
neurotrophic factor, concentrations and BDNF gene Val66Met polymorphism and 
amnestic mild cognitive impairment (aMCI), and neuropsychological 
characteristics.
METHODS: Ninety-nine aMCI patients and 99 matched normal controls were recruited 
for the study. Multi-dimension neuropsychologic tests were used to extensively 
assess the cognitive function, an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay was applied 
to measure serum BDNF concentrations, and polymerase chain reaction-restriction 
fragment length polymorphism was used to analyse BDNF gene Val66Met polymorphism 
in the subjects.
RESULTS: The scores of neuropsychologic tests in aMCI patients were 
significantly lower than those in the normal controls (all P<0.001), with the 
largest impairment on delayed recall of the auditory verbal memory test (AVMT) 
which reflect verbal episodic memory. The serum concentrations of BDNF in aMCI 
patients (median: 4.37 microg/L) were significantly lower than those of the 
normal controls (median: 4.98 microg/L) (z=-2.449, P=0.014). There was positive 
correlation between the serum concentrations of BDNF and the scores on delayed 
recall of AVMT (r=0.264, P=0.008). No significant differences were found for the 
genotype and allele distribution of BDNF Val66Met polymorphism between aMCI 
patients and the normal controls. BDNF Val66Met polymorphism was not associated 
with serum BDNF concentrations and cognitive assessment scores in aMCI patients 
(P>0.05).
CONCLUSION: aMCI is characterized by episodic memory impairment. Decreased BDNF 
concentrations may play a role in the pathophysiology of aMCI, and BDNF gene 
Val66Met polymorphism may not be an important genetic factor in susceptibility 
to aMCI.

PMID: 18460776 [Indexed for MEDLINE]