1. Genet Epidemiol. 2008 Nov;32(7):627-37. doi: 10.1002/gepi.20340.

Ordered-subset analysis (OSA) for family-based association mapping of complex 
traits.

Chung RH(1), Schmidt S, Martin ER, Hauser ER.

Author information:
(1)Center for Human Genetics, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North 
Carolina 27710, USA.

Association analysis provides a powerful tool for complex disease gene mapping. 
However, in the presence of genetic heterogeneity, the power for association 
analysis can be low since only a fraction of the collected families may carry a 
specific disease susceptibility allele. Ordered-subset analysis (OSA) is a 
linkage test that can be powerful in the presence of genetic heterogeneity. OSA 
uses trait-related covariates to identify a subset of families that provide the 
most evidence for linkage. A similar strategy applied to genetic association 
analysis would likely result in increased power to detect association. 
Association in the presence of linkage (APL) is a family-based association test 
(FBAT) for nuclear families with multiple affected siblings that properly infers 
missing parental genotypes when linkage is present. We propose here APL-OSA, 
which applies the OSA method to the APL statistic to identify a subset of 
families that provide the most evidence for association. A permutation procedure 
is used to approximate the distribution of the APL-OSA statistic under the null 
hypothesis that there is no relationship between the family-specific covariate 
and the family-specific evidence for allelic association. We performed a 
comprehensive simulation study to verify that APL-OSA has the correct type I 
error rate under the null hypothesis. This simulation study also showed that 
APL-OSA can increase power relative to other commonly used association tests 
(APL, FBAT and FBAT with covariate adjustment) in the presence of genetic 
heterogeneity. Finally, we applied APL-OSA to a family study of age-related 
macular degeneration, where cigarette smoking was used as a covariate.

DOI: 10.1002/gepi.20340
PMCID: PMC2582061
PMID: 18473393 [Indexed for MEDLINE]