1. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2009 Mar;34(4):844-56. doi: 10.1038/npp.2008.72. Epub
 2008 Jun 4.

A differential role for the adenosine A2A receptor in opiate reinforcement vs 
opiate-seeking behavior.

Brown RM(1), Short JL, Cowen MS, Ledent C, Lawrence AJ.

Author information:
(1)Brain Injury and Repair Group, Howard Florey Institute, University of 
Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, Australia.

The adenosine A(2A) receptor is specifically enriched in the medium spiny 
neurons that make up the 'indirect' output pathway from the ventral striatum, a 
structure known to have a crucial, integrative role in processes such as reward, 
motivation, and drug-seeking behavior. In the present study we investigated the 
impact of adenosine A(2A) receptor deletion on behavioral responses to morphine 
in a number of reward-related paradigms. The acute, rewarding effects of 
morphine were evaluated using the conditioned place preference paradigm. Operant 
self-administration of morphine on both fixed and progressive ratio schedules as 
well as cue-induced drug-seeking was assessed. In addition, the acute locomotor 
response to morphine as well as sensitization to morphine was evaluated. 
Decreased morphine self-administration and breakpoint in A(2A) knockout mice was 
observed. These data support a decrease in motivation to consume the drug, 
perhaps reflecting diminished rewarding effects of morphine in A(2A) knockout 
mice. In support of this finding, a place preference to morphine was not 
observed in A(2A) knockout mice but was present in wild-type mice. In contrast, 
robust cue-induced morphine-seeking behavior was exhibited by both A(2A) 
knockout and wild-type mice after a period of withdrawal. The acute locomotor 
response to morphine in the A(2A) knockout was similar to wild-type mice, yet 
A(2A) knockout mice did not display tolerance to chronic morphine under the 
present paradigm. Both genotypes display locomotor sensitization to morphine, 
implying a lack of a role for the A(2A) receptor in the drug-induced plasticity 
necessary for the development or expression of sensitization. Collectively, 
these data suggest a differential role for adenosine A(2A) receptors in opiate 
reinforcement compared to opiate-seeking.

DOI: 10.1038/npp.2008.72
PMID: 18536706 [Indexed for MEDLINE]