1. BMC Evol Biol. 2008 Jun 17;8:175. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-8-175.

The tiny Hairless protein from Apis mellifera: a potent antagonist of Notch 
signaling in Drosophila melanogaster.

Maier D(1), Chen AX, Preiss A, Ketelhut M.

Author information:
(1)Universität Hohenheim, Institut für Genetik (240), Garbenstr, 30, 70599 
Stuttgart, Germany. maierdie@uni-hohenheim.de

BACKGROUND: The Notch signaling pathway is fundamental to the regulation of many 
cell fate decisions in eumetazoans. Not surprisingly, members of this pathway 
are highly conserved even between vertebrates and invertebrates. There is one 
notable exception, Hairless, which acts as a general Notch antagonist in 
Drosophila. Hairless silences Notch target genes by assembling a repressor 
complex together with Suppressor of Hairless [Su(H)] and the co-repressors 
Groucho (Gro) and C-terminal binding protein (CtBP). Now with the availability 
of genomic databases, presumptive Hairless homologues are predicted, however 
only in insect species. To further our understanding of Hairless structure and 
function, we have cloned the Hairless gene from Apis mellifera (A.m.H) and 
characterized its functional conservation in Drosophila.
RESULTS: The Apis Hairless protein is only one third of the size of the 
Drosophila orthologue. Interestingly, the defined Suppressor of Hairless binding 
domain is interrupted by a nonconserved spacer sequence and the N-terminal motif 
is sufficient for binding. In contrast to Apis Hairless, the Drosophila 
orthologue contains a large acidic domain and we provide experimental evidence 
that this acidic domain is necessary to silence Hairless activity in vivo. 
Despite the dramatic size differences, Apis Hairless binds to the Drosophila 
Hairless interactors Su(H), Gro, CtBP and Pros26.4. Hence, Apis Hairless 
assembles a repressor complex with Drosophila components that may have a 
different topology. Nevertheless, Apis Hairless is sufficient to repress the 
Notch target gene vestigial in Drosophila. Moreover, it is able to rescue 
Hairless mutant phenotypes, providing in vivo evidence for its function as a 
bona fide Notch antagonist.
CONCLUSION: This is the first interspecies-complementation analysis of the 
Hairless gene. Guided by evolutionary comparisons, we hope to eventually 
identify all the relevant structural domains and cofactors of Hairless, thereby 
opening an avenue for further insights into the repressor-complexes that 
down-regulate Notch signaling also in other, higher eukaryotes.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2148-8-175
PMCID: PMC2440387
PMID: 18559091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]