1. BMC Syst Biol. 2008 Jun 18;2:51. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-2-51.

Time-resolved metabolomics reveals metabolic modulation in rice foliage.

Sato S(1), Arita M, Soga T, Nishioka T, Tomita M.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Advanced Biosciences, Keio University, Tsuruoka, Japan. 
n03615ss@sfc.keio.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: To elucidate the interaction of dynamics among modules that 
constitute biological systems, comprehensive datasets obtained from "omics" 
technologies have been used. In recent plant metabolomics approaches, the 
reconstruction of metabolic correlation networks has been attempted using 
statistical techniques. However, the results were unsatisfactory and effective 
data-mining techniques that apply appropriate comprehensive datasets are needed.
RESULTS: Using capillary electrophoresis mass spectrometry (CE-MS) and capillary 
electrophoresis diode-array detection (CE-DAD), we analyzed the dynamic changes 
in the level of 56 basic metabolites in plant foliage (Oryza sativa L. ssp. 
japonica) at hourly intervals over a 24-hr period. Unsupervised clustering of 
comprehensive metabolic profiles using Kohonen's self-organizing map (SOM) 
allowed classification of the biochemical pathways activated by the light and 
dark cycle. The carbon and nitrogen (C/N) metabolism in both periods was also 
visualized as a phenotypic linkage map that connects network modules on the 
basis of traditional metabolic pathways rather than pairwise correlations among 
metabolites. The regulatory networks of C/N assimilation/dissimilation at each 
time point were consistent with previous works on plant metabolism. In response 
to environmental stress, glutathione and spermidine fluctuated synchronously 
with their regulatory targets. Adenine nucleosides and nicotinamide coenzymes 
were regulated by phosphorylation and dephosphorylation. We also demonstrated 
that SOM analysis was applicable to the estimation of unidentifiable metabolites 
in metabolome analysis. Hierarchical clustering of a correlation coefficient 
matrix could help identify the bottleneck enzymes that regulate metabolic 
networks.
CONCLUSION: Our results showed that our SOM analysis with appropriate metabolic 
time-courses effectively revealed the synchronous dynamics among metabolic 
modules and elucidated the underlying biochemical functions. The application of 
discrimination of unidentified metabolites and the identification of bottleneck 
enzymatic steps even to non-targeted comprehensive analysis promise to 
facilitate an understanding of large-scale interactions among components in 
biological systems.

DOI: 10.1186/1752-0509-2-51
PMCID: PMC2442833
PMID: 18564421 [Indexed for MEDLINE]