1. Biochemistry. 2008 Aug 5;47(31):8058-69. doi: 10.1021/bi800443k. Epub 2008 Jul
 11.

Subdividing repressor function: DNA binding affinity, selectivity, and allostery 
can be altered by amino acid substitution of nonconserved residues in a 
LacI/GalR homologue.

Zhan H(1), Taraban M, Trewhella J, Swint-Kruse L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, MSN 3030, 3901 Rainbow 
Boulevard, The University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas 66160, 
USA.

Many mutations that impact protein function occur at residues that do not 
directly contact ligand. To understand the functional contributions from the 
sequence that links the DNA-binding and regulatory domains of the LacI/GalR 
homologues, we have created a chimeric protein (LLhP), which comprises the LacI 
DNA-binding domain, the LacI linker, and the PurR regulatory domain. Although 
DNA binding site residues are identical in LLhP and LacI, thermodynamic 
measurements of DNA binding affinity show that LLhP does not discriminate 
between alternative DNA ligands as well as LacI. In addition, small-angle 
scattering experiments show that LLhP is more compact than LacI. When DNA is 
released, LacI shows a 20 A increase in length that was previously attributed to 
unfolding of the linker. This change is not seen in apo-LLhP, even though the 
linker sequences of the two proteins are identical. Together, results indicate 
that long-range functional and structural changes are propagated across the 
interface that forms between the linker and regulatory domain. These changes 
could be mediated via the side chains of several linker residues that contact 
the regulatory domains of the naturally occurring proteins, LacI and PurR. 
Substitution of these residues in LLhP leads to a range of functional effects. 
Four variants exhibit altered affinity for DNA, with no changes in selectivity 
or allosteric response. Another two result in proteins that bind operator DNA 
with very low affinity and no allosteric response, similar to LacI binding 
nonspecific DNA sequences. Two more substitutions simultaneously diminish 
affinity, enhance allostery, and profoundly alter DNA ligand selectivity. Thus, 
positions within the linker can be varied to modulate different aspects of 
repressor function.

DOI: 10.1021/bi800443k
PMCID: PMC2561905
PMID: 18616293 [Indexed for MEDLINE]