1. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2008 Dec;23(12):3874-9. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfn386. Epub
 2008 Jul 12.

Twenty-one additional cases of familial renal glucosuria: absence of genetic 
heterogeneity, high prevalence of private mutations and further evidence of 
volume depletion.

Calado J(1), Sznajer Y, Metzger D, Rita A, Hogan MC, Kattamis A, Scharf M, Tasic 
V, Greil J, Brinkert F, Kemper MJ, Santer R.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Genética da Faculdade de Ciências Médicas, Instituto de 
Higiene e Medicina Tropical, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal. 
jcalado.gene@fcm.unl.pt

INTRODUCTION: Familial renal glucosuria (FRG) is a rare renal tubular disorder 
caused by mutations within the SLC5A2 gene. It is characterized by persistent 
glucosuria in the absence of hyperglycaemia and any other signs of generalized 
tubular dysfunction. In small series of patients previously reported, the 
molecular and phenotypic findings in FRG families, including first hints of 
extracellular volume depletion and activation of the 
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system induced by natriuresis, have been 
described. We have now extended this analysis to another 21 consecutive cases 
from 17 pedigrees, including 11 cases with severe glucose excretion.
METHODS: Mutation analysis was performed by direct sequencing of the genomic 
coding segments of the SLC5A2 gene. In two cases with severe glucosuria, basal 
plasma renin activity and serum aldosterone concentrations were determined.
RESULTS: Within the 17 pedigrees, we have identified a total of 20 different 
SLC5A2 mutations. Fifteen have not been previously reported. In all glucosuric 
individuals tested, at least one SLC5A2 mutation could be identified. 
Heterozygous individuals were found to have only mild glucose excretion whereas 
homozygous or compound heterozygous patients had severe glucosuria, ranging from 
10 to 86.5 g/1.73 m(2)/24 h. In two patients of the latter group, basal plasma 
renin activity and serum aldosterone concentration were determined and found to 
be raised to an average of 4.6-fold and 3.1-fold of the upper limit of the 
normal range, respectively. Discussion. The identification of at least one 
mutated allele in every affected individual in this cohort of 17 consecutively 
investigated families strongly suggests that genetic heterogeneity is not 
prevalent in FRG. Although 5 of the detected alleles have been described 
previously, 15 are novel, confirming that most mutations in FRG are private. Our 
finding of an activation of compensatory mechanisms for salt loss may warrant 
more detailed studies of long-term hormonal and metabolic imbalances in patients 
with FRG.

DOI: 10.1093/ndt/gfn386
PMID: 18622023 [Indexed for MEDLINE]