1. Arthritis Res Ther. 2008;10(4):R82. doi: 10.1186/ar2456. Epub 2008 Jul 17.

Brain-derived neurotrophic factor and its receptor in the human and the sand rat 
intervertebral disc.

Gruber HE(1), Ingram JA, Hoelscher G, Zinchenko N, Norton HJ, Hanley EN Jr.

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Carolinas Medical Center, Charlotte, NC 
28232, USA. helen.gruber@carolinashealthcare.org

INTRODUCTION: Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) was first identified in 
the intervertebral disc (IVD) when its molecular upregulation was observed in 
sections of nucleus pulposus cultured under conditions of increased osmolarity. 
BDNF is now known to be involved in a number of biologic functions, including 
regulation of differentiation/survival of sensory neurons, regulation of 
nociceptive function and central pain modulation, and modulation of inflammatory 
pain hypersensitivity. In addition, more recent investigations show that BDNF 
can induce the recruitment of endothelial cells and the formation of vascular 
structures. The objectives of the present study were to use immunocytochemistry 
to determine the distribution of BDNF and its receptor (BDNF-tropomyosine 
receptor kinase B) in the human IVD, and to test for gene expression of BDNF and 
its receptor in cultured human annulus fibrosus cells.
METHODS: We studied immunohistochemical localization of BDNF and its receptor in 
the human annulus, quantified the percentage of outer annulus and inner annulus 
cells and nucleus cells positive for BDNF immunolocalization, and studied the 
gene expression of BDNF and its receptor using microarray analysis.
RESULTS: The percentage (mean +/- standard error of the mean) of cells positive 
for BDNF localization was significantly greater in the outer annulus (32.3 +/- 
2.7%, n = 22) compared with either the inner annulus (8.1 +/- 1.5%, n = 6) or 
the nucleus (10.4 +/- 2.8%, n = 3) (P < 0.0001). BDNF-receptor 
immunolocalization showed a pattern similar to that of BDNF, but was not 
quantitatively assessed. BDNF gene expression levels from cultured annulus cells 
showed a significant positive correlation with increasing levels of IVD 
degeneration (P = 0.011).
CONCLUSION: These findings provide data on the presence of BDNF and its receptor 
in the human IVD at the translational level, and on the expression of BDNF and 
its receptor by cultured human annulus cells. Our findings point to the need for 
further studies to define the role of BDNF in the human IVD and to investigate 
regulatory events within the disc that control the expression of BDNF and its 
receptor.

DOI: 10.1186/ar2456
PMCID: PMC2575628
PMID: 18637190 [Indexed for MEDLINE]