1. Semin Thromb Hemost. 2008 Mar;34(2):204-10. doi: 10.1055/s-2008-1079262.

Hypercoagulability and tissue factor gene upregulation in hematologic 
malignancies.

Falanga A(1), Barbui T, Rickles FR.

Author information:
(1)Department Hematology/Oncology, Ospedali Riuniti di Bergamo, Bergamo, Italy. 
annafalanga@yahoo.com

Thrombotic complications in patients with hematologic malignancies are as 
frequent as in those with solid tumors and significantly affect morbidity and 
mortality. In acute leukemia, thrombosis and bleeding manifestations may occur 
concomitantly as a part of the same thrombo-hemorrhagic syndrome. In patients 
with Philadelphia chromosome-negative chronic myeloproliferative disorders 
(i.e., essential thrombocythemia [ET] and polycythemia vera [PV]), a thrombosis 
rate as high as 40% has been recorded. A hypercoagulable state is present in 
virtually all of these patients, even without clinical manifestations. In this 
review, we focus on the pathogenic mechanisms underlying the hypercoagulable 
state of these two hematologic malignancies. Although the pathogenesis of 
hypercoagulability is complex, a central role is played by the fundamental 
molecular changes of both the leukemic cells and of the progeny arising from the 
hematopoietic progenitor cells that have undergone clonal rearrangement. These 
cells overexpress procoagulant factors, as well as adhesion molecules and 
cytokines capable of inducing procoagulant changes in the vascular wall and 
stimulating increased cellular interactions. Recent molecular studies in 
experimental models of human tumors have demonstrated for the first time that 
oncogene- and repressor gene-mediated neoplastic transformation induces 
activation of blood coagulation. Similarly, in cells from patients with acute 
promyelocytic leukemia, the T15-17 translocation induces hyperexpression of 
tissue factor (TF) and renders the patient hypercoagulable. Furthermore, in 
blood cells from patients with PV or ET, the presence of the JAK2V617F mutation 
translates into activation of hemostasis, with increased expression of 
platelet-associated TF microparticles and the formation of increased 
platelet/neutrophil aggregates. Understanding the pathophysiology of 
hypercoagulability is critical to the design of appropriate measures for 
intervention in these hematologic disorders to prevent thromboembolic 
complications.

DOI: 10.1055/s-2008-1079262
PMID: 18645927 [Indexed for MEDLINE]