1. Neuroimage. 2009 Aug 1;47(1):56-64. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.06.039.
Epub  2008 Jul 11.

Variance decomposition of MRI-based covariance maps using genetically 
informative samples and structural equation modeling.

Schmitt JE(1), Lenroot RK, Ordaz SE, Wallace GL, Lerch JP, Evans AC, Prom EC, 
Kendler KS, Neale MC, Giedd JN.

Author information:
(1)Virginia Institute for Psychiatric and Behavioral Genetics, Virginia 
Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, USA.

The role of genetics in driving intracortical relationships is an important 
question that has rarely been studied in humans. In particular, there are no 
extant high-resolution imaging studies on genetic covariance. In this article, 
we describe a novel method that combines classical quantitative genetic 
methodologies for variance decomposition with recently developed 
semi-multivariate algorithms for high-resolution measurement of phenotypic 
covariance. Using these tools, we produced correlational maps of genetic and 
environmental (i.e. nongenetic) relationships between several regions of 
interest and the cortical surface in a large pediatric sample of 600 twins, 
siblings, and singletons. These analyses demonstrated high, fairly uniform, 
statistically significant genetic correlations between the entire cortex and 
global mean cortical thickness. In agreement with prior reports on phenotypic 
covariance using similar methods, we found that mean cortical thickness was most 
strongly correlated with association cortices. However, the present study 
suggests that genetics plays a large role in global brain patterning of cortical 
thickness in this manner. Further, using specific gyri with known high 
heritabilities as seed regions, we found a consistent pattern of high bilateral 
genetic correlations between structural homologues, with environmental 
correlations more restricted to the same hemisphere as the seed region, 
suggesting that interhemispheric covariance is largely genetically mediated. 
These findings are consistent with the limited existing knowledge on the 
genetics of cortical variability as well as our prior multivariate studies on 
cortical gyri.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.06.039
PMCID: PMC2996833
PMID: 18672072 [Indexed for MEDLINE]