1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Aug 12;105(32):11264-9. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0802970105. Epub 2008 Aug 6.

Excessive genomic DNA copy number variation in the Li-Fraumeni cancer 
predisposition syndrome.

Shlien A(1), Tabori U, Marshall CR, Pienkowska M, Feuk L, Novokmet A, Nanda S, 
Druker H, Scherer SW, Malkin D.

Author information:
(1)Program in Genetics and Genome Biology, Departments of Medical Biophysics, 
Centre for Applied Genomics, and Division of Hematology/Oncology, Hospital for 
Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.

DNA copy number variations (CNVs) are a significant and ubiquitous source of 
inherited human genetic variation. However, the importance of CNVs to cancer 
susceptibility and tumor progression has not yet been explored. Li-Fraumeni 
syndrome (LFS) is an autosomal dominantly inherited disorder characterized by a 
strikingly increased risk of early-onset breast cancer, sarcomas, brain tumors 
and other neoplasms in individuals harboring germline TP53 mutations. Known 
genetic determinants of LFS do not fully explain the variable clinical phenotype 
in affected family members. As part of a wider study of CNVs and cancer, we 
conducted a genome-wide profile of germline CNVs in LFS families. Here, by 
examining DNA from a large healthy population and an LFS cohort using 
high-density oligonucleotide arrays, we show that the number of CNVs per genome 
is well conserved in the healthy population, but strikingly enriched in these 
cancer-prone individuals. We found a highly significant increase in CNVs among 
carriers of germline TP53 mutations with a familial cancer history. Furthermore, 
we identified a remarkable number of genomic regions in which known 
cancer-related genes coincide with CNVs, in both LFS families and healthy 
individuals. Germline CNVs may provide a foundation that enables the more 
dramatic chromosomal changes characteristic of TP53-related tumors to be 
established. Our results suggest that screening families predisposed to cancer 
for CNVs may identify individuals with an abnormally high number of these 
events.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0802970105
PMCID: PMC2516272
PMID: 18685109 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: A.S. and D.M. 
have submitted a patent application on a portion of these findings.