1. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2009 Mar;202(4):589-98. doi: 
10.1007/s00213-008-1335-0. Epub 2008 Sep 21.

Naltrexone attenuation of conditioned but not primary reinforcement of nicotine 
in rats.

Liu X(1), Palmatier MI, Caggiula AR, Sved AF, Donny EC, Gharib M, Booth S.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurobiology and Behavior Research, Department of Psychiatry and 
Human Behavior, University of Mississippi Medical Center, 2500 N. State St., 
Jackson, MS 39216, USA. xliu@psychiatry.umsmed.edu

RATIONALE: Opioid neurotransmission has been implicated in reinforcement-related 
processes for several drugs of abuse, including opiates, stimulants, and 
alcohol. However, less is known about its role in the motivational effects of 
nicotine and nicotine-associated environmental cues.
OBJECTIVE: This study investigated whether pretreatment with naltrexone, an 
opioid receptor antagonist, alters conditioned incentive salience of nicotine 
cues under two conditions: cue-induced reinstatement of nicotine-seeking after 
extinction and cue-maintained responding during extinction. The effect of 
naltrexone on nicotine self-administration during the maintenance phase was also 
examined.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Male Sprague-Dawley rats were trained in daily 1-h 
sessions to self-administer nicotine (0.03 mg/kg/infusion, i.v.) on a 
fixed-ratio 5 schedule and associate a conditioned stimulus (CS) with each 
nicotine delivery. Once responding was extinguished by saline substitution for 
nicotine and omission of the CS, the reinstatement tests were conducted 
following subcutaneous administration of naltrexone (0, 0.25, 1, 2 mg/kg). In 
separate groups of rats, naltrexone (0, 2 mg/kg) was chronically given before 
each extinction sessions, where responses on the active lever resulted in 
presentations of the CS without nicotine infusion (saline substitution). 
Self-administration/naltrexone tests were conducted in different groups of rats 
receiving similar nicotine self-administration training.
RESULTS: Naltrexone significantly attenuated the CS-reinstated responding on the 
active, previously nicotine-reinforced lever in the reinstatement tests and the 
CS-maintained active lever responding during the extinction tests. In contrast, 
neither acute nor chronic naltrexone produced an effect on nicotine 
self-administration behavior.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that activation of opioid receptors is 
implicated in mediation of the conditioned incentive properties of nicotine cues 
but not in the maintenance of nicotine self-administration. Therefore, these 
findings suggest that opioid receptor antagonists might have clinical potential 
for prevention of smoking relapse associated with exposure to environmental 
cues.

DOI: 10.1007/s00213-008-1335-0
PMCID: PMC2811405
PMID: 18807246 [Indexed for MEDLINE]