1. PLoS One. 2008;3(10):e3453. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0003453. Epub 2008 Oct
20.

Cattle mammary bioreactor generated by a novel procedure of transgenic cloning 
for large-scale production of functional human lactoferrin.

Yang P(1), Wang J, Gong G, Sun X, Zhang R, Du Z, Liu Y, Li R, Ding F, Tang B, 
Dai Y, Li N.

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory for Agrobiotechnology, China Agricultural University, 
Beijing, People's Republic of China.

Large-scale production of biopharmaceuticals by current bioreactor techniques is 
limited by low transgenic efficiency and low expression of foreign proteins. In 
general, a bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) harboring most regulatory 
elements is capable of overcoming the limitations, but transferring BAC into 
donor cells is difficult. We describe here the use of cattle mammary bioreactor 
to produce functional recombinant human lactoferrin (rhLF) by a novel procedure 
of transgenic cloning, which employs microinjection to generate transgenic 
somatic cells as donor cells. Bovine fibroblast cells were co-microinjected for 
the first time with a 150-kb BAC carrying the human lactoferrin gene and a 
marker gene. The resulting transfection efficiency of up to 15.79 x 10(-2) 
percent was notably higher than that of electroporation and lipofection. 
Following somatic cell nuclear transfer, we obtained two transgenic cows that 
secreted rhLF at high levels, 2.5 g/l and 3.4 g/l, respectively. The rhLF had a 
similar pattern of glycosylation and proteolytic susceptibility as the natural 
human counterpart. Biochemical analysis revealed that the iron-binding and 
releasing properties of rhLF were identical to that of native hLF. Importantly, 
an antibacterial experiment further demonstrated that rhLF was functional. Our 
results indicate that co-microinjection with a BAC and a marker gene into donor 
cells for somatic cell cloning indeed improves transgenic efficiency. Moreover, 
the cattle mammary bioreactors generated with this novel procedure produce 
functional rhLF on an industrial scale.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0003453
PMCID: PMC2565487
PMID: 18941633 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.