1. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2009 Jan;29(1):84-91. doi: 
10.1161/ATVBAHA.108.176487. Epub 2008 Nov 6.

Endothelial lipase promotes apolipoprotein AI-mediated cholesterol efflux in 
THP-1 macrophages.

Qiu G(1), Hill JS.

Author information:
(1)James Hogg iCAPTURE Centre for Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Research, 
Providence Heart+Lung Institute, Department of Pathology and Laboratory 
Medicine, University of British Columbia-St. Paul's Hospital, Vancouver, BC 
Canada.

OBJECTIVE: Endothelial lipase (EL) is expressed by macrophages within 
atherosclerotic lesions. We investigated the influence of EL expression on 
cholesterol efflux in macrophages.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The present study used lentivirus to introduce either EL 
shRNA for loss-of-function studies or EL cDNA for gain-of-function studies to 
investigate the role of EL in apoAI-mediated cholesterol efflux. ApoAI-mediated 
cholesterol efflux was decreased after EL suppression, but increased with EL 
overexpression in free cholesterol labeled and acLDL loaded THP-1 macrophages. 
Similar findings were observed in THP-1 macrophages after exogenous EL addition 
and in transfected 293 cells. EL-related apoAI-mediated cholesterol efflux 
decreased after treatment with heparin or catalytic inactivation (S149A mutation 
or tetrahydrolipstatin) alone, and completely inhibited in combination. 
Furthermore, EL expression did not change ABCA1 expression, but was positively 
correlated with apoAI binding to macrophages and 293 cells. This effect was 
mitigated after heparin treatment but not influenced by catalytic inactivation 
via tetrahydrolipstatin or the S149A mutation. Moreover, EL expression was 
positively associated with lysophosphatidylcholine production and inversely with 
phosphatidylcholine, phosphatidylethanolamine, and sphingomyelin levels. 
Lysophosphatidylcholine treatment dose-dependently stimulated apoAI-mediated 
cholesterol efflux in THP-1 macrophages.
CONCLUSIONS: EL appears to promote apoAI-mediated cholesterol efflux through 
catalytic and noncatalytic-dependent mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.108.176487
PMID: 18988890 [Indexed for MEDLINE]