1. Alzheimers Dement. 2008 Nov;4(6):406-13. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2008.04.007.

Comparing test-specific distress of susceptibility versus deterministic genetic 
testing for Alzheimer's disease.

Cassidy MR(1), Roberts JS, Bird TD, Steinbart EJ, Cupples LA, Chen CA, 
Linnenbringer E, Green RC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, 
USA.

BACKGROUND: Genetic risk for Alzheimer's disease (AD) can be conferred by the 
susceptibility polymorphism apolipoprotein E (APOE), where the epsilon 4 allele 
increases the risk of developing late-onset AD but is not a definitive predictor 
of the disease, or by autosomal dominant mutations (eg, the presenilins), which 
almost inevitably result in early-onset familial AD. The purpose of this study 
was to compare the psychological impact of using these two different types of 
genetic information to disclose genetic risk for AD to family members of 
affected patients.
METHODS: Data were compared from two separate protocols. The Risk Evaluation and 
Education for Alzheimer's Disease (REVEAL) Study is a randomized, multi-site 
clinical trial that evaluated the impact of susceptibility testing for AD with 
APOE in 101 adult children of AD patients. A separate study, conducted at the 
University of Washington, assessed the impact of deterministic genetic testing 
by disclosing presenilin-1, presenilin-2, or TAU genotype to 22 individuals at 
risk for familial AD or frontotemporal dementia. In both protocols, participants 
received genetic counseling and completed the impact of event scale (IES), a 
measure of test-specific distress. Scores were analyzed at the time point 
closest to 1 year after disclosure at which IES data were available. The role of 
genetic test result (positive vs negative) and type of genetic testing 
(deterministic vs susceptibility) in predicting log-transformed IES scores were 
assessed with linear regression, controlling for age, gender, and time from 
disclosure.
RESULTS: Subjects from the REVEAL Study who learned that they were positive for 
the susceptibility gene APOE epsilon 4+ experienced similar, low levels of 
test-specific distress compared with those who received positive results of 
deterministic testing in the University of Washington study (P = .78). APOE 
epsilon 4+ individuals in the susceptibility protocol experienced more 
test-specific distress than those who tested epsilon 4- in the same study (P = 
.04); however, among those receiving deterministic test disclosure, the subjects 
who received positive results did not experience significantly higher levels of 
distress when compared with those who received negative results (P = .88).
CONCLUSIONS: The findings of this preliminary study, with limited sample size, 
suggest that the test-related distress experienced by those receiving positive 
results for a deterministic mutation is similar to the distress experienced by 
those receiving positive results from genetic susceptibility testing, and that 
the majority of participants receiving genotype disclosure do not experience 
clinically significant distress as indicated by IES scores 1 year after learning 
of their test results.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2008.04.007
PMCID: PMC2610442
PMID: 19012865 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.