1. Schizophr Res. 2009 Jan;107(1):1-12. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2008.10.011. Epub 
2008 Nov 21.

Results of phase 3 of the CATIE schizophrenia trial.

Stroup TS(1), Lieberman JA, McEvoy JP, Davis SM, Swartz MS, Keefe RS, Miller AL, 
Rosenheck RA, Hsiao JK; CATIE Investigators.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, School of Medicine, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, USA. sstroup@med.unc.edu

OBJECTIVE: The Clinical Antipsychotic Trials of Intervention Effectiveness 
(CATIE) study examined the comparative effectiveness of antipsychotic treatments 
for individuals with chronic schizophrenia. Patients who had discontinued 
antipsychotic treatment in phases 1 and 2 were eligible for phase 3, in which 
they selected one of nine antipsychotic regimens with the help of their study 
doctor. We describe the characteristics of the patients who selected each 
treatment option and their outcomes.
METHOD: Two hundred and seventy patients entered phase 3. The open-label 
treatment options were monotherapy with oral aripiprazole, clozapine, 
olanzapine, perphenazine, quetiapine, risperidone, ziprasidone, long-acting 
injectable fluphenazine decanoate, or a combination of any two of these 
treatments.
RESULTS: Few patients selected fluphenazine decanoate (n=9) or perphenazine 
(n=4). Similar numbers selected each of the other options (range 33-41). Of the 
seven common choices, those who selected clozapine and combination antipsychotic 
treatment were the most symptomatic, and those who selected aripiprazole and 
ziprasidone had the highest body mass index. Symptoms improved for all groups, 
although the improvements were modest for the groups starting with relatively 
mild levels of symptoms. Side effect profiles of the medications varied 
considerably but medication discontinuations due to intolerability were rare (7% 
overall).
CONCLUSIONS: Patients and their doctors made treatment selections based on 
clinical factors, including severity of symptoms, response to prior treatments, 
and physical health status. Fluphenazine decanoate was rarely used among those 
with evidence of treatment non-adherence and clozapine was underutilized for 
those with poor previous response. Combination antipsychotic treatment warrants 
further study.

DOI: 10.1016/j.schres.2008.10.011
PMCID: PMC2675163
PMID: 19027269 [Indexed for MEDLINE]