1. J Ocul Pharmacol Ther. 2008 Dec;24(6):527-35. doi: 10.1089/jop.2008.0082.

Deferroxamine preconditioning promotes long-lasting retinal ischemic tolerance.

Zhu Y(1), Zhang L, Gidday JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Washington University School of Medicine, St. 
Louis, MO 63110, USA.

OBJECTIVE: "Ischemic tolerance" can be induced in the retina by 
"preconditioning" with brief periods of non-injurious retinal ischemia or 
systemic hypoxia. The present study was undertaken to assess whether tolerance 
can be induced pharmacologically by deferroxamine (DFX), an iron chelator, which 
promotes the expression of the transcription factor, hypoxia-inducible factor 
1-alpha (HIF-1alpha), and to identify potential HIF-1alpha -induced effectors of 
this endogenous protective response.
METHODS: ND4 Swiss-Webster mice were preconditioned with DFX (200 mg/kg, 
intraperitoneally) as a single dose (SDP) or as repetitive doses (RDP; 6 doses 
over 2 weeks) and then subjected to 30 min of retinal ischemia (by intraocular 
pressure elevation) 1 or 4 weeks later. Retinal layer thicknesses and cell 
counts were quantified 1 week after ischemia. Retinae of additional mice were 
obtained at various times after SDP or RDP to examine protein-level expression 
of HIF-1alpha and adrenomedullin (ADM), a HIF-1alpha gene target, by 
immunoblotting and immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Ischemia-induced injury was significantly attenuated by SDP 1 week 
earlier, but not when SDP occurred 4 weeks earlier. However, RDP performed 4 
weeks earlier was potently neuroprotective. DFX robustly induced HIF-1alpha 
protein expression throughout the inner retina, and levels of HIF-1alpha protein 
remained significantly elevated over the 1- and 4-week periods of time between 
the respective SDP and RDP stimulus and the induction of retinal ischemia. 
Increases in ADM protein expression were evident throughout the retina following 
both preconditioning treatments.
CONCLUSIONS: DFX preconditions the retina against ischemic injury and multiple 
doses promote a long-lasting, ischemia-protective phenotype. The widespread and 
protracted elevations in HIF-1alpha protein levels and the robust expression of 
one of its neuroprotective, prosurvival gene targets, ADM, strongly suggest that 
DFX-induced preconditioning is HIF-1alpha-dependent. The ability to 
pharmacologically induce ischemic tolerance in the retina by a clinically 
well-tolerated drug underscores the potential therapeutic utility of 
preconditioning for retinal protection in various ischemic retinopathies.

DOI: 10.1089/jop.2008.0082
PMCID: PMC2720806
PMID: 19046123 [Indexed for MEDLINE]