1. BMC Microbiol. 2008 Dec 20;8:230. doi: 10.1186/1471-2180-8-230.

Assessment of genetic and functional diversity of phosphate solubilizing 
fluorescent pseudomonads isolated from rhizospheric soil.

Naik PR(1), Raman G, Narayanan KB, Sakthivel N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Pondicherry University, Kalapet, Pondicherry 
605014, India. ravibiot@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Phosphorus is an essential macronutrient for the growth of plants. 
However, in most soils a large portion of phosphorus becomes insoluble and 
therefore, unavailable to plants. Knowledge on biodiversity of 
phosphate-solubilizing fluorescent pseudomonads is essential to understand their 
ecological role and their utilization in sustainable agriculture.
RESULTS: Of 443 fluorescent pseudomonad strains tested, 80 strains (18%) showed 
positive for the solubilization of tri-calcium phosphate (Ca3(PO4)2) by the 
formation of visible dissolution halos on Pikovskaya's agar. These phosphate 
solubilizing strains showed high variability in utilizing various carbon 
sources. Numerical taxonomy of the phosphate solubilizing strains based on their 
carbon source utilization profiles resulted into three major phenons at a 0.76 
similarity coefficient level. Genotypic analyses of strains by BOX (bacterial 
repetitive BOX element)-polymerase chain reaction (PCR) resulted into three 
distinct genomic clusters and 26 distinct BOX profiles at a 80% similarity 
level. On the basis of phenotypic characterization and 16S rRNA gene 
phylogenetic analyses strains were identified as Pseudomonas aeruginosa, P. 
mosselii, P. monteilii, P. plecoglossicida, P. putida, P. fulva and P. 
fluorescens. These phosphate solubilizing strains also showed the production of 
plant growth promoting enzymes, hormones and exhibited antagonism against 
phytopathogenic fungi that attack on various crops. Gene specific primers have 
identified the putative antibiotic producing strains. These putative strains 
were grown in fermentation media and production of antibiotics was confirmed by 
thin layer chromatography (TLC) and high performance liquid chromatography 
(HPLC).
CONCLUSION: Present study revealed a high degree of functional and genetic 
diversity among the phosphate solubilizing fluorescent pseudomonad bacteria. Due 
to their innate potential of producing an array of plant growth promoting 
enzymes, hormones and antifungal metabolites these phosphate solubilizing 
strains are considered to play a vital role in plant growth promotion, disease 
suppression and subsequent enhancement of yield.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2180-8-230
PMCID: PMC2625360
PMID: 19099598 [Indexed for MEDLINE]