1. Semin Arthritis Rheum. 2010 Apr;39(5):410-6. doi: 
10.1016/j.semarthrit.2008.10.003. Epub 2008 Dec 24.

Maternal mixed connective tissue disease and offspring with chondrodysplasia 
punctata.

Schulz SW(1), Bober M, Johnson C, Braverman N, Jimenez SA.

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Thomas Jefferson University Hospital, Philadelphia, 
PA, USA.

OBJECTIVES: To describe the case of a mother with mixed connective tissue 
disease (MCTD) whose male and female offspring from 2 successive pregnancies had 
chondrodysplasia punctata (CDP) in the absence of identifiable biochemical or 
genetic abnormalities or teratogen exposure.
METHODS: Description of a male and female offspring from a mother with MCTD 
harboring high-titer anti-ribonucleoprotein (RNP) antibodies. Maternal 
autoantibody assays were performed employing quantitative multiplex suspension 
arrays and flow cytometry, and autoantibody titer and pattern were determined by 
indirect immunofluorescence. Assays of phytanic acid, plasmalogen, and very 
long-chain fatty acids were performed employing commercially available reagents. 
Chromosomal analysis was performed on both offspring employing standard 
cytogenetic analysis. Review of the relevant literature was performed (PubMed 
search 1966 through July 2008).
RESULTS: Two children with CDP born to a mother with MCTD who harbored anti-RNP 
autoantibodies at high titer are described. Genetic and chromosomal studies and 
biochemical analysis of peroxisome function and very long-chain fatty acids 
excluded known biochemical or genetic defects or mutations as the cause of CDP 
in these children. Furthermore, detailed review of the clinical history failed 
to disclose any evidence of maternal teratogen exposure during the 2 
pregnancies.
CONCLUSIONS: Maternal MCTD is the most likely explanation for the occurrence of 
CDP in the 2 children reported here. Review of previously published cases of CDP 
associated with autoimmune disease suggests that placental crossing of maternal 
autoantibodies during pregnancy specifically affecting the normal development of 
fetal growth plates is responsible for CDP in the offspring in these cases.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semarthrit.2008.10.003
PMCID: PMC2844477
PMID: 19110299 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: none