1. Thromb Haemost. 2009 Jan;101(1):55-61. doi: 10.1160/th08-07-0491.

Prothrombin amino terminal region helps protect coagulation factor Va from 
proteolytic inactivation by activated protein C.

Yegneswaran S(1), Nguyen PM, Gale AJ, Griffin JH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, The Scripps Research 
Institute, 10550, North Torrey Pines Road, MEM180, La Jolla, CA, 92037, USA.

The hypothesis that prothrombin (FII) protects coagulation factor Va (FVa) from 
proteolytic inactivation by activated protein C (APC) was tested using purified 
proteins. FII dose-dependently protected FVa from APC proteolysis under 
conditions where competition of proteins for binding to negatively-charged 
phospholipid surface was not relevant (i.e. either at high phospholipid vesicle 
concentrations or using soluble dicaproylphosphatidylserine at levels below its 
critical micellar concentration). Cleavages in FVa at both Arg(506) and Arg(306) 
by APC were inhibited by FII. FII did not alter the amidolytic activity of APC 
towards chromogenic oligopeptide substrates or inhibit FVIIIa inactivation by 
APC, implying that the FII-mediated protection of FVa from APC proteolysis was 
due to the ability of FII to inhibit protein-protein interactions between FVa 
and APC. FII also protected FVa from inactivation by Gla-domainless APC, ruling 
out a role for the APC Gla domain for these observations. To identify domains of 
FII responsible for the observed phenomenon, various forms or fragments of FII 
were employed. Biotin-Phe-ProArg-CMK-inhibited meizothrombin and fII-fragment 
1*2 protected FVa from proteolysis by APC. In contrast, no significant 
protection of FVa from APC cleavage was observed for Gladomainless-FII, 
prethrombin-1, prethrombin-2, FII fragment 1 or active site inhibited-thrombin 
(DEGR-thrombin). Overall, these data demonstrate that the Gla domain of FII 
linked to kringle 1 and 2 is necessary for the ability of FII to protect FVa 
from APC cleavage and support the general concept that assembly of the FII 
activation complex (FXa*FVa*FII*lipid surface) protects FVa from APC 
inactivation so that the procoagulant, thrombin generating pathway can act 
unhindered by APC. Only following FII activation and dissociation of the FII Gla 
domain fragments from the FII-ase complex, can APC inactivate FVa and 
down-regulate thrombin generation.

DOI: 10.1160/th08-07-0491
PMCID: PMC2730196
PMID: 19132189 [Indexed for MEDLINE]