1. Synapse. 2009 Apr;63(4):308-18. doi: 10.1002/syn.20609.

Cholinergic direct inhibition of N-methyl-D aspartate receptor-mediated currents 
in the rat neocortex.

Flores-Hernandez J(1), Salgado H, De La Rosa V, Avila-Ruiz T, Torres-Ramirez O, 
Lopez-Lopez G, Atzori M.

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Fisiologia, Universidad Autonoma de Puebla, Puebla, Mexico.

Acetylcholine (ACh) and N-methyl-D aspartate receptors (NMDARs) interact in the 
regulation of multiple important brain functions. NMDAR activation is indirectly 
modulated by ACh through the activation of muscarinic or nicotinic receptors. 
Scant information is available on whether ACh directly interacts with the NMDAR. 
By using a cortical brain slice preparation we found that the application of ACh 
and of other drugs acting on muscarinic or nicotinic receptors induces an acute 
and reversible reduction of NMDAR-mediated currents (I(NMDA)), ranging from 20 
to 90% of the control amplitude. The reduction displayed similar features in 
synaptic I(NMDA) in brain slices, as well as in currents evoked by NMDA 
application in brain slices or from acutely dissociated cortical cells, 
demonstrating its postsynaptic nature. The cholinergic inhibition of I(NMDA) 
displayed an onset-offset rate in the order of a second, and was resistant to 
the presence of the muscarinic antagonist atropine (10 microM) in the 
extracellular solution, and of G-protein blocker GDP(beta)S (500 microM) and 
activator GTP(gamma)S (400 microM) in the intracellular solution, indicating 
that it was not G-protein dependent. Recording at depolarized or hyperpolarized 
holding voltages reduced NMDAR-mediated currents to similar extents, suggesting 
that the inhibition was voltage-independent, whereas the reduction was markedly 
more pronounced in the presence of glycine (20 microM). A detailed analysis of 
the effects of tubocurarine suggested that at least this drug interfered with 
glycine-dependent NMDAR-activity. We conclude that NMDAR-mediated current scan 
be inhibited directly by cholinergic drugs, possibly by direct interaction 
within one or more subunits of the NMDAR. Our results could supply a new 
interpretation to previous studies on the role of ACh at the glutamatergic 
synapse.

Copyright 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/syn.20609
PMCID: PMC2836798
PMID: 19140165 [Indexed for MEDLINE]