1. Cell Signal. 2009 May;21(5):727-36. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2009.01.011. Epub 
2009 Jan 8.

Enhanced clonogenic survival induced by protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTP) 
inhibition after Cr(VI) exposure is mediated by c-Raf and Ras activity.

Bae D(1), Camilli TC, Ha NT, Ceryak S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Physiology, The George Washington University 
Medical Center, Washington, DC 20037, United States.

Our recent studies showed that maintenance of protein tyrosine phosphorylation 
by PTP inhibition enhanced cell growth, clonogenic survival, and mutagenesis 
after a single low-level Cr(VI) exposure, thereby suggesting that tyrosine 
phosphorylation-dependent signaling may govern inappropriate survival in human 
lung fibroblasts (HLFs). Our goal is to identify specific phospho-tyrosine 
regulator(s)/ downstream effectors involved in enhanced survival after Cr(VI) 
exposure and PTP inhibition. Phosphotyrosine profiling array showed that PTP 
inhibition following Cr(VI) exposure increased tyrosine phosphorylation of 
specific proteins, such as FGR and ABL, which are upstream regulators of both 
Erk and Akt pathways. To explore the roles of these pathways in the PTP-induced 
increase in clonogenic survival after Cr(VI) exposure, we examined the effect of 
combined Akt1 and Erk1/2 knockdown via siRNA technology. Akt1 and/or Erk1/2 
silencing had no effect on the PTP inhibitor-induced increase in survival 
following Cr(VI) exposure, suggesting the presence of non-Akt/non-Erk-mediated 
survival signaling. Interestingly, geldanamycin, an HSP90 inhibitor and 
non-specific Raf inhibitor, abrogated the PTP inhibitor-mediated increase in 
survival following Cr(VI) exposure and abolished the expression/activity of 
c-Raf and activity of Mek. These findings prompted us to explore upstream 
regulators of Erk, i.e., Ras, c-Raf and Mek for their potential roles in 
clonogenic survival. GW5074, a specific c-Raf kinase inhibitor did not alter the 
effect of the PTP inhibitor but decreased Cr(VI)-mediated clonogenic lethality, 
potentially though Mek hyperactivation. A genetic approach with a c/a Mek1 
mutant also showed that Mek activity was not directly associated with the PTP 
inhibitor effect. Finally, a genetic approach with d/n or c/a Ras and c-Raf 
mutants, showed that Ras and c-Raf activities play a substantive role in 
enhancing clonogenic survival by PTP inhibition following Cr(VI) insult. In 
conclusion, these studies highlight a novel pro-survival mechanism for 
clonogenic survival in the face of genotoxic stress in the presence of PTP 
inhibition via an Erk/Mek-independent and Ras/c-Raf-dependent regulation in 
normal human lung fibroblasts.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2009.01.011
PMCID: PMC2673100
PMID: 19167484 [Indexed for MEDLINE]