1. Biophys J. 2009 Feb;96(3):858-74. doi: 10.1016/j.bpj.2008.10.041.

Computational modeling of structurally conserved cancer mutations in the RET and 
MET kinases: the impact on protein structure, dynamics, and stability.

Dixit A(1), Torkamani A, Schork NJ, Verkhivker G.

Author information:
(1)Center for Bioinformatics, The University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas, USA.

Structural and biochemical characterization of protein kinases that confer 
oncogene addiction and harbor a large number of disease-associated mutations, 
including RET and MET kinases, have provided insights into molecular mechanisms 
associated with the protein kinase activation in human cancer. In this article, 
structural modeling, molecular dynamics, and free energy simulations of a 
structurally conserved mutational hotspot, shared by M918T in RET and M1250T in 
MET kinases, are undertaken to quantify the molecular mechanism of activation 
and the functional role of cancer mutations in altering protein kinase 
structure, dynamics, and stability. The mechanistic basis of the activating RET 
and MET cancer mutations may be driven by an appreciable free energy 
destabilization of the inactive kinase state in the mutational forms. According 
to our results, the locally enhanced mobility of the cancer mutants and a higher 
conformational entropy are counterbalanced by a larger enthalpy loss and result 
in the decreased thermodynamic stability. The computed protein stability 
differences between the wild-type and cancer kinase mutants are consistent with 
circular dichroism spectroscopy and differential scanning calorimetry 
experiments. These results support the molecular mechanism of activation, which 
causes a detrimental imbalance in the dynamic equilibrium shifted toward the 
active form of the enzyme. Furthermore, computer simulations of the inhibitor 
binding with the oncogenic and drug-resistant RET mutations have also provided a 
plausible molecular rationale for the observed differences in the inhibition 
profiles, which is consistent with the experimental data. Finally, structural 
mapping of RET and MET cancer mutations and the computed protein stability 
changes suggest a similar mechanism of activation, whereby the cancer mutations 
which display the higher oncogenic activity tend to have the greatest 
destabilization effect on the inactive kinase structure.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bpj.2008.10.041
PMCID: PMC2716637
PMID: 19186126 [Indexed for MEDLINE]