1. Diagn Mol Pathol. 2009 Mar;18(1):53-60. doi: 10.1097/PDM.0b013e31817cfd4b.

Diagnosis of hepatic iron overload: a family study illustrating pitfalls in 
diagnosing hemochromatosis.

Schranz M(1), Talasz H, Graziadei I, Winder T, Sergi C, Bogner K, Vogel W, 
Zoller H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Clinical Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 
Innsbruck Medical University, Anichstrasse 35, Innsbruck, Austria.

Recent identification of genetic variants in iron storage disease has changed 
the classification system and diagnostic algorithms for hemochromatosis. 
Clinical diagnosis of the disease requires phenotypic evidence of iron overload 
because the commonly disease-associated HFE genotypes have an incomplete 
penetrance. Furthermore, approximately 20% of patients with a clinical diagnosis 
of hemochromatosis have no disease-associated genotype, which underlines the 
importance of clear phenotypic criteria of hemochromatosis. A diagnosis of 
hemochromatosis cannot be made even in patients with liver cirrhosis simply on 
the basis of genetic testing that indicates that iron overload is the cause of 
the disease and not its consequence. Proper diagnosis requires integration of 
clinical presentation, family history, and the results of biochemical and 
histopathologic tests. Here we propose a rational diagnostic algorithm for 
hepatic iron overload syndromes and illustrate potential pitfalls by presenting 
a family study in a pedigree with rare HFE variants (H63D and E168Q), in cis on 
the same chromosome. Although the clinical suspicion of hemochromatosis was 
confirmed by histology, chemical analysis of liver tissue revealed a normal 
hepatic iron concentration, which is compatible with the genetic finding of 1 
normal and 1 doubly mutated allele. In conclusion, clinical suspicion of 
hemochromatosis and elevated serum iron parameters should prompt HFE genotyping 
for C282Y and H63D. Should they be uninformative, further genetic tests should 
be recommended only if iron overload in liver tissue has been confirmed 
chemically.

DOI: 10.1097/PDM.0b013e31817cfd4b
PMID: 19214108 [Indexed for MEDLINE]