1. J Gen Physiol. 2009 Mar;133(3):263-82. doi: 10.1085/jgp.200810079.

N-terminal inactivation domains of beta subunits are protected from trypsin 
digestion by binding within the antechamber of BK channels.

Zhang Z(1), Zeng XH, Xia XM, Lingle CJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. 
Louis, MO 63110, USA.

N termini of auxiliary beta subunits that produce inactivation of 
large-conductance Ca(2+)-activated K(+) (BK) channels reach their pore-blocking 
position by first passing through side portals into an antechamber separating 
the BK pore module and the large C-terminal cytosolic domain. Previous work 
indicated that the beta2 subunit inactivation domain is protected from digestion 
by trypsin when bound in the inactivated conformation. Other results suggest 
that, even when channels are closed, an inactivation domain can also be 
protected from digestion by trypsin when bound within the antechamber. Here, we 
provide additional tests of this model and examine its applicability to other 
beta subunit N termini. First, we show that specific mutations in the beta2 
inactivation segment can speed up digestion by trypsin under closed-channel 
conditions, supporting the idea that the beta2 N terminus is protected by 
binding within the antechamber. Second, we show that cytosolic channel blockers 
distinguish between protection mediated by inactivation and protection under 
closed-channel conditions, implicating two distinct sites of protection. 
Together, these results confirm the idea that beta2 N termini can occupy the BK 
channel antechamber by interaction at some site distinct from the BK central 
cavity. In contrast, the beta 3a N terminus is digested over 10-fold more 
quickly than the beta2 N terminus. Analysis of factors that contribute to 
differences in digestion rates suggests that binding of an N terminus within the 
antechamber constrains the trypsin accessibility of digestible basic residues, 
even when such residues are positioned outside the antechamber. Our analysis 
indicates that up to two N termini may simultaneously be protected from 
digestion. These results indicate that inactivation domains have sites of 
binding in addition to those directly involved in inactivation.

DOI: 10.1085/jgp.200810079
PMCID: PMC2654086
PMID: 19237592 [Indexed for MEDLINE]