1. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2009 Sep;24(9):1020-5. doi: 10.1002/gps.2214.

Investigation of dopamine receptors in susceptibility to behavioural and 
psychological symptoms in Alzheimer's disease.

Pritchard AL(1), Ratcliffe L, Sorour E, Haque S, Holder R, Bentham P, Lendon CL.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Psychiatry Group, Population Studies and Human Genetics, G Floor 
CBCRC Building, Queensland Institute of Medical Research, Herston, Brisbane, 
4006, Australia. Antonia.Pritchard@qimr.edu.au

OBJECTIVE: Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients commonly suffer from behavioural 
and psychological symptoms of dementia (BPSD). A genetic component to the 
development of BPSD in AD has been supported. Polymorphisms within dopamine 
receptors DRD1, DRD2, DRD3 and DRD4 have previously been investigated in a few 
interesting studies that are reviewed here and extended using our patient 
cohort.
METHODS: Our large cohort of 395 probable AD patients had longitudinal 
information on the BPSD (Neuropsychiatric Inventory), which was used to 
dichotomise patients into whether they had ever suffered from a given symptom 
within the study period, or not. These measures were related to the DRD1 
(A-48G), DRD2 (ser311cys; C-ins/del), DRD3 (ser9gly) and DRD4 (VNTR) genotype 
and allele frequencies.
RESULTS: Associations were revealed between DRD3 and elation, and between DRD4 
with agitation/aggression and with depression; however, these findings do not 
remain significant after correction for multiple testing. No associations were 
found with the other genetic variants and these symptoms and no associations 
were observed between any of the polymorphic variants examined and delusions, 
hallucinations, psychosis and aberrant motor behaviour.
CONCLUSION: Our data, in combination with a review of the literature, reveal a 
potential role for the VNTR variant of DRD4 in the development of depression in 
AD patients. The findings presented here need to be replicated in large, well 
characterised longitudinal cohorts.

DOI: 10.1002/gps.2214
PMID: 19235789 [Indexed for MEDLINE]