1. BMC Biotechnol. 2009 Mar 11;9:19. doi: 10.1186/1472-6750-9-19.

An optimised system for refolding of human glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase.

Wang XT(1), Engel PC.

Author information:
(1)School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Science, Conway Institute, University 
College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland. xiaotao.wang@ucd.ie

BACKGROUND: Human glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD), active in both dimer 
and tetramer forms, is the key entry enzyme in the pentose phosphate pathway 
(PPP), providing NADPH for biosynthesis and various other purposes, including 
protection against oxidative stress in erythrocytes. Accordingly haemolytic 
disease is a major consequence of G6PD deficiency mutations in man, and many 
severe disease phenotypes are attributed to G6PD folding problems. Therefore, a 
robust refolding method with high recovery yield and reproducibility is of 
particular importance to study those clinical mutant enzymes as well as to shed 
light generally on the refolding process of large multi-domain proteins.
RESULTS: The effects of different chemical and physical variables on the 
refolding of human recombinant G6PD have been extensively investigated. L-Arg, 
NADP+ and DTT are all major positive influences on refolding, and temperature, 
protein concentration, salt types and other additives also have significant 
impacts. With the method described here, ~70% enzyme activity could be regained, 
with good reproducibility, after denaturation with Gdn-HCl, by rapid dilution of 
the protein, and the refolded enzyme displays kinetic and CD properties 
indistinguishable from those of the native protein. Refolding under these 
conditions is relatively slow, taking about 7 days to complete at room 
temperature even in the presence of cyclophilin A, a peptidylprolyl isomerase 
reported to increase refolding rates. The refolded protein intermediates shift 
from dominant monomer to dimer during this process, the gradual emergence of 
dimer correlating well with the regain of enzyme activity.
CONCLUSION: L-Arg is the key player in the refolding of human G6PD, preventing 
the aggregation of folding intermediate, and NADP+ is essential for the folding 
intermediate to adopt native structure. The refolding protocol can be applied to 
produce high recovery yield of folded protein with unaltered properties, paving 
the way for future studies on clinical G6PD mutants with folding defects and 
providing a useful model system to study the folding process of oligomeric 
proteins.

DOI: 10.1186/1472-6750-9-19
PMCID: PMC2660318
PMID: 19284595 [Indexed for MEDLINE]