1. BMC Struct Biol. 2009 Mar 18;9:16. doi: 10.1186/1472-6807-9-16.

Rational mutagenesis to support structure-based drug design: MAPKAP kinase 2 as 
a case study.

Argiriadi MA(1), Sousa S, Banach D, Marcotte D, Xiang T, Tomlinson MJ, Demers M, 
Harris C, Kwak S, Hardman J, Pietras M, Quinn L, DiMauro J, Ni B, Mankovich J, 
Borhani DW, Talanian RV, Sadhukhan R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Abbott Laboratories, Worcester, MA USA. 
maria.argiriadi@abbott.com

BACKGROUND: Structure-based drug design (SBDD) can provide valuable guidance to 
drug discovery programs. Robust construct design and expression, protein 
purification and characterization, protein crystallization, and high-resolution 
diffraction are all needed for rapid, iterative inhibitor design. We describe 
here robust methods to support SBDD on an oral anti-cytokine drug target, human 
MAPKAP kinase 2 (MK2). Our goal was to obtain useful diffraction data with a 
large number of chemically diverse lead compounds. Although MK2 structures and 
structural methods have been reported previously, reproducibility was low and 
improved methods were needed.
RESULTS: Our construct design strategy had four tactics: N- and C-terminal 
variations; entropy-reducing surface mutations; activation loop deletions; and 
pseudoactivation mutations. Generic, high-throughput methods for cloning and 
expression were coupled with automated liquid dispensing for the rapid testing 
of crystallization conditions with minimal sample requirements. Initial results 
led to development of a novel, customized robotic crystallization screen that 
yielded MK2/inhibitor complex crystals under many conditions in seven crystal 
forms. In all, 44 MK2 constructs were generated, ~500 crystals were tested for 
diffraction, and ~30 structures were determined, delivering high-impact 
structural data to support our MK2 drug design effort.
CONCLUSION: Key lessons included setting reasonable criteria for construct 
performance and prioritization, a willingness to design and use customized 
crystallization screens, and, crucially, initiation of high-throughput construct 
exploration very early in the drug discovery process.

DOI: 10.1186/1472-6807-9-16
PMCID: PMC2678131
PMID: 19296855 [Indexed for MEDLINE]