1. J Clin Invest. 2009 Apr;119(4):911-23. doi: 10.1172/JCI36728.

Kallikrein genes are associated with lupus and glomerular basement 
membrane-specific antibody-induced nephritis in mice and humans.

Liu K(1), Li QZ, Delgado-Vega AM, Abelson AK, Sánchez E, Kelly JA, Li L, Liu Y, 
Zhou J, Yan M, Ye Q, Liu S, Xie C, Zhou XJ, Chung SA, Pons-Estel B, Witte T, de 
Ramón E, Bae SC, Barizzone N, Sebastiani GD, Merrill JT, Gregersen PK, Gilkeson 
GG, Kimberly RP, Vyse TJ, Kim I, D'Alfonso S, Martin J, Harley JB, Criswell LA; 
Profile Study Group; Italian Collaborative Group; German Collaborative Group; 
Spanish Collaborative Group; Argentinian Collaborative Group; SLEGEN Consortium; 
Wakeland EK, Alarcón-Riquelme ME, Mohan C.

Collaborators: Danieli MG, Galeazzi M, Querini PR, Migliaresi S, Scherbarth HR, 
Lopez JA, Motta EL, Gamron S, Drenkard C, Menso E, Allievi A, Tate GA, Presas 
JL, Palatnik SA, Abdala M, Bearzotti M, Alvarellos A, Caeiro F, Bertoli A, Paira 
S, Roverano S, Graf CE, Bertero E, Caprarulo C, Buchanan G, Guillerón C, 
Grimaudo S, Manni J, Catoggio LJ, Soriano ER, Santos CD, Prigione C, Ramos FA, 
Navarro SM, Berbotto GA, Jorfen M, Romero EJ, Garcia MA, Marcos JC, Marcos AI, 
Perandones CE, Eimon A, Battagliotti CG, Armadi-Simab K, Gross WL, Gromnica-Ihle 
E, Peter HH, Manger K, Schnarr S, Zeidler H, Schmidt RE, Ortego N, Callejas JL, 
Jiménez-Alonso J, Sabio M, Sánchez-Román J, Garcia-Hernandez FJ, Camps M, 
López-Nevot MA, González-Escribano MF, Harley JH, Riquelme MA, Kimberly R, 
Criswell L, Langefeld C, Tsao B, Jacob C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology and Department of Medicine, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75390-8884, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2009 Apr;119(4):768-71. doi: 10.1172/jci38786.

Immune-mediated nephritis contributes to disease in systemic lupus 
erythematosus, Goodpasture syndrome (caused by antibodies specific for 
glomerular basement membrane [anti-GBM antibodies]), and spontaneous lupus 
nephritis. Inbred mouse strains differ in susceptibility to anti-GBM 
antibody-induced and spontaneous lupus nephritis. This study sought to clarify 
the genetic and molecular factors that maybe responsible for enhanced 
immune-mediated renal disease in these models. When the kidneys of 3 mouse 
strains sensitive to anti-GBM antibody-induced nephritis were compared with 
those of 2 control strains using microarray analysis, one-fifth of the 
underexpressed genes belonged to the kallikrein gene family,which encodes serine 
esterases. Mouse strains that upregulated renal and urinary kallikreins 
exhibited less evidence of disease. Antagonizing the kallikrein pathway 
augmented disease, while agonists dampened the severity of anti-GBM 
antibody-induced nephritis. In addition, nephritis-sensitive mouse strains had 
kallikrein haplotypes that were distinct from those of control strains, 
including several regulatory polymorphisms,some of which were associated with 
functional consequences. Indeed, increased susceptibility to anti-GBM 
antibody-induced nephritis and spontaneous lupus nephritis was achieved by 
breeding mice with a genetic interval harboring the kallikrein genes onto a 
disease-resistant background. Finally, both human SLE and spontaneous lupus 
nephritis were found to be associated with kallikrein genes, particularly KLK1 
and the KLK3 promoter, when DNA SNPs from independent cohorts of SLE patients 
and controls were compared. Collectively, these studies suggest that kallikreins 
are protective disease-associated genes in anti-GBM antibody-induced nephritis 
and lupus.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI36728
PMCID: PMC2662554
PMID: 19307730 [Indexed for MEDLINE]