1. PLoS One. 2009;4(4):e5103. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005103. Epub 2009 Apr 1.

Characterization of transcription from TATA-less promoters: identification of a 
new core promoter element XCPE2 and analysis of factor requirements.

Anish R(1), Hossain MB, Jacobson RH, Takada S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Genes and Development 
Program of the Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Texas 
MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.

BACKGROUND: More than 80% of mammalian protein-coding genes are driven by 
TATA-less promoters which often show multiple transcriptional start sites 
(TSSs). However, little is known about the core promoter DNA sequences or 
mechanisms of transcriptional initiation for this class of promoters.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here we identify a new core promoter element 
XCPE2 (X core promoter element 2) (consensus sequence: 
A/C/G-C-C/T-C-G/A-T-T-G/A-C-C/A(+1)-C/T) that can direct specific transcription 
from the second TSS of hepatitis B virus X gene mRNA. XCPE2 sequences can also 
be found in human promoter regions and typically appear to drive one of the 
start sites within multiple TSS-containing TATA-less promoters. To gain insight 
into mechanisms of transcriptional initiation from this class of promoters, we 
examined requirements of several general transcription factors by in vitro 
transcription experiments using immunodepleted nuclear extracts and purified 
factors. Our results show that XCPE2-driven transcription uses at least TFIIB, 
either TFIID or free TBP, RNA polymerase II (RNA pol II) and the 
MED26-containing mediator complex but not Gcn5. Therefore, XCPE2-driven 
transcription can be carried out by a mechanism which differs from previously 
described TAF-dependent mechanisms for initiator (Inr)- or downstream promoter 
element (DPE)-containing promoters, the TBP- and SAGA 
(Spt-Ada-Gcn5-acetyltransferase)-dependent mechanism for yeast TATA-containing 
promoters, or the TFTC (TBP-free-TAF-containing complex)-dependent mechanism for 
certain Inr-containing TATA-less promoters. EMSA assays using XCPE2 promoter and 
purified factors further suggest that XCPE2 promoter recognition requires a set 
of factors different from those for TATA box, Inr, or DPE promoter recognition.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We identified a new core promoter element XCPE2 that 
are found in multiple TSS-containing TATA-less promoters. Mechanisms of promoter 
recognition and transcriptional initiation for XCPE2-driven promoters appear 
different from previously shown mechanisms for classical promoters that show 
single "focused" TSSs. Our studies provide insight into novel mechanisms of RNA 
Pol II transcription from multiple TSS-containing TATA-less promoters.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005103
PMCID: PMC2659449
PMID: 19337366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.