1. PLoS One. 2009;4(4):e5150. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005150. Epub 2009 Apr 2.

Acute and persistent Mycobacterium tuberculosis infections depend on the thiol 
peroxidase TpX.

Hu Y(1), Coates AR.

Author information:
(1)Centre of Infection, Division of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, St George's 
University of London, London, UK.

The macrophage is the natural niche of Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection. In 
order to combat oxidative and nitrosative stresses and persist in macrophages 
successfully, M. tuberculosis is endowed with a very efficient antioxidant 
complex. Amongst these antioxidant enzymes, TpX is the only one in M. 
tuberculosis with sequence homology to thiol peroxidase. Previous reports have 
demonstrated that the M. tuberculosis TpX protein functions as a peroxidase in 
vitro. It is the dominant antioxidant which protects M. tuberculosis against 
oxidative and nitrosative stresses. The level of the protein increases in 
oxidative stress. To determine the roles of tpx gene in M. tuberculosis survival 
and virulence in vivo, we constructed an M. tuberculosis strain lacking the 
gene. The characteristics of the mutant were examined in an in vitro stationary 
phase model, in response to stresses; in murine bone marrow derived macrophages 
and in an acute and an immune resistant model of murine tuberculosis. The tpx 
mutant became sensitive to H(2)O(2) and NO compared to the wild type strain. 
Enzymatic analysis using bacterial extracts from the WT and the tpx mutant 
demonstrated that the mutant contains reduced peroxidase activity. As a result 
of this, the mutant failed to grow and survive in macrophages. The growth 
deficiency in macrophages became more pronounced after interferon-gamma 
activation. In contrast, its growth was significantly restored in the 
macrophages of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS or NOS2) knockout mice. 
Moreover, the tpx mutant was impaired in its ability to initiate an acute 
infection and to maintain a persistent infection. Its virulence was attenuated. 
Our results demonstrated that tpx is required for M. tuberculosis to deal with 
oxidative and nitrosative stresses, to survive in macrophages and to establish 
acute and persistent infections in animal tuberculosis models.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005150
PMCID: PMC2659749
PMID: 19340292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.