1. ACS Chem Biol. 2009 May 15;4(5):367-77. doi: 10.1021/cb9000475.

Nontoxic chemical interdiction of the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition by 
targeting cap-dependent translation.

Ghosh B(1), Benyumov AO, Ghosh P, Jia Y, Avdulov S, Dahlberg PS, Peterson M, 
Smith K, Polunovsky VA, Bitterman PB, Wagner CR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 
55455, USA.

Normal growth and development depends upon high fidelity regulation of 
cap-dependent translation initiation, a process that is usurped and redirected 
in cancer to mediate acquisition of malignant properties. The 
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a key translationally regulated 
step in the development of epithelial cancers and pathological tissue fibrosis. 
To date, no compounds targeting EMT have been developed. Here we report the 
synthesis of a novel class of histidine triad nucleotide binding protein 
(HINT)-dependent pronucleotides that interdict EMT by negatively regulating the 
association of eIF4E with the mRNA cap. Compound eIF4E inhibitor-1 potently 
inhibited cap-dependent translation in a dose-dependent manner in zebrafish 
embryos without causing developmental abnormalities and prevented eIF4E from 
triggering EMT in zebrafish ectoderm explants without toxicity. Metabolism 
studies with whole cell lysates demonstrated that the prodrug was rapidly 
converted into 7-BnGMP. Thus we have successfully developed the first nontoxic 
small molecule able to inhibit EMT, a key process in the development of 
epithelial cancer and tissue fibrosis, by targeting the interaction of eIF4E 
with the mRNA cap and demonstrated the tractability of zebrafish as a model 
organism for studying agents that modulate EMT. Our work provides strong 
motivation for the continued development of compounds designed to normalize 
cap-dependent translation as novel chemo-preventive agents and therapeutics for 
cancer and fibrosis.

DOI: 10.1021/cb9000475
PMCID: PMC2796976
PMID: 19351181 [Indexed for MEDLINE]