1. Am J Med Genet A. 2009 May;149A(5):861-7. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32731.

Finding twinkle in the eyes of a 71-year-old lady: a case report and review of 
the genotypic and phenotypic spectrum of TWINKLE-related dominant disease.

Van Hove JL(1), Cunningham V, Rice C, Ringel SP, Zhang Q, Chou PC, Truong CK, 
Wong LJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado Denver, Denver, Colorado 
80045, USA. johan.vanhove@ucdenver.edu

Progressive external ophthalmoplegia (PEO) can be caused by a disorder 
characterized by multiple mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) deletions due to mutations 
in the TWINKLE gene, encoding a mtDNA helicase. We describe a 71-year-old woman 
who had developed PEO at age 55 years. She had cataracts, diabetes, 
paresthesias, cognitive defects, memory problems, hearing loss, and sensory 
ataxia. She had muscle weakness with ragged red fibers on biopsy. MRI showed 
static white matter changes. A c.908G>A substitution (p.R303Q) in the TWINKLE 
gene was identified. Multiple mtDNA deletions were detected in muscle but not 
blood by a PCR-based method, but not by Southern blot analysis. MtDNA copy 
number was maintained in blood and muscle. A systematic literature search was 
used to identify the genotypic and phenotypic spectrum of dominant 
TWINKLE-related disease. Patients were adults with PEO and symptoms including 
myopathy, neuropathy, dysarthria or dysphagia, sensory ataxia, and parkinsonism. 
Diabetes, cataract, memory loss, hearing loss, and cardiac problems were 
infrequent. All reported mutations clustered between amino acids 303 and 508 
with no mutations at the N-terminal half of the gene. The TWINKLE gene should be 
analyzed in adults with PEO even in the absence of mtDNA deletions in muscle on 
Southern blot analysis, and of a family history for PEO. The pathogenic 
mutations identified 5' beyond the linker region suggest a functional role for 
this part of the protein despite the absence of a primase function in humans. In 
our patient, the pathogenesis involved multiple mtDNA deletions without 
reduction in mtDNA copy number.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32731
PMID: 19353676 [Indexed for MEDLINE]