1. Biochem J. 2009 Jul 29;422(1):101-9. doi: 10.1042/BJ20090411.

Spermine analogue-regulated expression of spermidine/spermine 
N1-acetyltransferase and its effects on depletion of intracellular polyamine 
pools in mouse fetal fibroblasts.

Uimari A(1), Keinänen TA, Karppinen A, Woster P, Uimari P, Jänne J, Alhonen L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Molecular Medicine, AI Virtanen Institute for 
Molecular Sciences, Biocenter Kuopio, University of Kuopio, Kuopio, Finland. 
anne.uimari@uku.fi

SSAT (Spermidine/spermine N1-acetyltransferase, also known as SAT1), the key 
enzyme in the catabolism of polyamines, is turned over rapidly and there is only 
a low amount present in the cell. In the present study, the regulation of SSAT 
by spermine analogues, the inducers of the enzyme, was studied in wild-type 
mouse fetal fibroblasts, expressing endogenous SSAT, and in the SSAT-deficient 
mouse fetal fibroblasts transiently expressing an SSAT-EGFP (enhanced green 
fluorescent protein) fusion gene. In both cell lines treatments with DENSpm 
(N(1),N(11)-diethylnorspermine), CPENSpm 
(N(1)-ethyl-N(11)-[(cyclopropyl)-methy]-4,8-diazaundecane) and CHENSpm 
(N(1)-ethyl-N(11)-[(cycloheptyl)methy]-4,8-diazaundecane) led to high, moderate 
or low induction of SSAT activity respectively. The level of activity detected 
correlated with the presence of SSAT and SSAT-EGFP proteins, the latter 
localizing both in the cytoplasm and nucleus. RT-PCR (reverse transcription-PCR) 
results suggested that the analogue-affected regulation of SSAT-EGFP expression 
occurred, mainly, after transcription. In wild-type cells, DENSpm increased the 
amount of SSAT mRNA, and both DENSpm and CHENSpm affected splicing of the SSAT 
pre-mRNA. Depleted intracellular spermidine and spermine levels inversely 
correlated with detected SSAT activity. Interestingly, the analogues also 
reduced polyamine levels in the SSAT-deficient cells expressing the EGFP 
control. The results from the present study show that the distinct SSAT 
regulation by different analogues involves regulatory actions at multiple 
levels, and that the spermine analogues, in addition to inducing SSAT, lower 
intracellular polyamine pools by SSAT-independent mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20090411
PMCID: PMC4180119
PMID: 19473115 [Indexed for MEDLINE]