1. Mol Vis. 2009 Jun 2;15:1107-14.

Coding variant Met72Thr in the PEDF gene and risk of neovascular age-related 
macular degeneration and polypoidal choroidal vasculopathy.

Bessho H(1), Kondo N, Honda S, Kuno S, Negi A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Ophthalmology, Kobe University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Japan.

PURPOSE: Using a candidate-gene approach, a recent case-control study identified 
a previously unknown association between neovascular age-related macular 
degeneration (AMD) and the coding Met72Thr variant in the pigment 
epithelium-derived factor (PEDF) gene in a Taiwan Chinese population. However, a 
subsequent replication study failed to see this association in a white European 
population. We noted an important difference in the sample ascertainment scheme 
between these two studies. The original study did not consider findings of 
indocyanine green (ICG) angiography for disease classification, which is the 
only way to obtain a clear image of polypoidal choroidal vasculopathy (PCV) 
lesions. This suggests that their cohort might include a considerable amount of 
PCV, given its high prevalence in the Chinese population. In contrast, the 
replication study intentionally excluded PCV from the case cohort on the basis 
of ICG angiograms. Therefore, the inconsistent finding might be caused by 
potential sample heterogeneity between these two studies. In this respect, this 
association needed to be examined in a case series of clearly defined 
individuals with neovascular AMD and PCV. The aim of this study was to validate 
the previously reported association of the PEDF Met72Thr variant in a well 
characterized Japanese population with neovascular AMD and PCV.
METHODS: We genotyped the Met72Thr variant (rs1136287) in 116 patients with 
neovascular AMD, 140 patients with PCV, and 189 control participants in a 
Japanese population. Genotyping was performed using TaqMan technology. We tested 
for an association of this variant with neovascular AMD and PCV separately. We 
also evaluated population stratification in our study cohort.
RESULTS: We found no statistically significant evidence for association between 
rs1136287 and either neovascular AMD or PCV under any genetic models (trend, 
genotypic, dominant, and recessive genetic models; p>0.05). Population structure 
analyses excluded stratification artifact in our study population.
CONCLUSIONS: We report a lack of association between the PEDF Met72Thr variant 
and either neovascular AMD or PCV in a Japanese population. We conclude that the 
Met72Thr variant does not play a significant role in the risk of developing 
neovascular AMD or PCV.

PMCID: PMC2690961
PMID: 19503741 [Indexed for MEDLINE]