1. Glia. 2010 Jan 1;58(1):43-54. doi: 10.1002/glia.20900.

Maintaining retinal astrocytes normalizes revascularization and prevents 
vascular pathology associated with oxygen-induced retinopathy.

Dorrell MI(1), Aguilar E, Jacobson R, Trauger SA, Friedlander J, Siuzdak G, 
Friedlander M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 
92037, USA.

Astrocytes are well known modulators of normal developmental retinal 
vascularization. However, relatively little is known about the role of glial 
cells during pathological retinal neovascularization (NV), a leading contributor 
to vision loss in industrialized nations. We demonstrate that the loss of 
astrocytes and microglia directly correlates with the development of 
pathological NV in a mouse model of oxygen-induced retinopathy (OIR). These two 
distinct glial cell populations were found to have cooperative survival effects 
in vitro and in vivo. The intravitreal injection of myeloid progenitor cells, 
astrocytes, or astrocyte-conditioned media rescued endogenous astrocytes from 
degeneration that normally occurs within the hypoxic, vaso-obliterated retina 
following return to normoxia. Protection of the retinal astrocytes and microglia 
was directly correlated with accelerated revascularization of the normal retinal 
plexuses and reduction of pathological intravitreal NV normally associated with 
OIR. Using astrocyte-conditioned media, several factors were identified that may 
contribute to the observed astrocytic protection and subsequent normalization of 
the retinal vasculature, including vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and 
basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF). Injection of VEGF or bFGF at specific 
doses rescued the retinas from developing OIR-associated pathology, an effect 
that was also preceded by protection of endogenous glia from hypoxia-induced 
degeneration. Together, these data suggest that vascular-associated glia are 
also required for normalized revascularization of the hypoxic retina. Methods 
developed to target and protect glial cells may provide a novel strategy by 
which normalized revascularization can be promoted and the consequences of 
abnormal NV in retinal vascular diseases can be prevented.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/glia.20900
PMCID: PMC2814838
PMID: 19544395 [Indexed for MEDLINE]