1. PLoS Biol. 2009 Jun 23;7(6):e1000136. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1000136. Epub 
2009 Jun 23.

Long-term relationships between synaptic tenacity, synaptic remodeling, and 
network activity.

Minerbi A(1), Kahana R, Goldfeld L, Kaufman M, Marom S, Ziv NE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Technion Faculty of Medicine, Haifa, 
Israel.

Synaptic plasticity is widely believed to constitute a key mechanism for 
modifying functional properties of neuronal networks. This belief implicitly 
implies, however, that synapses, when not driven to change their characteristics 
by physiologically relevant stimuli, will maintain these characteristics over 
time. How tenacious are synapses over behaviorally relevant time scales? To 
begin to address this question, we developed a system for continuously imaging 
the structural dynamics of individual synapses over many days, while recording 
network activity in the same preparations. We found that in spontaneously active 
networks, distributions of synaptic sizes were generally stable over days. 
Following individual synapses revealed, however, that the apparently static 
distributions were actually steady states of synapses exhibiting continual and 
extensive remodeling. In active networks, large synapses tended to grow smaller, 
whereas small synapses tended to grow larger, mainly during periods of 
particularly synchronous activity. Suppression of network activity only mildly 
affected the magnitude of synaptic remodeling, but dependence on synaptic size 
was lost, leading to the broadening of synaptic size distributions and increases 
in mean synaptic size. From the perspective of individual neurons, activity 
drove changes in the relative sizes of their excitatory inputs, but such changes 
continued, albeit at lower rates, even when network activity was blocked. Our 
findings show that activity strongly drives synaptic remodeling, but they also 
show that significant remodeling occurs spontaneously. Whereas such spontaneous 
remodeling provides an explanation for "synaptic homeostasis" like processes, it 
also raises significant questions concerning the reliability of individual 
synapses as sites for persistently modifying network function.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1000136
PMCID: PMC2693930
PMID: 19554080 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.