1. Reprod Biol Endocrinol. 2009 Jun 29;7:67. doi: 10.1186/1477-7827-7-67.

Seminiferous tubule transfection in vitro to define post-meiotic gene 
regulation.

Danner S(1), Kirchhoff C, Ivell R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Andrology, University Clinic Hamburg-Eppendorf, 20246 Hamburg, 
Germany. Sandra.Danner@emb.fraunhofer.de

BACKGROUND: Post-meiotically expressed genes in the testis are essential for the 
proper progression of spermatogenesis, and yet, aside from the construction of 
individual transgenic mice using specific promoters to drive reporter plasmids, 
there are only very limited possibilities for relevant and quantitative analysis 
of gene promoters. This is due to the special nature of post-meiotic haploid 
cells, which to date are not represented in any appropriate cell-lines. This 
article reports the development of novel methodology using isolated and cultured 
rat seminiferous tubules in a multiwell format, into which promoter-reporter 
constructs can be introduced by a combination of microinjection and 
electroporation.
METHODS: Culture conditions were developed which allowed the continued 
incubation of isolated rat seminiferous tubules for up to 48 h without obvious 
cell death and loss of post-meiotic cells. Transfection of intact seminiferous 
tubules by microinjection and electroporation was optimized to achieve high 
expression efficiencies of control plasmids, using either fluorescent protein or 
luciferase as reporters, thereby allowing both morphological as well as 
quantitative assessment.
RESULTS: Successful transfection was achieved into all cell types except for 
mature spermatozoa. However, there appeared to be only limited cell-type 
specificity for the promoters used, even though these had appeared to be 
specific when used in transgenic animals.
CONCLUSION: We have devised a methodology which allows relatively high 
throughput analysis of post-meiotic gene promoters into primary cells of intact 
seminiferous tubules. An apparent lack of cell-type specificity suggests that 
the gene fragments used do not contain sufficient targeting information, or that 
the transient episomal expression of the constructs does not encourage 
appropriate expression specificity. The results also highlight the doubtful 
interpretation of many studies using heterologous transfection systems to 
analyse post-meiotically expressed genes.

DOI: 10.1186/1477-7827-7-67
PMCID: PMC2711954
PMID: 19563643 [Indexed for MEDLINE]