1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2009 Dec;50(12):5919-26. doi: 10.1167/iovs.09-3548.
 Epub 2009 Jul 2.

Genotyping microarray for CSNB-associated genes.

Zeitz C(1), Labs S, Lorenz B, Forster U, Uksti J, Kroes HY, De Baere E, Leroy 
BP, Cremers FP, Wittmer M, van Genderen MM, Sahel JA, Audo I, Poloschek CM, 
Mohand-Saïd S, Fleischhauer JC, Hüffmeier U, Moskova-Doumanova V, Levin AV, 
Hamel CP, Leifert D, Munier FL, Schorderet DF, Zrenner E, Friedburg C, Wissinger 
B, Kohl S, Berger W.

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Molecular Genetics and Gene Diagnostics, Institute of 
Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. 
christina.zeitz@inserm.fr

PURPOSE: Congenital stationary night blindness (CSNB) is a clinically and 
genetically heterogeneous retinal disease. Although electroretinographic (ERG) 
measurements can discriminate clinical subgroups, the identification of the 
underlying genetic defects has been complicated for CSNB because of genetic 
heterogeneity, the uncertainty about the mode of inheritance, and time-consuming 
and costly mutation scanning and direct sequencing approaches.
METHODS: To overcome these challenges and to generate a time- and cost-efficient 
mutation screening tool, the authors developed a CSNB genotyping microarray with 
arrayed primer extension (APEX) technology. To cover as many mutations as 
possible, a comprehensive literature search was performed, and DNA samples from 
a cohort of patients with CSNB were first sequenced directly in known CSNB 
genes. Subsequently, oligonucleotides were designed representing 126 sequence 
variations in RHO, CABP4, CACNA1F, CACNA2D4, GNAT1, GRM6, NYX, PDE6B, and SAG 
and spotted on the chip.
RESULTS: Direct sequencing of genes known to be associated with CSNB in the 
study cohort revealed 21 mutations (12 novel and 9 previously reported). The 
resultant microarray containing oligonucleotides, which allow to detect 126 
known and novel mutations, was 100% effective in determining the expected 
sequence changes in all known samples assessed. In addition, investigation of 34 
patients with CSNB who were previously not genotyped revealed sequence variants 
in 18%, of which 15% are thought to be disease-causing mutations.
CONCLUSIONS: This relatively inexpensive first-pass genetic testing device for 
patients with a diagnosis of CSNB will improve molecular diagnostics and genetic 
counseling of patients and their families and gives the opportunity to analyze 
whether, for example, more progressive disorders such as cone or cone-rod 
dystrophies underlie the same gene defects.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.09-3548
PMID: 19578023 [Indexed for MEDLINE]