1. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Oct 1;18(19):3615-25. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp310. Epub 2009
Jul  10.

Zebrafish survival motor neuron mutants exhibit presynaptic neuromuscular 
junction defects.

Boon KL(1), Xiao S, McWhorter ML, Donn T, Wolf-Saxon E, Bohnsack MT, Moens CB, 
Beattie CE.

Author information:
(1)Center for Molecular Neurobiology, Department of Neuroscience, Ohio State 
University, Columbus, OH, USA.

Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA), a recessive genetic disease, affects lower 
motoneurons leading to denervation, atrophy, paralysis and in severe cases 
death. Reduced levels of survival motor neuron (SMN) protein cause SMA. As a 
first step towards generating a genetic model of SMA in zebrafish, we identified 
three smn mutations. Two of these alleles, smnY262stop and smnL265stop, were 
stop mutations that resulted in exon 7 truncation, whereas the third, smnG264D, 
was a missense mutation corresponding to an amino acid altered in human SMA 
patients. Smn protein levels were low/undetectable in homozygous mutants 
consistent with unstable protein products. Homozygous mutants from all three 
alleles were smaller and survived on the basis of maternal Smn dying during the 
second week of larval development. Analysis of the neuromuscular system in these 
mutants revealed a decrease in the synaptic vesicle protein, SV2. However, two 
other synaptic vesicle proteins, synaptotagmin and synaptophysin were 
unaffected. To address whether the SV2 decrease was due specifically to Smn in 
motoneurons, we tested whether expressing human SMN protein exclusively in 
motoneurons in smn mutants could rescue the phenotype. For this, we generated a 
transgenic zebrafish line with human SMN driven by the motoneuron-specific 
zebrafish hb9 promoter and then generated smn mutant lines carrying this 
transgene. We found that introducing human SMN specifically into motoneurons 
rescued the SV2 decrease observed in smn mutants. Our analysis indicates the 
requirement for Smn in motoneurons to maintain SV2 in presynaptic terminals 
indicating that Smn, either directly or indirectly, plays a role in presynaptic 
integrity.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddp310
PMCID: PMC2742401
PMID: 19592581 [Indexed for MEDLINE]