1. PLoS One. 2009 Jul 28;4(7):e6370. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0006370.

Mitochondrial haplogroups and control region polymorphisms are not associated 
with prostate cancer in Middle European Caucasians.

Mueller EE(1), Eder W, Mayr JA, Paulweber B, Sperl W, Horninger W, Klocker H, 
Kofler B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Paracelsus Medical University Salzburg, Salzburg, 
Austria.

BACKGROUND: Besides being responsible for energy production in the cell, 
mitochondria are central players in apoptosis as well as the main source of 
harmful reactive oxygen species. Therefore, it can be hypothesised that sequence 
variation in the mitochondrial genome is a contributing factor to the etiology 
of diseases related to these different cellular events, including cancer. The 
aim of the present study was to assess the frequency of haplogroups and 
polymorphisms in the control region (CR) of mitochondrial DNA of peripheral 
blood mononuclear cells from patients with prostate carcinoma (n = 304) versus 
patients screened for prostate disease but found to be negative for cancer on 
biopsy (n = 278) in a Middle European population.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The nine major European haplogroups and the CR 
polymorphisms were identified by means of primer extension analysis and DNA 
sequencing, respectively. We found that mitochondrial haplogroup frequencies and 
CR polymorphisms do not differ significantly between patients with or without 
prostate cancer, implying no impact of inherited mitochondrial DNA variation on 
predisposition to prostate carcinoma in a Middle European population.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our results contrast with a recent report claiming an 
association between mtDNA haplogroup U and prostate cancer in a North American 
population of caucasian descent.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0006370
PMCID: PMC2712094
PMID: 19636411 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.