1. Cancer Lett. 2010 Mar 28;289(2):127-39. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2009.07.005.
Epub  2009 Jul 29.

Focal adhesion kinase: a prominent determinant in breast cancer initiation, 
progression and metastasis.

Luo M(1), Guan JL.

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Department of Internal Medicine, 
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Focal adhesion kinase (FAK) is an intracellular non-receptor tyrosine kinase. In 
addition to its role as a major mediator of signal transduction by integrins, 
FAK also participates in signaling by a wide range of extracellular stimuli 
including growth factors, G-protein-coupled receptor agonists, cytokines, and 
other inflammatory mediators. The link between FAK and breast cancers is 
strongly suggested by a number of reports showing that FAK gene is amplified and 
overexpressed in a large fraction of breast cancer specimens. In addition, 
increased FAK expression and activity frequently correlate with metastatic 
disease and poor prognosis. Since its discovery in early 1990s, numerous studies 
have shown a role for FAK in the regulation of cell spreading, adhesion, 
migration, survival, proliferation, differentiation, and angiogenesis. Many of 
these studies in cultured cells provided strong evidence to connect FAK 
expression/activation to the promotion of cancer. Recently, a prominent role of 
FAK in promoting mammary tumorigenesis, progression and metastasis has been 
unveiled by different animal models of human breast cancer, including xenograft 
models in immunodeficient rodents and spontaneous tumor models in transgenic 
mice that have specific deletion of FAK in the mammary epithelial cells during 
embryonic or postnatal development. These in vivo studies established FAK as a 
prominent determinant in mammary cancer initiation, progression and metastasis. 
Furthermore, a novel function of FAK in maintaining mammary cancer 
stem/progenitor cells in vivo has been recently reported, which may provide a 
novel cellular mechanism of FAK in promoting breast cancer initiation and 
progression. The wealth of knowledge accumulated over almost two decades of 
research on FAK should help to design potentially novel therapies for breast 
cancer.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.canlet.2009.07.005
PMCID: PMC2854647
PMID: 19643531 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest Statement None Declared