1. Biochemistry. 2009 Sep 22;48(37):8795-805. doi: 10.1021/bi901194p.

Structural basis for differential binding of the interleukin-8 monomer and dimer 
to the CXCR1 N-domain: role of coupled interactions and dynamics.

Ravindran A(1), Joseph PR, Rajarathnam K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Sealy Center for Structural 
Biology and Molecular Biophysics, 5.142 Medical Research Building, 301 
University Boulevard, The University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas 
77555, USA.

Interleukin-8 (IL-8 or CXCL8) plays a critical role in orchestrating the immune 
response by binding and activating the receptor CXCR1 that belongs to the GPCR 
class. IL-8 exists as both monomers and dimers, and both bind CXCR1 but with 
differential affinities. It is well established that the monomer is the 
high-affinity ligand and that the interactions between the ligand N-loop and 
receptor N-domain play a critical role in determining binding affinity. In order 
to characterize the structural basis of differential binding of the IL-8 monomer 
and dimer to the CXCR1 N-domain, we analyzed binding-induced NMR chemical shift 
and peak intensity changes and show that they are exquisitely sensitive and can 
provide detailed insights into the binding process. We used three IL-8 variants, 
a designed monomer, a trapped disulfide-linked dimer, and WT at dimeric 
concentrations. NMR data for the monomer show that nonsequential residues that 
span the entire N-loop are involved in the binding process and that the binding 
is mediated by a network of extensive direct and indirect coupled interactions. 
Interestingly, in the case of WT, binding induces dissociation of the 
dimer-receptor complex to the monomer-receptor complex, and in the case of the 
trapped dimer, binding results in increased global conformational flexibility. 
Increased dynamics is evidence of unfavorable interactions, indicating that 
binding of the WT dimer triggers conformational changes that disrupt 
dimer-interface interactions, resulting in its dissociation. These results 
together provide evidence that binding is not a localized event but results in 
extensive coupled interactions within the monomer and across the dimer interface 
and that these interactions play a fundamental role in determining binding 
affinity.

DOI: 10.1021/bi901194p
PMCID: PMC2858980
PMID: 19681642 [Indexed for MEDLINE]