1. Zhejiang Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2009 Jul;38(4):333-7.

[Enlightenment from genome-wide association study to genetics of psoriasis].

[Article in Chinese]

ZHANG XJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology & Venerology, The First Affiliated Hospital of 
Anhui Medical University, Hefei 230032, China. ayzxj@vip.sina.com

Psoriasis is a common autoimmune and hyper proliferative skin disease, 
characterized by thick, silvery scale patches. Numerous family studies have 
provided compelling evidence of a genetic predisposition to psoriasis, although 
the inheritance pattern is unclear. However, few of these studies have achieved 
consistent results, except for the MHC locus, a problem frequently encountered 
in the investigation of complex disease. Using high-throughput techniques to 
genotype hundreds of thousands of single nucleotide polymorphisms explore their 
relationship with phenotypes, genome-wide association studies (GWAS) are now 
proven to be a powerful approach for screening the susceptibility genes (loci) 
of complex disease. Recently, three GWAS on psoriasis published in Nature 
Genetics have provided us with many novel clues concerning disease pathogenesis, 
in both immune and non-immune pathways. The MHC locus (HLA-Cw6 and other MHC 
variance), the major locus involved in the immune reactions of human immune 
disease, has consistently been shown to be associated with psoriasis, both in 
previous linkage and present GWAS. IL-12B and IL23R, which are the two non-MHC 
genes with highly associated evidence with psoriasis in multiple studies 
performed so far and potent cytokines with complex biological activities, should 
be of great importance in the pathogenesis of psoriasis. Recent clinical trials, 
in which anti-IL-12p40 antibodies were used for the treatment of psoriasis, have 
provided further evidence of the role of IL-12/23 in the pathophysiology of 
psoriasis,and highlighted a new road of treatment for psoriasis. In 2008,we 
performed the first large GWAS in the Chinese population and identified a novel 
susceptibility locus within the late cornified envelope (LCE) gene cluster: 
LCE3A and LCE3D on chromosome 1q21, with conclusive evidence (rs4085613, 
p(combined)=6.69*10(-30); odds ratio=0.76). Meanwhile, another group also 
identified a deletion comprising and LCE gene cluster of LCE3B and LCE3C, which 
is significantly associated with a risk of psoriasis in Spain, Netherland, Italy 
and USA. Both of these independent studies provided substantial association 
evidence for the LCE genes involved in the pathogenesis of psoriasis. The LCE 
genes encode the stratum-corneum proteins of the cornified envelope, which plays 
an important role in epidermal terminal differentiation. As we know, psoriasis 
is a disease of interfollicular epidermis and rapid keratinocyte proliferation 
may cause the production of parakeratotic keratinocytes in psoriatic skin and, 
thus, the formation of poorly adherent stratum corneum, which in turn results in 
the characteristic scale or flakes of psoriasis lesions. Although some of the 
highlighted genes are already targeted by effective psoriasis therapies, others 
could become future targets for treatments,especially for the LCE genes, which 
will be very useful for unlocking new drug targets and tailored treatments for 
this painful, disfiguring skin disease. Meanwhile larger samples and improved 
strategy for identification of other susceptibility variants to psoriasis and 
downstream functional study to elucidate the underlying mechanisms of diseases 
are also needed. Taken together, unremitting efforts of the basic research on 
psoriasis will lead us to achieve a better treatment and diagnosis for psoriasis 
in the near future.

PMID: 19693967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]