1. BMC Med Genomics. 2009 Aug 21;2:56. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-2-56.

Induction of the interleukin 6/ signal transducer and activator of transcription 
pathway in the lungs of mice sub-chronically exposed to mainstream tobacco 
smoke.

Halappanavar S(1), Russell M, Stampfli MR, Williams A, Yauk CL.

Author information:
(1)Environmental Health Science and Research Bureau, Health Canada, Ottawa, 
Ontario, K1A 0L2, Canada. sabina_halappanavar@hc-sc.gc.ca

BACKGROUND: Tobacco smoking is associated with lung cancer and other respiratory 
diseases. However, little is known about the global molecular changes that 
precede the appearance of clinically detectable symptoms. In this study, the 
effects of mainstream tobacco smoke (MTS) on global transcription in the mouse 
lung were investigated.
METHODS: Male C57B1/CBA mice were exposed to MTS from two cigarettes daily, 5 
days/week for 6 or 12 weeks. Mice were sacrificed immediately, or 6 weeks 
following the last cigarette. High density DNA microarrays were used to 
characterize global gene expression changes in whole lung. Microarray results 
were validated by Quantitative real-time RT-PCR. Further analysis of protein 
synthesis and function was carried out for a select set of genes by ELISA and 
Western blotting.
RESULTS: Globally, seventy nine genes were significantly differentially 
expressed following the exposure to MTS. These genes were associated with a 
number of biological processes including xenobiotic metabolism, redox balance, 
oxidative stress and inflammation. There was no differential gene expression in 
mice exposed to smoke and sampled 6 weeks following the last cigarette. 
Moreover, cluster analysis demonstrated that these samples clustered alongside 
their respective controls. We observed simultaneous up-regulation of interleukin 
6 (IL-6) and its antagonist, suppressor of cytokine signalling (SOCS3) mRNA 
following 12 weeks of MTS exposure. Analysis by ELISA and Western blotting 
revealed a concomitant increase in total IL-6 antigen levels and its downstream 
targets, including phosphorylated signal transducer and activator of 
transcription 3 (Stat3), basal cell-lymphoma extra large (BCL-XL) and myeloid 
cell leukemia 1 (MCL-1) protein, in total lung tissue extracts. However, in 
contrast to gene expression, a subtle decrease in total SOCS3 protein was 
observed after 12 weeks of MTS exposure.
CONCLUSION: Global transcriptional analysis identified a set of genes responding 
to MTS exposure in mouse lung. These genes returned to basal levels following 
smoking cessation, providing evidence to support the benefits of smoking 
cessation. Detailed analyses were undertaken for IL-6 and its associated 
pathways. Our results provide further insight into the role of these pathways in 
lung injury and inflammation induced by MTS.

DOI: 10.1186/1755-8794-2-56
PMCID: PMC2737544
PMID: 19698101