1. Br J Ophthalmol. 2010 Apr;94(4):479-86. doi: 10.1136/bjo.2009.162644. Epub
2009  Sep 1.

Added value of infrared, red-free and autofluorescence fundus imaging in 
pseudoxanthoma elasticum.

De Zaeytijd J(1), Vanakker OM, Coucke PJ, De Paepe A, De Laey JJ, Leroy BP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology & Centre for Medical Genetics, Ghent University 
Hospital, De Pintelaan 185, Ghent 9000, Belgium.

PURPOSE: Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) is an autosomal recessive disorder 
caused by mutations in the ABCC6 gene and primarily affects the oculocutaneous 
and cardiovascular systems. However, the phenotype, including the 
ophthalmological manifestations, varies in severity. The present study aims to 
evaluate the added value of novel funduscopic imaging techniques, such as 
near-infrared reflectance, red-free and autofluorescence imaging in PXE.
METHODS: In 22 molecularly proven PXE patients and 25 obligate carriers, PXE 
retinopathy was evaluated using funduscopy, white light, red-free, infrared and 
autofluorescence imaging.
RESULTS: At least one characteristic of PXE retinopathy was evident on 
funduscopy of all eyes. Angioid streaks could be subdivided in those with (brick 
red) or without (feathered) adjacent RPE alterations. Infrared imaging showed 
the brick-red-coloured streaks as well-demarcated dark fissures, even when these 
passed unnoticed on funduscopy. Feathered types were detected as triangular 
areas of hypoautofluorescence. The peau d'orange was much more visible and much 
more widespread on infrared imaging, with extension from the posterior pole 
towards the whole midperiphery. Comets and comet tails were best seen with 
red-free imaging.
CONCLUSIONS: Infrared, red-free and autofluorescence imaging are more sensitive 
than white light funduscopy and imaging in visualising early retinal signs of 
PXE. In addition, this specialised imaging allows a better appreciation of the 
extent of lesions. Hence, such imaging increases the chances of making a correct 
diagnosis early, and aids in the accurate evaluation of evolution of disease in 
the ophthalmic follow-up of PXE patients.

DOI: 10.1136/bjo.2009.162644
PMID: 19726431 [Indexed for MEDLINE]