1. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2009 Sep;66(9):966-975. doi: 
10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2009.95.

A genomewide association study points to multiple loci that predict 
antidepressant drug treatment outcome in depression.

Ising M(#)(1), Lucae S(#)(1), Binder EB(1), Bettecken T(1), Uhr M(1), Ripke 
S(1), Kohli MA(1), Hennings JM(1), Horstmann S(1), Kloiber S(1), Menke A(1), 
Bondy B(1), Rupprecht R(1), Domschke K(1), Baune BT(1), Arolt V(1), Rush AJ(1), 
Holsboer F(1), Müller-Myhsok B(1).

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany (Drs Ising, Lucae, 
Binder, Bettecken, Uhr, Ripke, Kohli, Hennings, Horstmann, Kloiber, Menke, 
Holsboer, and Müller-Myhsok), Department of Psychiatry, Ludwig Maximilians 
University, Munich, Germany (Drs Bondy and Rupprecht), Department of Psychiatry, 
Westfalian Wilhelms University Muenster, Muenster, Germany (Drs Domschke, Baune, 
and Arolt), Department of Psychiatry, James Cook University, Townsville, 
Australia (Dr Baune), Department of Psychiatry, University of Texas Southwestern 
Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA, and Department of Clinical Sciences, Duke-NUS, 
Singapore (Dr Rush).
(#)Contributed equally

CONTEXT: The efficacy of antidepressant drug treatment in depression is 
unsatisfactory; 1 in 3 patients does not fully recover even after several 
treatment trials. Genetic factors and clinical characteristics contribute to the 
failure of a favorable treatment outcome.
OBJECTIVE: To identify genetic and clinical determinants of antidepressant drug 
treatment outcome in depression.
DESIGN: Genomewide pharmacogenetic association study with 2 independent 
replication samples.
SETTING: We performed a genomewide association study in patients from the Munich 
Antidepressant Response Signature (MARS) project and in pooled DNA from an 
independent German replication sample. A set of 328 single-nucleotide 
polymorphisms highly related to outcome in both genomewide association studies 
was genotyped in a sample of the Sequenced Treatment Alternatives to Relieve 
Depression (STAR*D) study.
PARTICIPANTS: A total of 339 inpatients with a depressive episode (MARS sample), 
a further 361 inpatients with depression (German replication sample), and 832 
outpatients with major depression (STAR*D sample).
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: We generated a multilocus genetic variable that described 
the individual number of alleles of the selected single nucleotide polymorphisms 
associated with beneficial treatment outcome in the MARS sample ("response" 
alleles) to evaluate additive genetic effects on antidepressant drug treatment 
outcome.
RESULTS: Multilocus analysis revealed a significant contribution of a binary 
variable that categorized patients as carriers of a high vs low number of 
response alleles in the prediction of antidepressant drug treatment outcome in 
both samples (MARS and STAR*D). In addition, we observed that patients with a 
comorbid anxiety disorder combined with a low number of response alleles showed 
the least favorable outcome.
CONCLUSION: These results demonstrate the importance of multiple genetic factors 
combined with clinical features in the prediction of antidepressant drug 
treatment outcome, which underscores the multifactorial nature of this trait.

DOI: 10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2009.95
PMCID: PMC4465570
PMID: 19736353 [Indexed for MEDLINE]