1. BMC Mol Biol. 2009 Sep 15;10:89. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-10-89.

Interaction of ZEB and histone deacetylase with the PLDLS-binding cleft region 
of monomeric C-terminal binding protein 2.

Zhao LJ(1), Kuppuswamy M, Vijayalingam S, Chinnadurai G.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Molecular Virology, Saint Louis University Health Sciences 
Center, St, Louis, Missouri 63104, USA. zhaol@slu.edu

BACKGROUND: Proteins of the C-terminal binding protein (CtBP) family, CtBP1 and 
CtBP2 are closely related transcriptional regulators that are coded by two 
different gene loci in the vertebrate genomes. They perform redundant and unique 
functions during animal development. CtBP proteins mediate their transcriptional 
function through interaction with various DNA-binding repressors that contain 
PLDLS-like motifs and chromatin modifying enzymes, such as class I histone 
deacetylases (HDAC) that do not contain such motifs. The N-terminal region of 
CtBP1/2 forms a hydrophobic cleft and is involved in interaction with both 
PLDLS-containing factors and non-PLDLS factors. CtBP proteins function as dimers 
to mediate transcriptional repression and dimerization is modulated by specific 
binding to NAD/NADH.
RESULTS: In this study, we have investigated the role of dimerization of CtBP2 
in recruitment of PLDLS-motif cofactors and non-PLDLS cofactors. Our results 
indicate that mutations in CtBP2 that interfere with dimerization abolish CtBP2 
interaction with most cellular factors, except the PLDLS-motif factor 
zinc-finger E-box binding homeobox (ZEB) and the non-PLDLS factor HDAC2. Unlike 
most PLDLS-containing CtBP-binding proteins, ZEB contains three PLDLS-like 
motifs and all three contribute to the interaction with the CtBP2 monomer. 
Despite the ability to interact with ZEB and HDAC, the CtBP2 monomer fails to 
mediate ZEB-dependent transcriptional repression. The lack of repression 
activity of the CtBP2 monomer is correlated with the competition between ZEB and 
HDAC for interaction with the CtBP2 monomer.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest a competition between the canonical 
PLDLS-motif factors such as E1A and non-PLDLS factor HDAC for interaction with 
CtBP. They also indicate that the affinity for the CtBP monomer may be 
determined by the number as well as amino acid sequence compositions of the 
PLDLS-like motifs. Our results are consistent with a model that the CtBP2 dimer 
may interact with a PLDLS-containing repressor through one monomer and recruit 
HDAC and other chromatin modifying enzymes through the second monomer in the 
CtBP2 dimer.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2199-10-89
PMCID: PMC2749851
PMID: 19754958 [Indexed for MEDLINE]