1. Biochem J. 2009 Nov 11;424(2):211-20. doi: 10.1042/BJ20090888.

Structural insight on the control of urea synthesis: identification of the 
binding site for N-acetyl-L-glutamate, the essential allosteric activator of 
mitochondrial carbamoyl phosphate synthetase.

Pekkala S(1), Martínez AI, Barcelona B, Gallego J, Bendala E, Yefimenko I, Rubio 
V, Cervera J.

Author information:
(1)Centro de Investigación Príncipe Felipe, Avda. Autopista del Saler 16, 
Valencia 46012, Spain.

NAG (N-acetyl-L-glutamate), the essential allosteric activator of the first urea 
cycle enzyme, CPSI (carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I), is a key regulator of 
this crucial cycle for ammonia detoxification in animals (including humans). 
Automated cavity searching and flexible docking have allowed identification of 
the NAG site in the crystal structure of human CPSI C-terminal domain. The site, 
a pocket lined by invariant residues and located between the central beta-sheet 
and two alpha-helices, opens at the beta-sheet C-edge and is roofed by a 
three-residue lid. It can tightly accommodate one extended NAG molecule having 
the delta-COO- at the pocket entry, the alpha-COO- and acetamido groups tightly 
hydrogen bonded to the pocket, and the terminal methyl of the acetamido 
substituent surrounded by hydrophobic residues. This binding mode is supported 
by the observation of reduced NAG affinity upon mutation of NAG-interacting 
residues of CPSI (recombinantly expressed using baculovirus/insect cells); by 
the fine-mapping of the N-chloroacetyl-L-glutamate photoaffinity labelling site 
of CPSI; and by previously established structure-activity relationships for NAG 
analogues. The location of the NAG site is identical to that of the weak 
bacterial CPS activator IMP (inosine monophosphate) in Escherichia coli CPS, 
indicating a common origin for these sites and excluding any relatedness to the 
binding site of the other bacterial CPS activator, ornithine. Our findings open 
the way to the identification of CPSI deficiency patients carrying NAG site 
mutations, and to the possibility of tailoring the activator to fit a given NAG 
site mutation, as exemplified here with N-acetyl-L(+/-)-beta-phenylglutamate for 
the W1410K CPSI mutation.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20090888
PMID: 19754428 [Indexed for MEDLINE]