1. Biochemistry. 2009 Oct 27;48(42):10005-13. doi: 10.1021/bi9014902.

Insights into the molecular determinants of proton inhibition in an 
acid-inactivated degenerins and mammalian epithelial Na(+) channel.

Wang Y(1), Bianchi L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Miller School of Medicine, 
University of Miami, Miami, Florida 33136, USA.

Mammalian ASIC channels of the DEG/ENaC superfamily are gated by extracellular 
protons and function to mediate touch and pain sensitivity, learning and memory, 
and fear conditioning. The recently solved crystal structure of chicken ASIC1a 
and preliminary functional studies suggested that a highly negatively charged 
pocket in the extracellular domain of the channel might be the primary proton 
binding domain. However, more recent extensive mutagenesis analysis paints a 
more complex mechanism of channel gating, involving binding of protons at sites 
immediately after the first transmembrane domain (TM1) and displacement of 
inhibitory Ca(2+) ions from the acidic pocket in the extracellular domain and 
from another Ca(2+) binding site at the mouth of the pore. We recently 
identified and functionally characterized Caenorhabditis elegans ACD-1, the 
first acid-inactivated DEG/ENaC channel. ACD-1 is expressed in C. elegans amphid 
glia and functions with neuronal DEG/ENaC channel DEG-1 to mediate acid 
avoidance and chemotaxis to the amino acid lysine. The post-TM1 residues that 
were proposed to bind protons in ASIC1a are not conserved in ACD-1, but some of 
the amino acids constituting the acidic pocket are. However, ACD-1 proton 
sensitivity is completely independent from extracellular Ca(2+), and protons 
appear to bind the channel in a less cooperative manner. We thus wondered if 
residues in the acidic pocket might contribute to ACD-1 acid sensitivity. We 
show here that while ACD-1 sensitivity to extracellular protons is influenced by 
mutations in the acidic pocket, other sites are likely to participate. We also 
report that one histidine at the base of the thumb and residues in the channel 
pore influence proton inhibition in a voltage-independent manner, suggesting 
that they affect the coupling of proton binding with the gating rather than 
proton binding itself. We conclude that ACD-1 inhibition by protons is likely 
mediated by binding of proton ions to multiple sites throughout the 
extracellular domain of the channel. Our data also support a model in which 
residues in the acidic pocket contribute to determining the channel state 
perhaps by changing the strength of the interaction between adjacent thumb and 
finger domains.

DOI: 10.1021/bi9014902
PMCID: PMC2764801
PMID: 19769407 [Indexed for MEDLINE]