1. J RNAi Gene Silencing. 2005 Jul 28;1(1):32-7.

Selective DNAzyme-mediated cleavage of AChR mutant transcripts by targeting the 
mutation site or through mismatches in the binding arm.

Abdelgany A(1), Ealing J, Wood M, Beeson D.

Author information:
(1)Neurosciences Group, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University 
of Oxford, The John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford OX3 9DS, UK.

Many dominantly inherited disorders are caused by missense amino acid 
substitutions resulting from a single nucleotide exchange in the encoding gene. 
For these disorders, where proteins expressed from the mutant alleles are often 
pathogenic and present throughout life, gene silencing, through intervention at 
the mRNA level, holds promise as a therapeutic approach. We have used mutations 
that underlie the slow channel congenital myasthenic syndrome (SCCMS) as a model 
system to study allele-specific gene silencing of RNA transcripts by DNAzymes. 
We tested the ability of DNAzymes to give allele-specific cleavage for i) 
mutations that create cleavage sites, and ii) mutations located close to a 
DNAzyme cleavage site that create a potential mismatch in the binding arms. For 
both we demonstrate selective cleavage of mutant transcripts under simulated 
physiological conditions. For DNAzymes with binding arm mismatches the degree of 
selectivity for mutant over wild type may be enhanced by optimising the mismatch 
position as well as the binding arm length. The optimal sites for mismatches are 
1.1 and 1.2 in arm I, and 16.2 in arm II. Asymmetric binding arm DNAzymes with a 
shorter arm I are more discriminative. Our results show it should be possible to 
apply DNAzyme-mediated cleavage of mutant alleles even when the mutant does not 
itself create a putative cleavage site. This therapeutic approach may be well 
suited to dominantly inherited disorders such as SCCMS, where loss of some wild 
type transcripts is unlikely to have pathogenic consequences.

PMCID: PMC2737196
PMID: 19771202

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declared no competing interests.