1. PLoS One. 2009 Sep 29;4(9):e7271. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007271.

Transcriptional profiling of rats subjected to gestational undernourishment: 
implications for the developmental variations in metabolic traits.

Morris TJ(1), Vickers M, Gluckman P, Gilmour S, Affara N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, England. 
tjm42@cam.ac.uk

A link has been established between prenatal nutrition and the development of 
metabolic and cardiovascular diseases later in life, a process referred to as 
developmental programming. It has been suggested that the trajectory of 
development is shifted by alterations in the maternal nutritional state leading 
to changes in developmental plasticity, in part underpinned by epigenetic 
changes in gene regulation. However, to date, only candidate gene approaches 
have been used to assess expression and molecular changes in the offspring of 
maternally undernourished animals. Furthermore, most work has focused on animals 
at an age where the programmed phenotype is already manifest and little is known 
about changes in gene expression in the offspring prior to development of 
obesity and related metabolic disorders. Gene expression profiles of liver, 
retroperitoneal white adipose fat, and biceps femoris skeletal muscle tissue 
from young adult male rats (55 days old) in which nutritional status had been 
manipulated in utero by maternal undernutrition (UN) were compared to the 
profiles of offspring of ad libitum fed mothers serving as the control group 
(AD) (8 offspring/group). The expression profiles were determined using the 
Illumina RatRef-12 BeadChip. No significant changes in expression were 
identified for skeletal muscle or white adipose tissue. However, studies of 
liver tissue showed 249 differentially expressed genes (143 up regulated, 106 
down regulated). Although the animals at day 55 have yet to develop obesity they 
already show biochemical abnormalities and by day 110 express a phenotype 
characterized by increased adiposity and altered insulin sensitivity. An 
analysis of pathways affected suggests that intrauterine programming of UN 
animals to favor fat as an energy source results in mitochondrial dysfunction 
which initially affects the postnatal hepatic function and subsequently, via the 
resultant metabolic changes in other organs leads to the evolution of a 
phenotype similar to that of the metabolic syndrome.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007271
PMCID: PMC2749934
PMID: 19787071 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.