1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009 Nov;94(11):4367-71. doi: 10.1210/jc.2009-1479. 
Epub 2009 Oct 6.

Parasympathetic paragangliomas are part of the Von Hippel-Lindau syndrome.

Gaal J(1), van Nederveen FH, Erlic Z, Korpershoek E, Oldenburg R, Boedeker CC, 
Kontny U, Neumann HP, Dinjens WN, de Krijger RR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Josephine Nefkens Institute, Erasmus MC, University 
Medical Center Rotterdam, 3000 CA Rotterdam, The Netherlands. 
j.gaal@erasmusmc.nl

CONTEXT: Von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease, caused by germline mutations in the 
VHL gene, is a hereditary tumor syndrome manifested by hemangioblastomas, clear 
cell renal cell carcinomas, and pheochromocytomas. In addition, a multitude of 
other rare tumors, including parasympathetic paragangliomas, can occur and even 
be the sole manifestation of VHL disease. The VHL gene is a bona fide tumor 
suppressor gene with biallelic inactivation contributing to tumor formation. 
However, in parasympathetic paragangliomas occurring in VHL disease, biallelic 
inactivation of the VHL gene has not been demonstrated to date.
DESIGN: The head and neck paragangliomas of two VHL patients were analyzed for 
mutations by direct sequencing of the VHL gene. In addition loss of 
heterozygosity analysis was performed for three microsatellite loci near the VHL 
gene. To rule out other underlying genetic causes of the parasympathetic 
paragangliomas, mutation analysis of the SDHB, SDHC, and SDHD genes was also 
performed.
RESULTS: Apart from germline VHL mutations, no additional mutations were found 
in the paraganglioma-related tumor suppressor genes SDHB, SDHC, and SDHD. 
Analysis of paraganglioma tissue revealed loss of the VHL wild-type allele in 
both tumors, indicating that in these tumors biallelic VHL gene inactivation 
occurred.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings indicate that parasympathetic paragangliomas in VHL 
disease, although rare, are part of the syndrome and related to VHL gene 
inactivation. Clinicians should be aware of the potential occurrence of 
parasympathetic paragangliomas in VHL disease.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2009-1479
PMID: 19808854 [Indexed for MEDLINE]