1. J Psychiatr Res. 2010 Apr;44(5):278-85. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2009.09.006.
 Epub 2009 Oct 8.

Bipolar disorder comorbid with alcoholism: a 1H magnetic resonance spectroscopy 
study.

Nery FG(1), Stanley JA, Chen HH, Hatch JP, Nicoletti MA, Monkul ES, Lafer B, 
Soares JC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, The University of Texas Health Science Center at 
San Antonio, San Antonio, TX, USA.

Alcoholism is highly prevalent among bipolar disorder (BD) patients, and its 
presence is associated with a worse outcome and refractoriness to treatment of 
the mood disorder. The neurobiological underpinnings that characterize this 
comorbidity are unknown. We sought to investigate the neurochemical profile of 
the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) of BD patients with comorbid 
alcoholism. A short-TE, single-voxel (1)H spectroscopy acquisition at 1.5T from 
the left DLFPC of 22 alcoholic BD patients, 26 non-alcoholic BD patients and 54 
healthy comparison subjects (HC) were obtained. Absolute levels of N-acetyl 
aspartate, phosphocreatine plus creatine, choline-containing compounds, 
myo-inositol, glutamate plus glutamine (Glu+Gln) and glutamate were obtained 
using the water signal as an internal reference. Analysis of co-variance was 
used to compare metabolite levels among the three groups. In the primary 
comparison, non-alcoholic BD patients had higher glutamate concentrations 
compared to alcoholic BD patients. In secondary comparisons integrating 
interactions between gender and alcoholism, non-alcoholic BD patients presented 
significantly higher glutamate plus glutamine (Glu+Gln) than alcoholic BD 
patients and HC. These results appeared to be driven by differences in male 
subjects. Alcoholic BD patients with additional drug use disorders presented 
significantly lower myo-inositol than BD patients with alcoholism alone. The 
co-occurrence of BD and alcoholism may be characterized by neurochemical 
abnormalities related to the glutamatergic system and to the inositol second 
messenger system and/or in glial pathology. These abnormalities may be the 
neurochemical correlate of an increased risk to develop alcoholism in BD, or of 
a persistently worse clinical and functional status in BD patients in remission 
from alcoholism, supporting the clinical recommendation that efforts should be 
made to prevent or early diagnose and treat alcoholism in BD patients.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2009.09.006
PMCID: PMC2836426
PMID: 19818454 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST Fabiano G. Nery currently 
holds a temporary position as medical manager for Eli Lilly Brazil. E. Serap 
Monkul is an employee of Eli Lilly Brazil. Jair C. Soares has been a speaker for 
Lilly, AstraZeneca and BMS, has received research grants from Pfizer and 
Repligen and has been a consultant for Organon and Shire. The other authors do 
not have any commercial associations that might pose a conflict of interest in 
connection with this manuscript.