1. Biochemistry. 2009 Nov 24;48(46):10997-1010. doi: 10.1021/bi9008374.

Tryptophan synthase: structure and function of the monovalent cation site.

Dierkers AT(1), Niks D, Schlichting I, Dunn MF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of California, Riverside, California 
92521, USA.

The monovalent cation (MVC) site of the tryptophan synthase from Salmonella 
typhimurium plays essential roles in catalysis and in the regulation of 
substrate channeling. In vitro, MVCs affect the equilibrium distribution of 
intermediates formed in the reaction of l-Ser with the alpha(2)beta(2) complex; 
the MVC-free, Cs(+)-bound, and NH(4)(+)-bound enzymes stabilize the 
alpha-aminoacrylate species, E(A-A), while Na(+) binding stabilizes the l-Ser 
external aldimine species, E(Aex(1)). Two probes of beta-site reactivity and 
conformation were used herein, the reactive indole analogue, indoline, and the 
l-Trp analogue, l-His. MVC-bound E(A-A) reacts rapidly with indoline to give the 
indoline quinonoid species, E(Q)(indoline), which slowly converts to 
dihydroiso-l-tryptophan. MVC-free E(A-A) gives very little E(Q)(indoline), and 
turnover is strongly impaired; the fraction of E(Q)(indoline) formed is <3.5% of 
that given by the Na(+)-bound form. The reaction of l-Ser with the MVC-free 
internal aldimine species, E(Ain), initially gives small amounts of an active 
E(A-A) which converts to an inactive species on a slower, conformational, time 
scale. This inactivation is abolished by the binding of MVCs. The inactive 
E(A-A) appears to have a closed beta-subunit conformation with an altered 
substrate binding site that is different from the known conformations of 
tryptophan synthase. Reaction of l-His with E(Ain) gives an equilibrating 
mixture of external aldimine and quinonoid species, E(Aex)(his) and E(Q)(his). 
The MVC-free and Na(+) forms of the enzyme gave trace amounts of E(Q)(his) ( 
approximately 1% of the beta-sites). The Cs(+) and NH(4)(+) forms gave 
approximately 17 and approximately 14%, respectively. The reactivity of MVC-free 
E(Ain) was restored by the binding of an alpha-site ligand. These studies show 
MVCs and alpha-site ligands act synergistically to modulate the switching of the 
beta-subunit from the open to the closed conformation, and this switching is 
crucial to the regulation of beta-site catalytic activity. Comparison of the 
structures of Na(+) and Cs(+) forms of the enzyme shows Cs(+) favors complexes 
with open indole binding sites poised for the conformational transition to the 
closed state, whereas the Na(+) form does not. The beta-subunits of Cs(+) 
complexes exhibit preformed indole subsites; the indole subsites of the open 
Na(+) complexes are collapsed, distorted, and too small to accommodate indole.

DOI: 10.1021/bi9008374
PMCID: PMC3424278
PMID: 19848417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]