1. J Am Chem Soc. 2009 Nov 18;131(45):16500-8. doi: 10.1021/ja905929c.

Unprecedented glycosidase activity at a lectin carbohydrate-binding site 
exemplified by the cyanobacterial lectin MVL.

Shahzad-ul-Hussan S(1), Cai M, Bewley CA.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Bioorganic Chemistry, National Institute of Diabetes and 
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 
20892, USA.

Carbohydrate binding proteins, or lectins, are engendered with the ability to 
bind specific carbohydrate structures, thereby mediating cell-cell and 
cell-pathogen interactions. Lectins are distinct from carbohydrate modifying 
enzymes and antibodies, respectively, as they do not carry out glycosidase or 
glycosyl transferase reactions, and they are of nonimmune origin. Cyanobacterial 
and algal lectins have become prominent in recent years due to their unique 
biophysical traits, such as exhibiting novel protein folds and unusually high 
carbohydrate affinity, and ability to potently inhibit HIV-1 entry through high 
affinity carbohydrate-mediated interactions with the HIV envelope glycoprotein 
gp120. The antiviral cyanobacterial lectin Microcystis viridis lectin (MVL), 
which contains two high affinity oligomannose binding sites, is one such 
example. Here we used glycan microarray profiling, NMR spectroscopy, and 
mutagenesis to show that one of the two oligomannose binding sites of MVL can 
catalyze the cleavage of chitin fragments (such as chitotriose) to GlcNAc, to 
determine the mode of MVL binding to and cleavage of chitotriose, to identify 
Asp75 as the primary catalytic residue involved in this cleavage, and to solve 
the solution structure of an inactive mutant of MVL in complex with this 
unexpected substrate. These studies represent the first demonstration of dual 
catalytic activity and carbohydrate recognition for discrete oligosaccharides at 
the same carbohydrate-binding site in a lectin. Sequence comparisons between the 
N- and C-domains of MVL, together with the sequences of new MVL homologues 
identified through bioinformatics, provide insight into the evolving roles of 
carbohydrate recognition.

DOI: 10.1021/ja905929c
PMCID: PMC2792741
PMID: 19856962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]