1. BMC Neurosci. 2009 Oct 27;10:130. doi: 10.1186/1471-2202-10-130.

Progranulin is expressed within motor neurons and promotes neuronal cell 
survival.

Ryan CL(1), Baranowski DC, Chitramuthu BP, Malik S, Li Z, Cao M, Minotti S, 
Durham HD, Kay DG, Shaw CA, Bennett HP, Bateman A.

Author information:
(1)Royal Victoria Hospital and Department of Medicine, McGill University Health 
Centre Research Institute, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. cara.ryan@mail.mcgill.ca

BACKGROUND: Progranulin is a secreted high molecular weight growth factor 
bearing seven and one half copies of the cysteine-rich granulin-epithelin motif. 
While inappropriate over-expression of the progranulin gene has been associated 
with many cancers, haploinsufficiency leads to atrophy of the frontotemporal 
lobes and development of a form of dementia (frontotemporal lobar degeneration 
with ubiquitin positive inclusions, FTLD-U) associated with the formation of 
ubiquitinated inclusions. Recent reports indicate that progranulin has 
neurotrophic effects, which, if confirmed would make progranulin the only 
neuroprotective growth factor that has been associated genetically with a 
neurological disease in humans. Preliminary studies indicated high progranulin 
gene expression in spinal cord motor neurons. However, it is uncertain what the 
role of Progranulin is in normal or diseased motor neuron function. We have 
investigated progranulin gene expression and subcellular localization in 
cultured mouse embryonic motor neurons and examined the effect of progranulin 
over-expression and knockdown in the NSC-34 immortalized motor neuron cell line 
upon proliferation and survival.
RESULTS: In situ hybridisation and immunohistochemical techniques revealed that 
the progranulin gene is highly expressed by motor neurons within the mouse 
spinal cord and in primary cultures of dissociated mouse embryonic spinal 
cord-dorsal root ganglia. Confocal microscopy coupled to immunocytochemistry 
together with the use of a progranulin-green fluorescent protein fusion 
construct revealed progranulin to be located within compartments of the 
secretory pathway including the Golgi apparatus. Stable transfection of the 
human progranulin gene into the NSC-34 motor neuron cell line stimulates the 
appearance of dendritic structures and provides sufficient trophic stimulus to 
survive serum deprivation for long periods (up to two months). This is mediated 
at least in part through an anti-apoptotic mechanism. Control cells, while 
expressing basal levels of progranulin do not survive in serum free conditions. 
Knockdown of progranulin expression using shRNA technology further reduced cell 
survival.
CONCLUSION: Neurons are among the most long-lived cells in the body and are 
subject to low levels of toxic challenges throughout life. We have demonstrated 
that progranulin is abundantly expressed in motor neurons and is cytoprotective 
over prolonged periods when over-expressed in a neuronal cell line. This work 
highlights the importance of progranulin as neuroprotective growth factor and 
may represent a therapeutic target for neurodegenerative diseases including 
motor neuron disease.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2202-10-130
PMCID: PMC2779192
PMID: 19860916 [Indexed for MEDLINE]