1. Am J Ophthalmol. 2009 Nov;148(5):733-743.e2. doi: 10.1016/j.ajo.2009.06.028.

Reticular macular disease.

Smith RT(1), Sohrab MA, Busuioc M, Barile G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA. 
rts1@columbia.edu

PURPOSE: To present a unified description of reticular macular disease (RMD), a 
common clinical entity that includes reticular pseudodrusen (RPD) and confers 
high-risk of progression to advanced age-related macular degeneration.
DESIGN: Population-based, retrospective, cross-sectional study. Forty-two 
patients with reticular findings in at least one imaging method, of whom 21 were 
followed up.
METHODS: RMD was defined as RPD in color or red-free photography, in a reticular 
pattern on scanning laser ophthalmoscope imaging (autofluorescence scans, 
infrared photographs, or indocyanine green angiography), or both. Color and 
red-free images were contrast-enhanced, and color photographs were examined in 
green and blue channels. Image registration in different methods allowed 
comparison of areas involved and assessment of lesion colocalization.
RESULTS: RMD generally was present in both photography and scanning laser 
ophthalmoscope imaging. When present in two image methods, areas of RMD either 
largely overlapped or one fell within the other. Individual lesions had high 
spatial correspondence. Serial imaging showed faded to absent findings in eyes 
in which choroidal neovascularization developed.
CONCLUSIONS: RMD is a single disease entity with stereotypical presentations in 
multiple imaging methods, of which RPD is one. Autofluorescence, infrared 
imaging, and indocyanine green angiography suggest that it involves the retinal 
pigment epithelium and choriocapillaris, whereas photographic patterns implicate 
the inner choroid. Infrared imaging, unlike other methods, can demonstrate RMD 
in the central macula. RMD is associated with progression to advanced 
age-related macular degeneration, perhaps on an inflammatory basis. RMD deserves 
wider recognition among clinicians caring for elderly patients.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajo.2009.06.028
PMCID: PMC2786242
PMID: 19878758 [Indexed for MEDLINE]