1. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2010 Apr;48(4):746-56. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2009.11.002. 
Epub 2009 Nov 11.

deltaPKC inhibition or varepsilonPKC activation repairs endothelial vascular 
dysfunction by regulating eNOS post-translational modification.

Monti M(1), Donnini S, Giachetti A, Mochly-Rosen D, Ziche M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Siena, Via Aldo Moro, 2, 
53100, Siena, Italy.

The balance between endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS)-derived nitric 
oxide (NO) and reactive oxygen species (ROS) production determines 
endothelial-mediated vascular homeostasis. Activation of protein kinase C (PKC) 
has been linked to imbalance of the eNOS/ROS system, which leads to endothelial 
dysfunction. We previously found that selective inhibition of delta PKC 
(deltaPKC) or selective activation of epsilon PKC (varepsilonPKC) reduces 
oxidative damage in the heart following myocardial infarction. In this study we 
determined the effect of these PKC isozymes in the survival of coronary 
endothelial cells (CVEC). We demonstrate here that serum deprivation of CVEC 
increased eNOS-mediated ROS levels, activated caspase-3, reduced Akt 
phosphorylation and cell number. Treatment with either the deltaPKC inhibitor, 
deltaV1-1, or the varepsilonPKC activator, psivarepsilonRACK, inhibited these 
effects, restoring cell survival through inhibition of eNOS activity. The 
decrease in eNOS activity coincided with specific de-phosphorylation of eNOS at 
Ser1179, and eNOS phosphorylation at Thr497 and Ser116. Furthermore, deltaV1-1 
or psivarepsilonRACK induced physical association of eNOS with caveolin-1, an 
additional marker of eNOS inhibition, and restored Akt activation by inhibiting 
its nitration. Together our data demonstrate that (1) in endothelial 
dysfunction, ROS and reactive nitrogen species (RNS) formation result from 
uncontrolled eNOS activity mediated by activation of deltaPKC or inhibition of 
varepsilonPKC; (2) inhibition of deltaPKC or activation of varepsilonPKC 
corrects the perturbed phosphorylation state of eNOS, thus increasing cell 
survival. Since endothelial health ensures better tissue perfusion and 
oxygenation, treatment with a deltaPKC inhibitor and/or an varepsilonPKC 
activator in diseases of endothelial dysfunction should be considered.

Copyright (c) 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2009.11.002
PMCID: PMC3760592
PMID: 19913548 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement DM-R is the 
founder and share-holder of KAI Pharmaceuticals. However, none of the work in 
her laboratory is in collaboration with or supported by the company. The other 
authors have no conflicts of interest pursuant to the current work.