1. PLoS One. 2009 Nov 24;4(11):e7985. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007985.

Bacterial microbiota profiling in gastritis without Helicobacter pylori 
infection or non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug use.

Li XX(1), Wong GL, To KF, Wong VW, Lai LH, Chow DK, Lau JY, Sung JJ, Ding C.

Author information:
(1)Stanley Ho Centre for Emerging Infectious Diseases, The Chinese University of 
Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.

Recent 16S ribosomal RNA gene (rRNA) molecular profiling of the stomach mucosa 
revealed a surprising complexity of microbiota. Helicobacter pylori infection 
and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) use are two main contributors 
to gastritis and peptic ulcer. However, little is known about the association 
between other members of the stomach microbiota and gastric diseases. In this 
study, cloning and sequencing of the 16S rRNA was used to profile the stomach 
microbiota from normal and gastritis patients. One hundred and thirty three 
phylotypes from eight bacterial phyla were identified. The stomach microbiota 
was found to be closely adhered to the mucosa. Eleven Streptococcus phylotypes 
were successfully cultivated from the biopsies. One to two genera represented a 
majority of clones within any of the identified phyla. We further developed two 
real-time quantitative PCR assays to quantify the relative abundance of the 
Firmicutes phylum and the Streptococcus genus. Significantly higher abundance of 
the Firmicutes phylum and the Streptococcus genus within the Firmicutes phylum 
was observed in patients with antral gastritis, compared with normal controls. 
This study suggests that the genus taxon level can largely represent much higher 
taxa such as the phylum. The clinical relevance and the mechanism underlying the 
altered microbiota composition in gastritis require further functional studies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007985
PMCID: PMC2776972
PMID: 19956741 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.