1. PLoS One. 2009 Nov 24;4(11):e7990. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007990.

Detection of sub-clinical CWD infection in conventional test-negative deer long 
after oral exposure to urine and feces from CWD+ deer.

Haley NJ(1), Mathiason CK, Zabel MD, Telling GC, Hoover EA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical 
Sciences, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, Colorado, United States of 
America.

BACKGROUND: Chronic wasting disease (CWD) of cervids is a prion disease 
distinguished by high levels of transmissibility, wherein bodily fluids and 
excretions are thought to play an important role. Using cervid bioassay and 
established CWD detection methods, we have previously identified infectious 
prions in saliva and blood but not urine or feces of CWD+ donors. More recently, 
we identified very low concentrations of CWD prions in urine of deer by cervid 
PrP transgenic (Tg[CerPrP]) mouse bioassay and serial protein misfolding cyclic 
amplification (sPMCA). This finding led us to examine further our initial cervid 
bioassay experiments using sPMCA.
OBJECTIVES: We sought to investigate whether conventional test-negative deer, 
previously exposed orally to urine and feces from CWD+ sources, may be harboring 
low level CWD infection not evident in the 19 month observation period. We 
further attempted to determine the peripheral PrP(CWD) distribution in these 
animals.
METHODS: Various neural and lymphoid tissues from conventional test-negative 
deer were reanalyzed for CWD prions by sPMCA and cervid transgenic mouse 
bioassay in parallel with appropriate tissue-matched positive and negative 
controls.
RESULTS: PrP(CWD) was detected in the tissues of orally exposed deer by both 
sPMCA and Tg[CerPrP] mouse bioassay; each assay revealed very low levels of CWD 
prions previously undetectable by western blot, ELISA, or IHC. Serial PMCA 
analysis of individual tissues identified that obex alone was positive in 4 of 5 
urine/feces exposed deer. PrP(CWD) was amplified from both lymphoid and neural 
tissues of positive control deer but not from identical tissues of negative 
control deer.
DISCUSSION: Detection of subclinical infection in deer orally exposed to urine 
and feces (1) suggests that a prolonged subclinical state can exist, 
necessitating observation periods in excess of two years to detect CWD 
infection, and (2) illustrates the sensitive and specific application of sPMCA 
in the diagnosis of low-level prion infection. Based on these results, it is 
possible that low doses of prions, e.g. following oral exposure to urine and 
saliva of CWD-infected deer, bypass significant amplification in the LRS, 
perhaps utilizing a neural conduit between the alimentary tract and CNS, as has 
been demonstrated in some other prion diseases.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007990
PMCID: PMC2776529
PMID: 19956732 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.