1. PLoS Pathog. 2009 Nov;5(11):e1000676. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000676. Epub 
2009 Nov 26.

Evidence that two ATP-dependent (Lon) proteases in Borrelia burgdorferi serve 
different functions.

Coleman JL(1), Katona LI, Kuhlow C, Toledo A, Okan NA, Tokarz R, Benach JL.

Author information:
(1)State of New York Department of Health, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, 
New York, United States of America. jcoleman@notes.cc.sunysb.edu

The canonical ATP-dependent protease Lon participates in an assortment of 
biological processes in bacteria, including the catalysis of damaged or 
senescent proteins and short-lived regulatory proteins. Borrelia spirochetes are 
unusual in that they code for two putative ATP-dependent Lon homologs, Lon-1 and 
Lon-2. Borrelia burgdorferi, the etiologic agent of Lyme disease, is transmitted 
through the blood feeding of Ixodes ticks. Previous work in our laboratory 
reported that B. burgdorferi lon-1 is upregulated transcriptionally by exposure 
to blood in vitro, while lon-2 is not. Because blood induction of Lon-1 may be 
of importance in the regulation of virulence factors critical for spirochete 
transmission, the clarification of functional roles for these two proteases in 
B. burgdorferi was the object of this study. On the chromosome, lon-2 is 
immediately downstream of ATP-dependent proteases clpP and clpX, an arrangement 
identical to that of lon of Escherichia coli. Phylogenetic analysis revealed 
that Lon-1 and Lon-2 cluster separately due to differences in the NH(2)-terminal 
substrate binding domains that may reflect differences in substrate specificity. 
Recombinant Lon-1 manifested properties of an ATP-dependent chaperone-protease 
in vitro but did not complement an E. coli Lon mutant, while Lon-2 corrected two 
characteristic Lon-mutant phenotypes. We conclude that B. burgdorferi Lons -1 
and -2 have distinct functional roles. Lon-2 functions in a manner consistent 
with canonical Lon, engaged in cellular homeostasis. Lon-1, by virtue of its 
blood induction, and as a unique feature of the Borreliae, may be important in 
host adaptation from the arthropod to a warm-blooded host.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000676
PMCID: PMC2777506
PMID: 19956677 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.