1. Arch Neurol. 2009 Dec;66(12):1537-44. doi: 10.1001/archneurol.2009.285.

High striatal amyloid beta-peptide deposition across different autosomal 
Alzheimer disease mutation types.

Villemagne VL(1), Ataka S, Mizuno T, Brooks WS, Wada Y, Kondo M, Jones G, 
Watanabe Y, Mulligan R, Nakagawa M, Miki T, Shimada H, O'Keefe GJ, Masters CL, 
Mori H, Rowe CC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Centre for Positron Emission Tomography, 
Austin Health, Heidelberg, Australia. villemagne@petnm.unimelb.edu.au

BACKGROUND: Supported by compelling genetic data regarding early-onset familial 
Alzheimer disease (AD), the amyloid beta-peptide (Abeta)-centric theory holds 
that Abeta is involved in the pathogenesis of sporadic AD. Mutations in the 
amyloid precursor protein (APP), presenilin 1 (PSEN1), and presenilin 2 (PSEN2) 
genes lead to increased Abeta levels before symptoms arise.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the pattern of Pittsburgh Compound B (PiB) retention in 
subjects with different autosomal dominant mutations associated with familial AD 
vs that in healthy age-matched control subjects and subjects with probable 
sporadic AD, to correlate Abeta burden as measured by PiB with available 
clinical and cognitive data, and to compare the regional brain patterns of PiB 
retention and fluorodeoxyglucose F 18 (FDG) uptake.
DESIGN: Correlation analysis of positron emission tomography (PET) imaging 
studies.
SETTING: Academic research.
PARTICIPANTS: Seven PSEN1 mutation carriers and 1 APP mutation carrier underwent 
PiB and FDG PET imaging. Amyloid beta-peptide burden and FDG uptake were 
established using standardized uptake values normalized to pons.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE: Primary outcomes were PET results, which were compared 
with those of a well-characterized cohort of 30 healthy control subjects and 30 
subjects with probable sporadic AD.
RESULTS: All mutation carriers had high PiB retention in the striatum, with some 
also having cortical PiB retention in ventrofrontal and posterior 
cingulate/precuneus areas. The striatal pattern of PiB retention was similar in 
the PSEN1 and APP mutation carriers. Neither striatal nor cortical Abeta burden 
was related to cognitive status.
CONCLUSIONS: Consistent with previous studies, the pattern of Abeta deposition 
in familial AD differs from that in sporadic AD, with higher striatal and 
somewhat lower cortical PiB retention in familial AD. The pattern and degree of 
Abeta deposition were not associated with mutation type nor cognitive status.

DOI: 10.1001/archneurol.2009.285
PMID: 20008660 [Indexed for MEDLINE]