1. PLoS One. 2009 Dec 16;4(12):e8292. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008292.

Cardiac glycosides induce cell death in human cells by inhibiting general 
protein synthesis.

Perne A(1), Muellner MK, Steinrueck M, Craig-Mueller N, Mayerhofer J, 
Schwarzinger I, Sloane M, Uras IZ, Hoermann G, Nijman SM, Mayerhofer M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical and Chemical Laboratory Diagnostics, Medical University 
of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

BACKGROUND: Cardiac glycosides are Na(+)/K(+)-pump inhibitors widely used to 
treat heart failure. They are also highly cytotoxic, and studies have suggested 
specific anti-tumor activity leading to current clinical trials in cancer 
patients. However, a definitive demonstration of this putative anti-cancer 
activity and the underlying molecular mechanism has remained elusive.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Using an unbiased transcriptomics approach, we 
found that cardiac glycosides inhibit general protein synthesis. Protein 
synthesis inhibition and cytotoxicity were not specific for cancer cells as they 
were observed in both primary and cancer cell lines. These effects were 
dependent on the Na(+)/K(+)-pump as they were rescued by expression of a cardiac 
glycoside-resistant Na(+)/K(+)-pump. Unlike human cells, rodent cells are 
largely resistant to cardiac glycosides in vitro and mice were found to tolerate 
extremely high levels.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The physiological difference between human and mouse 
explains the previously observed sensitivity of human cancer cells in mouse 
xenograft experiments. Thus, published mouse xenograft models used to support 
anti-tumor activity for these drugs require reevaluation. Our finding that 
cardiac glycosides inhibit protein synthesis provides a mechanism for the 
cytotoxicity of CGs and raises concerns about ongoing clinical trials to test 
CGs as anti-cancer agents in humans.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008292
PMCID: PMC2788214
PMID: 20016840 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.