1. J Biol Chem. 1991 Mar 15;266(8):5260-7.

Insulin resistance and diabetes due to different mutations in the tyrosine 
kinase domain of both insulin receptor gene alleles.

Kusari J(1), Takata Y, Hatada E, Freidenberg G, Kolterman O, Olefsky JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, La Jolla 92093.

Mutations in the insulin receptor gene can lead to in vivo and in vitro insulin 
resistance and can be the cause of diabetes mellitus in selected patients. We 
have studied a 22-year-old diabetic woman with Type A insulin resistance and 
acanthosis nigricans. Insulin binding to the patient's erythrocytes, monocytes, 
adipocytes, fibroblasts, and transformed lymphocytes was decreased. Receptor 
autophosphorylation and tyrosine kinase activity toward an exogenous substrate 
were reduced in partially purified insulin receptors from the proband's 
transformed lymphocytes. Determination of the nucleotide sequence of the 
patient's insulin receptor cDNA revealed that the subject was a compound 
heterozygote who inherited two different mutant insulin receptor gene alleles. 
The paternal allele contains a missense mutation encoding the substitution of 
glutamine for arginine at position 981 in the tyrosine kinase domain of the 
receptor. The maternal allele contains a nonsense mutation causing premature 
termination after amino acid 988 in the beta-subunit, thereby deleting most of 
the kinase domain. The mRNA encoded by the allele with the premature stop codon 
is likely to be unstable, since mRNA transcripts from this allele were decreased 
markedly compared with the other allele. The mother, who is heterozygous for the 
nonsense mutation, exhibited only mild insulin resistance, whereas the proband 
was severely insulin-resistant; this indicates that the missense mutation is 
biologically significant. In summary, (1) we have identified a patient and her 
family with a genetic form of insulin resistance and diabetes due to a defect at 
the level of the insulin receptor; (2) the proband is a compound heterozygote 
displaying a missense mutation (position 981) in one allele and a nonsense 
mutation (position 988) in the other insulin receptor gene allele; (3) the 
missense mutation is in the kinase domain and encodes a receptor with impaired 
in vitro kinase activity; and (4) based on the in vitro and in vivo phenotype, 
the kinase domain mutation at position 981 is biologically significant leading 
to insulin resistance.

PMID: 2002058 [Indexed for MEDLINE]