1. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2010 Feb;65(2):224-7. doi: 10.1093/jac/dkp452. Epub
2009  Dec 22.

Genetic analysis of extensively drug-resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
strains in Lisbon, Portugal.

Perdigão J(1), Macedo R, Malaquias A, Ferreira A, Brum L, Portugal I.

Author information:
(1)Centro de Patogénese Molecular, URIA, Universidade de Lisboa, 1649-003 
Lisbon, Portugal.

OBJECTIVES: Extensively drug-resistant (XDR) tuberculosis (TB) threatens the 
global control of TB worldwide. Lisbon has a high XDR-TB rate [50% of the 
multidrug-resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB)], which is mainly associated with 
Lisboa family strains. Few studies have addressed the identification of 
mutations associated with resistance to second-line injectable drugs, and the 
relative frequency of such mutations varies geographically. The aim of this 
study was to characterize the genetic changes associated with the high number of 
XDR-TB cases in Lisbon.
METHODS: In the present study we analysed 26 XDR-TB clinical isolates. The gyrA, 
tlyA and rrs genes were screened for mutations that could be responsible for 
resistance to fluoroquinolones and second-line injectable drugs. Moreover, the 
strains under analysis were also genotyped by MIRU-VNTR ('mycobacterial 
interspersed repetitive unit-variable number of tandem repeats').
RESULTS: The mutational analysis identified the most frequent mutations in the 
resistance-associated genes: S91P in gyrA (42.3%); A1401G in rrs (30.8%); and 
Ins755GT in tlyA (42.3%). The occurrence of mutations in rrs was associated with 
the non-occurrence of mutations in tlyA. The genotypic analysis revealed that 
the strains were highly clonal, belonging to one of two MIRU-VNTR clusters, with 
the largest belonging to the Lisboa family. Association between mutations in 
gyrA and rrs or tlyA was verified.
CONCLUSIONS: The association of specific mutations highlighted the strains' high 
clonality and indicates recent XDR-TB transmission. In addition, the 
identification of the most frequent resistance-associated mutations will be 
invaluable in applying XDR-TB molecular detection tests in the region in the 
near future.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/dkp452
PMID: 20028780 [Indexed for MEDLINE]