1. Proteome Sci. 2009 Dec 24;7:46. doi: 10.1186/1477-5956-7-46.

Quantitative mass spectrometry of TATA binding protein-containing complexes and 
subunit phosphorylations during the cell cycle.

Pijnappel WP(#)(1), Kolkman A(#)(2), Baltissen MP(1), Heck AJ(2), Timmers HM(1).

Author information:
(1)Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Department of Physiological Chemistry, 
University Medical Center Utrecht, Universiteitsweg 100, 3584 CG Utrecht, the 
Netherlands.
(2)Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics 
Group, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Faculty of Science, Padualaan 8, 
3584 CH Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Progression through the cell cycle is accompanied by tightly 
controlled regulation of transcription. On one hand, a subset of genes is 
expressed in a cell cycle-dependent manner. On the other hand, a general 
inhibition of transcription occurs during mitosis. Genetic and genome-wide 
studies suggest cell cycle regulation at the level of transcription initiation 
by protein complexes containing the common DNA-binding subunit TATA binding 
protein (TBP). TBP is a key player in regulating transcription by all three 
nuclear RNA polymerases. It forms at least four distinct protein complexes with 
TBP-associated factors (TAFs): SL1, B-TFIID, TFIID, and TFIIIB. Some TAFs are 
known to remain associated with TBP during the cell cycle. Here we analyze all 
TAFs and their phosphorylation status during the cell cycle using a quantitative 
mass spectrometry approach.
RESULTS: TBP protein complexes present in human cells at the G2/M and G1/S 
transitions were analyzed by combining affinity purification with quantitative 
mass spectrometry using stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture 
(SILAC). Phosphorylations were mapped and quantified after enrichment of tryptic 
peptides by titanium dioxide. This revealed that subunit stoichiometries of TBP 
complexes remained intact, but their relative abundances in nuclear extracts 
changed during the cell cycle. Several novel phosphorylations were detected on 
subunits of the TBP complexes TFIID and SL1. G2/M-specific phosphorylations were 
detected on TAF1, TAF4, TAF7, and TAFI41/TAF1D, and G1/S-specific 
dephosphorylations were detected on TAF3. Many phosphorylated residues were 
evolutionary conserved from human to zebrafish and/or drosophila, and were 
present in conserved regions suggesting important regulatory functions.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides the first quantitative proteomic analysis of 
human TBP containing protein complexes at the G2/M and G1/S transitions, and 
identifies new cell cycle-dependent phosphorylations on TAFs present in their 
protein complex. We speculate that phosphorylation of complex-specific subunits 
may be involved in regulating the activities of TBP protein complexes during the 
cell cycle.

DOI: 10.1186/1477-5956-7-46
PMCID: PMC2804597
PMID: 20034391