1. PLoS One. 2010 Jan 6;5(1):e8519. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008519.

Failure to detect the novel retrovirus XMRV in chronic fatigue syndrome.

Erlwein O(1), Kaye S, McClure MO, Weber J, Wills G, Collier D, Wessely S, Cleare 
A.

Author information:
(1)Jefferiss Research Trust Laboratories, Section of Infectious Diseases, 
Wright-Fleming Institute, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, St 
Mary's Campus, Norfolk Place, London, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: In October 2009 it was reported that 68 of 101 patients with chronic 
fatigue syndrome (CFS) in the US were infected with a novel gamma retrovirus, 
xenotropic murine leukaemia virus-related virus (XMRV), a virus previously 
linked to prostate cancer. This finding, if confirmed, would have a profound 
effect on the understanding and treatment of an incapacitating disease affecting 
millions worldwide. We have investigated CFS sufferers in the UK to determine if 
they are carriers of XMRV.
METHODOLOGY: Patients in our CFS cohort had undergone medical screening to 
exclude detectable organic illness and met the CDC criteria for CFS. DNA 
extracted from blood samples of 186 CFS patients were screened for XMRV provirus 
and for the closely related murine leukaemia virus by nested PCR using specific 
oligonucleotide primers. To control for the integrity of the DNA, the cellular 
beta-globin gene was amplified. Negative controls (water) and a positive control 
(XMRV infectious molecular clone DNA) were included. While the beta-globin gene 
was amplified in all 186 samples, neither XMRV nor MLV sequences were detected.
CONCLUSION: XMRV or MLV sequences were not amplified from DNA originating from 
CFS patients in the UK. Although we found no evidence that XMRV is associated 
with CFS in the UK, this may be a result of population differences between North 
America and Europe regarding the general prevalence of XMRV infection, and might 
also explain the fact that two US groups found XMRV in prostate cancer tissue, 
while two European studies did not.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008519
PMCID: PMC2795199
PMID: 20066031 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.