1. PLoS One. 2010 Jan 13;5(1):e8680. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008680.

Structural and mutational analysis of Escherichia coli AlkB provides insight 
into substrate specificity and DNA damage searching.

Holland PJ(1), Hollis T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Wake Forest University School of Medicine, 
Winston-Salem, North Carolina, USA.

BACKGROUND: In Escherichia coli, cytotoxic DNA methyl lesions on the N1 position 
of purines and N3 position of pyrimidines are primarily repaired by the 
2-oxoglutarate (2-OG) iron(II) dependent dioxygenase, AlkB. AlkB repairs 
1-methyladenine (1-meA) and 3-methylcytosine (3-meC) lesions, but it also 
repairs 1-methylguanine (1-meG) and 3-methylthymine (3-meT) at a much less 
efficient rate. How the AlkB enzyme is able to locate and identify methylated 
bases in ssDNA has remained an open question.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We determined the crystal structures of the E. 
coli AlkB protein holoenzyme and the AlkB-ssDNA complex containing a 1-meG 
lesion. We coupled this to site-directed mutagenesis of amino acids in and 
around the active site, and tested the effects of these mutations on the ability 
of the protein to bind both damaged and undamaged DNA, as well as catalyze 
repair of a methylated substrate.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: A comparison of our substrate-bound AlkB-ssDNA complex 
with our unliganded holoenzyme reveals conformational changes of residues within 
the active site that are important for binding damaged bases. Site-directed 
mutagenesis of these residues reveals novel insight into their roles in DNA 
damage recognition and repair. Our data support a model that the AlkB protein 
utilizes at least two distinct conformations in searching and binding methylated 
bases within DNA: a "searching" mode and "repair" mode. Moreover, we are able to 
functionally separate these modes through mutagenesis of residues that affect 
one or the other binding state. Finally, our mutagenesis experiments show that 
amino acid D135 of AlkB participates in both substrate specificity and 
catalysis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008680
PMCID: PMC2800194
PMID: 20084272 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.