1. BMC Evol Biol. 2010 Jan 26;10:26. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-10-26.

Phylogenomics reveals subfamilies of fungal nonribosomal peptide synthetases and 
their evolutionary relationships.

Bushley KE(1), Turgeon BG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Pathology & Plant-Microbe Biology, 334 Plant Science 
Bldg, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, 14853, USA.

BACKGROUND: Nonribosomal peptide synthetases (NRPSs) are multimodular enzymes, 
found in fungi and bacteria, which biosynthesize peptides without the aid of 
ribosomes. Although their metabolite products have been the subject of intense 
investigation due to their life-saving roles as medicinals and injurious roles 
as mycotoxins and virulence factors, little is known of the phylogenetic 
relationships of the corresponding NRPSs or whether they can be ranked into 
subgroups of common function. We identified genes (NPS) encoding NRPS and 
NRPS-like proteins in 38 fungal genomes and undertook phylogenomic analyses in 
order to identify fungal NRPS subfamilies, assess taxonomic distribution, 
evaluate levels of conservation across subfamilies, and address mechanisms of 
evolution of multimodular NRPSs. We also characterized relationships of fungal 
NRPSs, a representative sampling of bacterial NRPSs, and related adenylating 
enzymes, including alpha-aminoadipate reductases (AARs) involved in lysine 
biosynthesis in fungi.
RESULTS: Phylogenomic analysis identified nine major subfamilies of fungal NRPSs 
which fell into two main groups: one corresponds to NPS genes encoding primarily 
mono/bi-modular enzymes which grouped with bacterial NRPSs and the other 
includes genes encoding primarily multimodular and exclusively fungal NRPSs. 
AARs shared a closer phylogenetic relationship to NRPSs than to other 
acyl-adenylating enzymes. Phylogenetic analyses and taxonomic distribution 
suggest that several mono/bi-modular subfamilies arose either prior to, or early 
in, the evolution of fungi, while two multimodular groups appear restricted to 
and expanded in fungi. The older mono/bi-modular subfamilies show conserved 
domain architectures suggestive of functional conservation, while multimodular 
NRPSs, particularly those unique to euascomycetes, show a diversity of 
architectures and of genetic mechanisms generating this diversity.
CONCLUSIONS: This work is the first to characterize subfamilies of fungal NRPSs. 
Our analyses suggest that mono/bi-modular NRPSs have more ancient origins and 
more conserved domain architectures than most multimodular NRPSs. It also 
demonstrates that the alpha-aminoadipate reductases involved in lysine 
biosynthesis in fungi are closely related to mono/bi-modular NRPSs. Several 
groups of mono/bi-modular NRPS metabolites are predicted to play more pivotal 
roles in cellular metabolism than products of multimodular NRPSs. In contrast, 
multimodular subfamilies of NRPSs are of more recent origin, are restricted to 
fungi, show less stable domain architectures, and biosynthesize metabolites 
which perform more niche-specific functions than mono/bi-modular NRPS products. 
The euascomycete-only NRPS subfamily, in particular, shows evidence for 
extensive gain and loss of domains suggestive of the contribution of domain 
duplication and loss in responding to niche-specific pressures.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2148-10-26
PMCID: PMC2823734
PMID: 20100353 [Indexed for MEDLINE]