1. PLoS One. 2010 Jan 25;5(1):e8699. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008699.

RNA microarray analysis in prenatal mouse cochlea reveals novel IGF-I target 
genes: implication of MEF2 and FOXM1 transcription factors.

Sanchez-Calderon H(1), Rodriguez-de la Rosa L, Milo M, Pichel JG, Holley M, 
Varela-Nieto I.

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomedicas Alberto Sols, CSIC-UAM, Madrid, 
Spain. hsanchez@iib.uam.es

BACKGROUND: Insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) provides pivotal cell survival 
and differentiation signals during inner ear development throughout evolution. 
Homozygous mutations of human IGF1 cause syndromic sensorineural deafness, 
decreased intrauterine and postnatal growth rates, and mental retardation. In 
the mouse, deficits in IGF-I result in profound hearing loss associated with 
reduced survival, differentiation and maturation of auditory neurons. 
Nevertheless, little is known about the molecular basis of IGF-I activity in 
hearing and deafness.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: A combination of quantitative RT-PCR, 
subcellular fractionation and Western blotting, along with in situ hybridization 
studies show IGF-I and its high affinity receptor to be strongly expressed in 
the embryonic and postnatal mouse cochlea. The expression of both proteins 
decreases after birth and in the cochlea of E18.5 embryonic Igf1(-/-) null mice, 
the balance of the main IGF related signalling pathways is altered, with lower 
activation of Akt and ERK1/2 and stronger activation of p38 kinase. By comparing 
the Igf1(-/-) and Igf1(+/+) transcriptomes in E18.5 mouse cochleae using RNA 
microchips and validating their results, we demonstrate the up-regulation of the 
FoxM1 transcription factor and the misexpression of the neural progenitor 
transcription factors Six6 and Mash1 associated with the loss of IGF-I. 
Parallel, in silico promoter analysis of the genes modulated in conjunction with 
the loss of IGF-I revealed the possible involvement of MEF2 in cochlear 
development. E18.5 Igf1(+/+) mouse auditory ganglion neurons showed intense 
MEF2A and MEF2D nuclear staining and MEF2A was also evident in the organ of 
Corti. At P15, MEF2A and MEF2D expression were shown in neurons and sensory 
cells. In the absence of IGF-I, nuclear levels of MEF2 were diminished, 
indicating less transcriptional MEF2 activity. By contrast, there was an 
increase in the nuclear accumulation of FoxM1 and a corresponding decrease in 
the nuclear cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p27(Kip1).
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We have defined the spatiotemporal expression of 
elements involved in IGF signalling during inner ear development and reveal 
novel regulatory mechanisms that are modulated by IGF-I in promoting sensory 
cell and neural survival and differentiation. These data will help us to 
understand the molecular bases of human sensorineural deafness associated to 
deficits in IGF-I.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008699
PMCID: PMC2810322
PMID: 20111592 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.