1. BMC Bioinformatics. 2010 Jan 18;11 Suppl 1(Suppl 1):S18. doi: 
10.1186/1471-2105-11-S1-S18.

Identifying main effects and epistatic interactions from large-scale SNP data 
via adaptive group Lasso.

Yang C(1), Wan X, Yang Q, Xue H, Yu W.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, Department of 
Electronic and Computer Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and 
Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong, PR China. eeyang@ust.hk

BACKGROUND: Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) based association studies aim 
at identifying SNPs associated with phenotypes, for example, complex diseases. 
The associated SNPs may influence the disease risk individually (main effects) 
or behave jointly (epistatic interactions). For the analysis of high throughput 
data, the main difficulty is that the number of SNPs far exceeds the number of 
samples. This difficulty is amplified when identifying interactions.
RESULTS: In this paper, we propose an Adaptive Group Lasso (AGL) model for 
large-scale association studies. Our model enables us to analyze SNPs and their 
interactions simultaneously. We achieve this by introducing a sparsity 
constraint in our model based on the fact that only a small fraction of SNPs is 
disease-associated. In order to reduce the number of false positive findings, we 
develop an adaptive reweighting scheme to enhance sparsity. In addition, our 
method treats SNPs and their interactions as factors, and identifies them in a 
grouped manner. Thus, it is flexible to analyze various disease models, 
especially for interaction detection. However, due to the intensive computation 
when millions of interaction terms needs to be searched in the model fitting, 
our method needs to combined with some filtering methods when applied to 
genome-wide data for detecting interactions.
CONCLUSION: By using a wide range of simulated datasets and a real dataset from 
WTCCC, we demonstrate the advantages of our method.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-11-S1-S18
PMCID: PMC3203332
PMID: 20122189 [Indexed for MEDLINE]