1. J Nippon Med Sch. 2010 Feb;77(1):4-12. doi: 10.1272/jnms.77.4.

The mechanism of mineralization and the role of alkaline phosphatase in health 
and disease.

Orimo H(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical and Biological Chemistry, Graduate School of Medicine, 
Nippon Medical School, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan. orimohd@nms.ac.jp

Biomineralization is the process by which hydroxyapatite is deposited in the 
extracellular matrix. Physiological mineralization occurs in hard tissues, 
whereas pathological calcification occurs in soft tissues. The first step of 
mineralization is the formation of hydroxyapatite crystals within matrix 
vesicles that bud from the surface membrane of hypertrophic chondrocytes, 
osteoblasts, and odontoblasts. This is followed by propagation of hydroxyapatite 
into the extracellular matrix and its deposition between collagen fibrils. 
Extracellular inorganic pyrophosphate, provided by NPP1 and ANKH, inhibits 
hydroxyapatite formation. Tissue-nonspecific alkaline phosphatase (TNAP) 
hydrolyzes pyrophosphate and provides inorganic phosphate to promote 
mineralization. Inorganic pyrophosphate, pyridoxal phosphate, and 
phosphoethanolamine are thought to be the physiologic substrates of TNAP. These 
accumulate in the event of TNAP deficiency, e.g., in cases of hypophosphatasia. 
The gene encoding TNAP is mapped to chromosome 1, consists of 12 exons, and 
possesses regulatory motifs in the 5'-untranslated region. Inhibition of TNAP 
enzymatic activity suppresses TNAP mRNA expression and mineralization in vitro. 
Hypophosphatasia is an inherited systemic bone disease characterized by 
hypomineralization of hard tissues. The phenotype of hypophosphatasia is varied. 
To date, more than 200 mutations in the TNAP gene have been reported. Knockout 
mice mimic the phenotypes of severe hypophosphatasia. Among the mutations in the 
TNAP gene, c.1559delT is frequent in the Japanese population. This frameshift 
mutation results in the expression of an abnormally long protein that is 
degraded in cells. DNA-based prenatal diagnosis using chorionic villus sampling 
has been developed, but requires thorough genetic counseling. Although 
hypophosphatasia is untreatable at present, the recent success of enzyme 
replacement therapy offers promise. The problems presented by impaired 
mineralization in age-related chronic diseases, such as pathologic calcification 
and decreasing physiological mineralization are growing in importance. 
Strategies for preventing pathologic calcification using TNAP and NPP1 are in 
development. A nutrigenomic approach, based on the relationship between TNAP 
gene polymorphism and bone mineral density, is also discussed.

DOI: 10.1272/jnms.77.4
PMID: 20154452 [Indexed for MEDLINE]