1. J Nat Prod. 2010 Mar 26;73(3):500-16. doi: 10.1021/np900821e.

Discovery and development of natural product-derived chemotherapeutic agents 
based on a medicinal chemistry approach.

Lee KH(1).

Author information:
(1)Natural Products Research Laboratories, Eshelman School of Pharmacy, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599-7568, USA. 
khlee@unc.edu

Medicinal plants have long been an excellent source of pharmaceutical agents. 
Accordingly, the long-term objectives of the author's research program are to 
discover and design new chemotherapeutic agents based on plant-derived compound 
leads by using a medicinal chemistry approach, which is a combination of 
chemistry and biology. Different examples of promising bioactive natural 
products and their synthetic analogues, including sesquiterpene lactones, 
quassinoids, naphthoquinones, phenylquinolones, dithiophenediones, 
neo-tanshinlactone, tylophorine, suksdorfin, DCK, and DCP, will be presented 
with respect to their discovery and preclinical development as potential 
clinical trial candidates. Research approaches include bioactivity- or mechanism 
of action-directed isolation and characterization of active compounds, rational 
drug design-based modification and analogue synthesis, and structure-activity 
relationship and mechanism of action studies. Current clinical trial agents 
discovered by the Natural Products Research Laboratories, University of North 
Carolina, include bevirimat (dimethyl succinyl betulinic acid), which is now in 
phase IIb trials for treating AIDS. Bevirimat is also the first in a new class 
of HIV drug candidates called "maturation inhibitors". In addition, an etoposide 
analogue, GL-331, progressed to anticancer phase II clinical trials, and the 
curcumin analogue JC-9 is in phase II clinical trials for treating acne and in 
development for trials against prostate cancer. The discovery and development of 
these clinical trial candidates will also be discussed.

DOI: 10.1021/np900821e
PMCID: PMC2893734
PMID: 20187635 [Indexed for MEDLINE]