1. PLoS One. 2010 Mar 10;5(3):e9627. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009627.

Investigating a new generation of ribozymes in order to target HCV.

Lévesque MV(1), Lévesque D, Brière FP, Perreault JP.

Author information:
(1)Département de Biochimie, Faculté de Médecine et des Sciences de la santé, 
Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec, Canada.

For a long time nucleic acid-based approaches directed towards controlling the 
propagation of Hepatitis C Virus (HCV) have been considered to possess high 
potential. Towards this end, ribozymes (i.e. RNA enzymes) that specifically 
recognize and subsequently catalyze the cleavage of their RNA substrate present 
an attractive molecular tool. Here, the unique properties of a new generation of 
ribozymes are taken advantage of in order to develop an efficient and durable 
ribozyme-based technology with which to target HCV (+) RNA strands. These 
ribozymes resulted from the coupling of a specific on/off adaptor (SOFA) to the 
ribozyme domain derived from the Hepatitis Delta Virus (HDV). The former 
switches cleavage activity "on" solely in the presence of the desired RNA 
substrate, while the latter was the first catalytic RNA reported to function 
naturally in human cells, specifically in hepatocytes. In order to maximize the 
chances for success, a step-by-step approach was used for both the design and 
the selection of the ribozymes. This approach included the use of both 
bioinformatics and biochemical methods for the identification of the sites 
possessing the greatest potential for targeting, and the subsequent in vitro 
testing of the cleavage activities of the corresponding SOFA-HDV ribozymes. 
These efforts led to a significant improvement in the ribozymes' designs. The 
ability of the resulting SOFA-HDV ribozymes to inhibit HCV replication was 
further examined using a luciferase-based replicon. Although some of the 
ribozymes exhibited high levels of cleavage activity in vitro, none appears to 
be a potential long term inhibitor in cellulo. Analysis of recent discoveries in 
the cellular biology of HCV might explain this failure, as well as provide some 
ideas on the potential limits of using nucleic acid-based drugs to control the 
propagation of HCV. Finally, the above conclusions received support from 
experiments performed using a collection of SOFA-HDV ribozymes directed against 
HCV (-) strands.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009627
PMCID: PMC2835756
PMID: 20224783 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.