1. J Mol Endocrinol. 2010 Jun;44(6):319-29. doi: 10.1677/JME-09-0140. Epub 2010
Mar  17.

Cyclophilin B as a co-regulator of prolactin-induced gene expression and 
function in breast cancer cells.

Fang F(1), Zheng J, Galbaugh TL, Fiorillo AA, Hjort EE, Zeng X, Clevenger CV.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology Division of Rheumatology Division of 
Hematology/Oncology, Robert H Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center, Northwestern 
University, Lurie 4-107, 303 East Superior Street, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

The effects of prolactin (PRL) during the pathogenesis of breast cancer are 
mediated in part though Stat5 activity enhanced by its interaction with its 
transcriptional inducer, the prolyl isomerase cyclophilin B (CypB). We have 
demonstrated that knockdown of CypB decreases cell growth, proliferation, and 
migration, and CypB expression is associated with malignant progression of 
breast cancer. In this study, we examined the effect of CypB knockdown on PRL 
signaling in breast cancer cells. CypB knockdown with two independent siRNAs was 
shown to impair PRL-induced reporter expression in breast cancer cell line. cDNA 
microarray analysis was performed on these cells to assess the effect of CypB 
reduction, and revealed a significant decrease in PRL-induced endogenous gene 
expression in two breast cancer cell lines. Parallel functional assays revealed 
corresponding alterations of both anchorage-independent cell growth and cell 
motility of breast cancer cells. Our results demonstrate that CypB expression 
levels significantly modulate PRL-induced function in breast cancer cells 
ultimately resulting in enhanced levels of PRL-responsive gene expression, cell 
growth, and migration. Given the increasingly appreciated role of PRL in the 
pathogenesis of breast cancer, the actions of CypB detailed here are of 
biological significance.

DOI: 10.1677/JME-09-0140
PMCID: PMC2965652
PMID: 20237142 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interest: The authors declare 
that there is no conflict of interest that could be perceived as prejudicing the 
impartiality of the research reported.