1. BMC Evol Biol. 2010 Mar 27;10:84. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-10-84.

The Mediterranean Sea as a barrier to gene flow: evidence from variation in and 
around the F7 and F12 genomic regions.

Athanasiadis G(1), González-Pérez E, Esteban E, Dugoujon JM, Stoneking M, Moral 
P.

Author information:
(1)Unitat d'Antropologia, Facultat de Biologia, Universitat de Barcelona, 
Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: The Mediterranean has a long history of interactions among different 
peoples. In this study, we investigate the genetic relationships among thirteen 
population samples from the broader Mediterranean region together with three 
other groups from the Ivory Coast and Bolivia with a particular focus on the 
genetic structure between North Africa and South Europe. Analyses were carried 
out on a diverse set of neutral and functional polymorphisms located in and 
around the coagulation factor VII and XII genomic regions (F7 and F12).
RESULTS: Principal component analysis revealed a significant clustering of the 
Mediterranean samples into North African and South European groups consistent 
with the results from the hierarchical AMOVA, which showed a low but significant 
differentiation between groups from the two shores. For the same range of 
geographic distances, populations from each side of the Mediterranean were found 
to differ genetically more than populations within the same side. To further 
investigate this differentiation, we carried out haplotype analyses, which 
provided partial evidence that sub-Saharan gene flow was higher towards North 
Africa than South Europe.
CONCLUSIONS: As there is no consensus between the two genomic regions regarding 
gene flow through the Sahara, it is hard to reach a solid conclusion about its 
role in the differentiation between the two Mediterranean shores and more data 
are necessary to reach a definite conclusion. However our data suggest that the 
Mediterranean Sea was at least partially a barrier to gene flow between the two 
shores.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2148-10-84
PMCID: PMC2853540
PMID: 20346176 [Indexed for MEDLINE]