1. PLoS One. 2010 Apr 2;5(4):e9996. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009996.

Simultaneous induction of non-canonical autophagy and apoptosis in cancer cells 
by ROS-dependent ERK and JNK activation.

Wong CH(1), Iskandar KB, Yadav SK, Hirpara JL, Loh T, Pervaiz S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National 
University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2016 Jul 8;11(7):e0159352. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0159352.

BACKGROUND: Chemotherapy-induced reduction in tumor load is a function of 
apoptotic cell death, orchestrated by intracellular caspases. However, the 
effectiveness of these therapies is compromised by mutations affecting specific 
genes, controlling and/or regulating apoptotic signaling. Therefore, it is 
desirable to identify novel pathways of cell death, which could function in 
tandem with or in the absence of efficient apoptotic machinery. In this regard, 
recent evidence supports the existence of a novel cell death pathway termed 
autophagy, which is activated upon growth factor deprivation or exposure to 
genotoxic compounds. The functional relevance of this pathway in terms of its 
ability to serve as a stress response or a truly death effector mechanism is 
still in question; however, reports indicate that autophagy is a specialized 
form of cell death under certain conditions.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We report here the simultaneous induction of 
non-canonical autophagy and apoptosis in human cancer cells upon exposure to a 
small molecule compound that triggers intracellular hydrogen peroxide (H(2)O(2)) 
production. Whereas, silencing of beclin1 neither inhibited the hallmarks of 
autophagy nor the induction of cell death, Atg 7 or Ulk1 knockdown significantly 
abrogated drug-induced H(2)O(2)-mediated autophagy. Furthermore, we provide 
evidence that activated extracellular regulated kinase (ERK) and c-Jun 
N-terminal kinase (JNK) are upstream effectors controlling both autophagy and 
apoptosis in response to elevated intracellular H(2)O(2). Interestingly, 
inhibition of JNK activity reversed the increase in Atg7 expression in this 
system, thus indicating that JNK may regulate autophagy by activating Atg7. Of 
note, the small molecule compound triggered autophagy and apoptosis in primary 
cells derived from patients with lymphoma, but not in non-transformed cells.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Considering that loss of tumor suppressor beclin 1 is 
associated with neoplasia, the ability of this small molecule compound to engage 
both autophagic and apoptotic machineries via ROS production and subsequent 
activation of ERK and JNK could have potential translational implications.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009996
PMCID: PMC2848860
PMID: 20368806 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.