1. J Exp Bot. 2010 Jun;61(10):2669-81. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erq101. Epub 2010 Apr 21.

The physiological importance of photosynthetic ferredoxin NADP+ oxidoreductase 
(FNR) isoforms in wheat.

Moolna A(1), Bowsher CG.

Author information:
(1)Michael Smith Building, Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, 
Oxford Road, Manchester, UK.

Ferredoxin NADP(+) oxidoreductase (FNR) enzymes catalyse electron transfer 
between ferredoxin and NADPH. In plants, a photosynthetic FNR (pFNR) transfers 
electrons from reduced ferredoxin to NADPH for the final step of linear electron 
flow, providing reductant for carbon fixation. pFNR is also thought to play 
important roles in two different mechanisms of cyclic electron flow around 
photosystem I; and photosynthetic reductant is itself partitioned between 
competing linear, cyclic, and alternative electron flow pathways. Four pFNR 
protein isoforms in wheat that display distinct reaction kinetics with leaf-type 
ferredoxin have previously been identified. It has been suggested that these 
isoforms may be crucial to the regulation of reductant partition between carbon 
fixation and other metabolic pathways. Here the 12 cm primary wheat leaf has 
been used to show that the alternative N-terminal pFNRI and pFNRII protein 
isoforms have statistically significant differences in response to the 
physiological parameters of chloroplast maturity, nitrogen regime, and oxidative 
stress. More specifically, the results obtained suggest that the alternative 
N-terminal forms of pFNRI have distinct roles in the partitioning of 
photosynthetic reductant. The role of alternative N-terminal processing of pFNRI 
is also discussed in terms of its importance for thylakoid targeting. The 
results suggest that the four pFNR protein isoforms are each present in the 
chloroplast in phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated states. pFNR isoforms vary 
in putative phosphorylation responses to physiological parameters, but the 
physiological significance requires further investigation.

DOI: 10.1093/jxb/erq101
PMCID: PMC2882262
PMID: 20410318 [Indexed for MEDLINE]