1. PLoS One. 2010 May 5;5(5):e10480. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010480.

MicroRNA expression profiling of oligodendrocyte differentiation from human 
embryonic stem cells.

Letzen BS(1), Liu C, Thakor NV, Gearhart JD, All AH, Kerr CL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, The Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Cells of the oligodendrocyte (OL) lineage play a vital role in the 
production and maintenance of myelin, a multilamellar membrane which allows for 
saltatory conduction along axons. These cells may provide immense therapeutic 
potential for lost sensory and motor function in demyelinating conditions, such 
as spinal cord injury, multiple sclerosis, and transverse myelitis. However, the 
molecular mechanisms controlling OL differentiation are largely unknown. 
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are considered the "micromanagers" of gene expression with 
suggestive roles in cellular differentiation and maintenance. Although unique 
patterns of miRNA expression in various cell lineages have been characterized, 
this is the first report documenting their expression during oligodendrocyte 
maturation from human embryonic stem (hES) cells. Here, we performed a global 
miRNA analysis to reveal and identify characteristic patterns in the multiple 
stages leading to OL maturation from hES cells including those targeting factors 
involved in myelin production.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We isolated cells from 8 stages of OL 
differentiation. Total RNA was subjected to miRNA profiling and validations 
preformed using real-time qRT-PCR. A comparison of miRNAs from our cultured OLs 
and OL progenitors showed significant similarities with published results from 
equivalent cells found in the rat and mouse central nervous system. Principal 
component analysis revealed four main clusters of miRNA expression corresponding 
to early, mid, and late progenitors, and mature OLs. These results were 
supported by correlation analyses between adjacent stages. Interestingly, the 
highest differentially-expressed miRNAs demonstrated a similar pattern of 
expression throughout all stages of differentiation, suggesting that they 
potentially regulate a common target or set of targets in this process. The 
predicted targets of these miRNAs include those with known or suspected roles in 
oligodendrocyte development and myelination including C11Orf9, CLDN11, MYTL1, 
MBOP, MPZL2, and DDR1.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We demonstrate miRNA profiles during distinct stages 
in oligodendroglial differentiation that may provide key markers of OL 
maturation. Our results reveal pronounced trends in miRNA expression and their 
potential mRNA target interactions that could provide valuable insight into the 
molecular mechanisms of differentiation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010480
PMCID: PMC2864763
PMID: 20463920 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.