1. PLoS One. 2010 May 7;5(5):e10537. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010537.

OAS1 polymorphisms are associated with susceptibility to West Nile encephalitis 
in horses.

Rios JJ(1), Fleming JG, Bryant UK, Carter CN, Huber JC, Long MT, Spencer TE, 
Adelson DL.

Author information:
(1)McDermott Center for Human Growth and Development, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, United States of America.

West Nile virus, first identified within the United States in 1999, has since 
spread across the continental states and infected birds, humans and domestic 
animals, resulting in numerous deaths. Previous studies in mice identified the 
Oas1b gene, a member of the OAS/RNASEL innate immune system, as a determining 
factor for resistance to West Nile virus (WNV) infection. A recent case-control 
association study described mutations of human OAS1 associated with clinical 
susceptibility to WNV infection. Similar studies in horses, a particularly 
susceptible species, have been lacking, in part, because of the difficulty in 
collecting populations sufficiently homogenous in their infection and disease 
states. The equine OAS gene cluster most closely resembles the human cluster, 
with single copies of OAS1, OAS3 and OAS2 in the same orientation. With 
naturally occurring susceptible and resistant sub-populations to lethal West 
Nile encephalitis, we undertook a case-control association study to investigate 
whether, similar to humans (OAS1) and mice (Oas1b), equine OAS1 plays a role in 
resistance to severe WNV infection. We identified naturally occurring single 
nucleotide mutations in equine (Equus caballus) OAS1 and RNASEL genes and, using 
Fisher's Exact test, we provide evidence that mutations in equine OAS1 
contribute to host susceptibility. Virtually all of the associated OAS1 
polymorphisms were located within the interferon-inducible promoter, suggesting 
that differences in OAS1 gene expression may determine the host's ability to 
resist clinical manifestations associated with WNV infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010537
PMCID: PMC2866329
PMID: 20479874 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.