1. BMC Syst Biol. 2010 May 17;4:66. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-4-66.

Avoiding transcription factor competition at promoter level increases the 
chances of obtaining oscillation.

Munteanu A(1), Constante M, Isalan M, Solé RV.

Author information:
(1)ICREA-Complex Systems Lab, Universitat Pompeu Fabra (PRBB-GRIB), Dr Aiguader 
88, 08003 Barcelona, Spain. andreea.munteanu@upf.edu

BACKGROUND: The ultimate goal of synthetic biology is the conception and 
construction of genetic circuits that are reliable with respect to their 
designed function (e.g. oscillators, switches). This task remains still to be 
attained due to the inherent synergy of the biological building blocks and to an 
insufficient feedback between experiments and mathematical models. Nevertheless, 
the progress in these directions has been substantial.
RESULTS: It has been emphasized in the literature that the architecture of a 
genetic oscillator must include positive (activating) and negative (inhibiting) 
genetic interactions in order to yield robust oscillations. Our results point 
out that the oscillatory capacity is not only affected by the interaction 
polarity but by how it is implemented at promoter level. For a chosen oscillator 
architecture, we show by means of numerical simulations that the existence or 
lack of competition between activator and inhibitor at promoter level affects 
the probability of producing oscillations and also leaves characteristic 
fingerprints on the associated period/amplitude features.
CONCLUSIONS: In comparison with non-competitive binding at promoters, 
competition drastically reduces the region of the parameters space characterized 
by oscillatory solutions. Moreover, while competition leads to pulse-like 
oscillations with long-tail distribution in period and amplitude for various 
parameters or noisy conditions, the non-competitive scenario shows a 
characteristic frequency and confined amplitude values. Our study also situates 
the competition mechanism in the context of existing genetic oscillators, with 
emphasis on the Atkinson oscillator.

DOI: 10.1186/1752-0509-4-66
PMCID: PMC2898670
PMID: 20478019 [Indexed for MEDLINE]