1. Methods Enzymol. 2010;473:77-94. doi: 10.1016/S0076-6879(10)73003-2.

Use of dimedone-based chemical probes for sulfenic acid detection evaluation of 
conditions affecting probe incorporation into redox-sensitive proteins.

Klomsiri C(1), Nelson KJ, Bechtold E, Soito L, Johnson LC, Lowther WT, Ryu SE, 
King SB, Furdui CM, Poole LB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Wake Forest University School of Medicine, 
Winston-Salem, North Carolina, USA.

Sulfenic acids, formed as transient intermediates during the reaction of 
cysteine residues with peroxides, play significant roles in enzyme catalysis and 
regulation, and are also involved in the redox regulation of transcription 
factors and other signaling proteins. Therefore, interest in the identification 
of protein sulfenic acids has grown substantially in the past few years. 
Dimedone, which specifically traps sulfenic acids, has provided the basis for 
the synthesis of a novel group of compounds that derivatize 1,3-cyclohexadione, 
a dimedone analogue, with reporter tags such as biotin for affinity capture and 
fluorescent labels for visual detection. These reagents allow identification of 
the cysteine sites and proteins that are sensitive to oxidation and permit 
identification of the cellular conditions under which such oxidations occur. We 
have shown that these compounds are reactive and specific toward sulfenic acids 
and that the labeled proteins can be detected at high sensitivity using gel 
analysis or mass spectrometry. Here, we further characterize these reagents, 
showing that the DCP-Bio1 incorporation rates into three sulfenic acid 
containing proteins, papaya papain, Escherichia coli fRMsr, and the Salmonella 
typhimurium peroxiredoxin AhpC, are significantly different and, in the case of 
fRMsr, are unaffected by changes in buffer pH from 5.5 and 8.0. We also provide 
protocols to label protein sulfenic acids in cellular proteins, either by in 
situ labeling of intact cells or by labeling at the time of lysis. We show that 
the addition of alkylating reagents and catalase to the lysis buffer is critical 
in preventing the formation of sulfenic acid subsequent to cell lysis. Data 
presented herein also indicate that the need to standardize, as much as 
possible, the protein and reagent concentrations during labeling. Finally, we 
introduce several new test or control proteins that can be used to evaluate 
labeling procedures and efficiencies.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0076-6879(10)73003-2
PMCID: PMC3795394
PMID: 20513472 [Indexed for MEDLINE]