1. Environ Mol Mutagen. 2010 Jun;51(5):451-61. doi: 10.1002/em.20570.

The approaches for manipulating mitochondrial proteome.

Shokolenko IN(1), Alexeyev MF, LeDoux SP, Wilson GL.

Author information:
(1)University of South Alabama, Mobile, Alabama, USA.

Over the past decade a large volume of research data has accumulated which has 
established a fundamental role for mitochondria in normal cellular functioning, 
as well as in various pathologies. Mitochondria play a pivotal role in 
metabolism and energy production, and are one of the key players involved in 
programmed cell death. On the other hand, mitochondrial dysfunction is 
implicated, directly or indirectly in numerous pathological conditions including 
inherited mitochondrial disorders, diabetes, cardiovascular and 
neurodegenerative diseases, and a variety of malignancies. The ability to 
modulate mitochondrial function by altering the diverse protein component of 
this organelle may be of great value for developing future therapeutic 
interventions. This review will discuss approaches used to introduce proteins 
into mitochondria. One group of methods utilizes strategies aimed at expressing 
proteins from genes in the nucleus. These include overexpression of 
nuclear-encoded mitochondrial proteins, allotopic expression, which is the 
re-coding and relocation of mitochondrial genes to the nucleus for expression 
and subsequent delivery of their gene products to mitochondria, and xenotopic 
expression, which is the nuclear expression of genes coding electron transport 
chain components from distant species, for delivery of their products to 
mammalian mitochondria. Additionally, antigenomic and progenomic strategies 
which focus on expression of mitochondrially targeted nuclear proteins involved 
in the maintenance of mtDNA will be discussed. The second group of methods 
considered will focus on attempts to use purified proteins for mitochondrial 
delivery. Special consideration has been given to the complexities involved in 
targeting exogenous proteins to mitochondria.

DOI: 10.1002/em.20570
PMCID: PMC3249350
PMID: 20544885 [Indexed for MEDLINE]