1. Tohoku J Exp Med. 2010 Jul;221(3):191-5. doi: 10.1620/tjem.221.191.

Carnitine palmitoyltransferase 2 deficiency: the time-course of blood and 
urinary acylcarnitine levels during initial L-carnitine supplementation.

Hori T(1), Fukao T, Kobayashi H, Teramoto T, Takayanagi M, Hasegawa Y, Yasuno T, 
Yamaguchi S, Kondo N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Gifu University Graduate School of Medicine.

Carnitine palmitoyltransferase 2 (CPT2) deficiency is one of the most common 
mitochondrial beta-oxidation defects. A female patient with an infantile form of 
CPT2 deficiency first presented as having a Reye-like syndrome with hypoglycemic 
convulsions. Oral L-carnitine supplementation was administered since serum free 
carnitine level was very low (less than 10 micromol/L), indicating secondary 
carnitine deficiency. Her serum and urinary acylcarnitine profiles were analyzed 
successively to evaluate time-course effects of L-carnitine supplementation. 
After the first two days of L-carnitine supplementation, the serum level of free 
carnitine was elevated; however, the serum levels of acylcarnitines and the 
urinary excretion of both free carnitine and acylcarnitines remained low. A peak 
of the serum free carnitine level was detected on day 5, followed by a peak of 
acetylcarnitine on day 7, and peaks of long-chain acylcarnitines, such as C16, 
C18, C18:1 and C18:2 carnitines, on day 9. Thereafter free carnitine became 
predominant again. These peaks of the serum levels corresponded to urinary 
excretion peaks of free carnitine, acetylcarnitine, and medium-chain 
dicarboxylic carnitines, respectively. It took several days for oral L-carnitine 
administration to increase the serum carnitine levels, probably because the 
intracellular stores were depleted. Thereafter, the administration increased the 
excretion of abnormal acylcarnitines, some of which had accumulated within the 
tissues. The excretion of medium-chain dicarboxylic carnitines dramatically 
decreased on day 13, suggesting improvement of tissue acylcarnitine 
accumulation. These time-course changes in blood and urinary acylcarnitine 
levels after L-carnitine supplementation support the effectiveness of 
L-carnitine supplementation to CPT2-deficient patients.

DOI: 10.1620/tjem.221.191
PMID: 20543534 [Indexed for MEDLINE]