1. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2010 Aug;88(8):679-88. doi: 
10.1002/bdra.20683.

Genetic and lifestyle variables associated with homocysteine concentrations and 
the distribution of folate derivatives in healthy premenopausal women.

Summers CM(1), Mitchell LE, Stanislawska-Sachadyn A, Baido SF, Blair IA, Von 
Feldt JM, Whitehead AS.

Author information:
(1)Centers for Cancer Pharmacology, Pharmacogenetics, and Excellence in 
Environmental Toxicology, Department of Pharmacology, University of Pennsylvania 
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

BACKGROUND: Low folate and high homocysteine (Hcy) concentrations are associated 
with pregnancy-related pathologies such as spina bifida. Polymorphisms in 
folate/Hcy metabolic enzymes may contribute to this potentially pathogenic 
biochemical phenotype.
METHODS: The study comprised 26 Caucasian and 23 African-American premenopausal 
women. Subjects gave fasting blood samples for biochemical phenotyping and 
genotyping. Total Hcy (tHcy) and both plasma and red blood cell (RBC) folate 
derivatives (i.e. tetrahydrofolate [THF], 5-methylTHF [5-MTHF], and 
5,10-methenylTHF [5,10-MTHF]) were measured using stable isotope dilution liquid 
chromatography, multiple reaction monitoring, and mass spectrometry. Eleven 
polymorphisms from nine folate/Hcy pathway genes were genotyped. Tests of 
association between genetic, lifestyle, and biochemical variables were applied.
RESULTS: In African American women, tHcy concentrations were associated (p < 
0.05) with total RBC folate, RBC 5-MTHF, B(12), and polymorphisms in methionine 
synthase (MTR) and thymidylate synthase (TYMS). In Caucasian women, tHcy 
concentrations were not associated with total folate levels, but were associated 
(p < 0.05) with RBC THF, ratios of RBC 5-MTHF:THF, and polymorphisms in 
5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) and MTR. In African Americans, 
folate derivative levels were associated with smoking, B(12), and polymorphisms 
in MTR, TYMS, methionine synthase reductase (MTRR), and reduced folate carrier1 
(RFC1). In Caucasians, folate derivative levels were associated with vitamin 
use, B(12), and polymorphisms in MTHFR, TYMS, and RFC1.
CONCLUSIONS: Polymorphisms in the folate/Hcy pathway are associated with tHcy 
and folate derivative levels. In African American and Caucasian women, different 
factors are associated with folate/Hcy phenotypes and may contribute to 
race-specific differences in the risks of a range of pregnancy-related 
pathologies.

DOI: 10.1002/bdra.20683
PMCID: PMC4051228
PMID: 20544798 [Indexed for MEDLINE]