1. BMC Genomics. 2010 Aug 6;11:465. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-465.

Distributed probing of chromatin structure in vivo reveals pervasive chromatin 
accessibility for expressed and non-expressed genes during tissue 
differentiation in C. elegans.

Sha K(1), Gu SG, Pantalena-Filho LC, Goh A, Fleenor J, Blanchard D, Krishna C, 
Fire A.

Author information:
(1)Depts, of Pathology and Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, 300 
Pasteur Drive, Palo Alto CA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Tissue differentiation is accompanied by genome-wide changes in the 
underlying chromatin structure and dynamics, or epigenome. By controlling when, 
where, and what regulatory factors have access to the underlying genomic DNA, 
the epigenome influences the cell's transcriptome and ultimately its function. 
Existing genomic methods for analyzing cell-type-specific changes in chromatin 
generally involve two elements: (i) a source for purified cells (or nuclei) of 
distinct types, and (ii) a specific treatment that partitions or degrades 
chromatin by activity or structural features. For many cell types of great 
interest, such assays are limited by our inability to isolate the relevant cell 
populations in an organism or complex tissue containing an intertwined mixture 
of other cells. This limitation has confined available knowledge of chromatin 
dynamics to a narrow range of biological systems (cell types that can be 
sorted/separated/dissected in large numbers and tissue culture models) or to 
amalgamations of diverse cell types (tissue chunks, whole organisms).
RESULTS: Transgene-driven expression of DNA/chromatin modifying enzymes provides 
one opportunity to query chromatin structures in expression-defined cell 
subsets. In this work we combine in vivo expression of a bacterial DNA adenine 
methyltransferase (DAM) with high throughput sequencing to sample 
tissue-specific chromatin accessibility on a genome-wide scale. We have applied 
the method (DALEC: Direct Asymmetric Ligation End Capture) towards mapping a 
cell-type-specific view of genome accessibility as a function of differentiated 
state. Taking advantage of C. elegans strains expressing the DAM enzyme in 
diverse tissues (body wall muscle, gut, and hypodermis), our efforts yield a 
genome-wide dataset measuring chromatin accessibility at each of 538,000 DAM 
target sites in the C. elegans (diploid) genome.
CONCLUSIONS: Validating the DALEC mapping results, we observe a strong 
association between observed coverage by nucleosomes and low DAM accessibility. 
Strikingly, we observed no extended regions of inaccessible chromatin for any of 
the tissues examined. These results are consistent with "local choreography" 
models in which differential gene expression is driven by intricate local 
rearrangements of chromatin structure rather than gross impenetrability of large 
chromosomal regions.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-465
PMCID: PMC3091661
PMID: 20691096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]