1. PLoS Pathog. 2010 Aug 19;6(8):e1001058. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1001058.

Immune modulation with sulfasalazine attenuates immunopathogenesis but enhances 
macrophage-mediated fungal clearance during Pneumocystis pneumonia.

Wang J(1), Gigliotti F, Bhagwat SP, George TC, Wright TW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Rochester School of Medicine and 
Dentistry, Rochester, New York, USA.

Although T cells are critical for host defense against respiratory fungal 
infections, they also contribute to the immunopathogenesis of Pneumocystis 
pneumonia (PcP). However, the precise downstream effector mechanisms by which T 
cells mediate these diverse processes are undefined. In the current study the 
effects of immune modulation with sulfasalazine were evaluated in a mouse model 
of PcP-related Immune Reconstitution Inflammatory Syndrome (PcP-IRIS). Recovery 
of T cell-mediated immunity in Pneumocystis-infected immunodeficient mice 
restored host defense, but also initiated the marked pulmonary inflammation and 
severe pulmonary function deficits characteristic of IRIS. Sulfasalazine 
produced a profound attenuation of IRIS, with the unexpected consequence of 
accelerated fungal clearance. To determine whether macrophage phagocytosis is an 
effector mechanism of T cell-mediated Pneumocystis clearance and whether 
sulfasalazine enhances clearance by altering alveolar macrophage phagocytic 
activity, a novel multispectral imaging flow cytometer-based method was 
developed to quantify the phagocytosis of Pneumocystis in vivo. Following immune 
reconstitution, alveolar macrophages from PcP-IRIS mice exhibited a dramatic 
increase in their ability to actively phagocytose Pneumocystis. Increased 
phagocytosis correlated temporally with fungal clearance, and required the 
presence of CD4(+) T cells. Sulfasalazine accelerated the onset of the CD4(+) T 
cell-dependent alveolar macrophage phagocytic response in PcP-IRIS mice, 
resulting in enhanced fungal clearance. Furthermore, sulfasalazine promoted a 
TH2-polarized cytokine environment in the lung, and sulfasalazine-enhanced 
phagocytosis of Pneumocystis was associated with an alternatively activated 
alveolar macrophage phenotype. These results provide evidence that macrophage 
phagocytosis is an important in vivo effector mechanism for T cell-mediated 
Pneumocystis clearance, and that macrophage phenotype can be altered to enhance 
phagocytosis without exacerbating inflammation. Immune modulation can diminish 
pulmonary inflammation while preserving host defense, and has therapeutic 
potential for the treatment of PcP-related immunopathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1001058
PMCID: PMC2924364
PMID: 20808846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. George is an employee of Amnis Corporation, 
producers of the ImageStream imaging flow cytometer.