1. PLoS Pathog. 2010 Sep 2;6(9):e1001084. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1001084.

Generation of neutralizing antibodies and divergence of SIVmac239 in cynomolgus 
macaques following short-term early antiretroviral therapy.

Ozkaya Sahin G(1), Bowles EJ, Parker J, Uchtenhagen H, Sheik-Khalil E, Taylor S, 
Pybus OG, Mäkitalo B, Walther-Jallow L, Spångberg M, Thorstensson R, Achour A, 
Fenyö EM, Stewart-Jones GB, Spetz AL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.

Neutralizing antibodies (NAb) able to react to heterologous viruses are 
generated during natural HIV-1 infection in some individuals. Further knowledge 
is required in order to understand the factors contributing to induction of 
cross-reactive NAb responses. Here a well-established model of experimental 
pathogenic infection in cynomolgus macaques, which reproduces long-lasting HIV-1 
infection, was used to study the NAb response as well as the viral evolution of 
the highly neutralization-resistant SIVmac239. Twelve animals were infected 
intravenously with SIVmac239. Antiretroviral therapy (ART) was initiated ten 
days post-inoculation and administered daily for four months. Viral load, CD4(+) 
T-cell counts, total IgG levels, and breadth as well as strength of NAb in 
plasma were compared simultaneously over 14 months. In addition, envs from 
plasma samples were sequenced at three time points in all animals in order to 
assess viral evolution. We report here that seven of the 12 animals controlled 
viremia to below 10(4) copies/ml of plasma after discontinuation of ART and that 
this control was associated with a low level of evolutionary divergence. 
Macaques that controlled viral load developed broader NAb responses early on. 
Furthermore, escape mutations, such as V67M and R751G, were identified in virus 
sequenced from all animals with uncontrolled viremia. Bayesian estimation of 
ancestral population genetic diversity (PGD) showed an increase in this value in 
non-controlling or transient-controlling animals during the first 5.5 months of 
infection, in contrast to virus-controlling animals. Similarly, non- or 
transient controllers displayed more positively-selected amino-acid 
substitutions. An early increase in PGD, resulting in the generation of 
positively-selected amino-acid substitutions, greater divergence and relative 
high viral load after ART withdrawal, may have contributed to the generation of 
potent NAb in several animals after SIVmac239 infection. However, early broad 
NAb responses correlated with relatively preserved CD4(+) T-cell numbers, low 
viral load and limited viral divergence.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1001084
PMCID: PMC2932721
PMID: 20824092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.