1. PLoS Genet. 2010 Sep 2;6(9):e1001085. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001085.

Commercially available outbred mice for genome-wide association studies.

Yalcin B(1), Nicod J, Bhomra A, Davidson S, Cleak J, Farinelli L, Østerås M, 
Whitley A, Yuan W, Gan X, Goodson M, Klenerman P, Satpathy A, Mathis D, Benoist 
C, Adams DJ, Mott R, Flint J.

Author information:
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
United Kingdom.

Genome-wide association studies using commercially available outbred mice can 
detect genes involved in phenotypes of biomedical interest. Useful populations 
need high-frequency alleles to ensure high power to detect quantitative trait 
loci (QTLs), low linkage disequilibrium between markers to obtain accurate 
mapping resolution, and an absence of population structure to prevent false 
positive associations. We surveyed 66 colonies for inbreeding, genetic 
diversity, and linkage disequilibrium, and we demonstrate that some have 
haplotype blocks of less than 100 Kb, enabling gene-level mapping resolution. 
The same alleles contribute to variation in different colonies, so that when 
mapping progress stalls in one, another can be used in its stead. Colonies are 
genetically diverse: 45% of the total genetic variation is attributable to 
differences between colonies. However, quantitative differences in allele 
frequencies, rather than the existence of private alleles, are responsible for 
these population differences. The colonies derive from a limited pool of 
ancestral haplotypes resembling those found in inbred strains: over 95% of 
sequence variants segregating in outbred populations are found in inbred 
strains. Consequently it is possible to impute the sequence of any mouse from a 
dense SNP map combined with inbred strain sequence data, which opens up the 
possibility of cataloguing and testing all variants for association, a situation 
that has so far eluded studies in completely outbred populations. We demonstrate 
the colonies' potential by identifying a deletion in the promoter of H2-Ea as 
the molecular change that strongly contributes to setting the ratio of CD4+ and 
CD8+ lymphocytes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001085
PMCID: PMC2932682
PMID: 20838427 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.