1. PLoS One. 2010 Sep 8;5(9):e12517. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012517.

Molecular biomarker analyses using circulating tumor cells.

Punnoose EA(1), Atwal SK, Spoerke JM, Savage H, Pandita A, Yeh RF, Pirzkall A, 
Fine BM, Amler LC, Chen DS, Lackner MR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology Biomarker Development, Genentech, Inc, South San 
Francisco, California, United States of America. punnoose.elizabeth@gene.com

BACKGROUND: Evaluation of cancer biomarkers from blood could significantly 
enable biomarker assessment by providing a relatively non-invasive source of 
representative tumor material. Circulating Tumor Cells (CTCs) isolated from 
blood of metastatic cancer patients hold significant promise in this regard.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Using spiked tumor-cells we evaluated CTC 
capture on different CTC technology platforms, including CellSearch and two 
biochip platforms, and used the isolated CTCs to develop and optimize assays for 
molecular characterization of CTCs. We report similar performance for the 
various platforms tested in capturing CTCs, and find that capture efficiency is 
dependent on the level of EpCAM expression. We demonstrate that captured CTCs 
are amenable to biomarker analyses such as HER2 status, qRT-PCR for breast 
cancer subtype markers, KRAS mutation detection, and EGFR staining by 
immunofluorescence (IF). We quantify cell surface expression of EGFR in 
metastatic lung cancer patient samples. In addition, we determined HER2 status 
by IF and FISH in CTCs from metastatic breast cancer patients. In the majority 
of patients (89%) we found concordance with HER2 status from patient tumor 
tissue, though in a subset of patients (11%), HER2 status in CTCs differed from 
that observed in the primary tumor. Surprisingly, we found CTC counts to be 
higher in ER+ patients in comparison to HER2+ and triple negative patients, 
which could be explained by low EpCAM expression and a more mesenchymal 
phenotype of tumors belonging to the basal-like molecular subtype of breast 
cancer.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our data suggests that molecular characterization from 
captured CTCs is possible and can potentially provide real-time information on 
biomarker status. In this regard, CTCs hold significant promise as a source of 
tumor material to facilitate clinical biomarker evaluation. However, limitations 
exist from a purely EpCAM based capture system and addition of antibodies to 
mesenchymal markers could further improve CTC capture efficiency to enable 
routine biomarker analysis from CTCs.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012517
PMCID: PMC2935889
PMID: 20838621 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: This study was funded fully 
by Genentech but there is no competing interest that can bias this work. This 
affiliation, however, does not alter the authors' adherence to all the PLoS ONE 
policies on sharing data and materials.