1. PLoS Genet. 2010 Sep 16;6(9):e1001121. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001121.

Comparative Genomic Hybridization (CGH) reveals a neo-X chromosome and biased 
gene movement in stalk-eyed flies (genus Teleopsis).

Baker RH(1), Wilkinson GS.

Author information:
(1)Sackler Institute for Comparative Genomics, American Museum of Natural 
History, New York, New York, USA. rbaker@amnh.org

Chromosomal location has a significant effect on the evolutionary dynamics of 
genes involved in sexual dimorphism, impacting both the pattern of sex-specific 
gene expression and the rate of duplication and protein evolution for these 
genes. For nearly all non-model organisms, however, knowledge of chromosomal 
gene content is minimal and difficult to obtain on a genomic scale. In this 
study, we utilized Comparative Genomic Hybridization (CGH), using probes 
designed from EST sequence, to identify genes located on the X chromosome of 
four species in the stalk-eyed fly genus Teleopsis. Analysis of log(2) ratio 
values of female-to-male hybridization intensities from the CGH microarrays for 
over 3,400 genes reveals a strongly bimodal distribution that clearly 
differentiates autosomal from X-linked genes for all four species. Genotyping of 
33 and linkage mapping of 28 of these genes in Teleopsis dalmanni indicate the 
CGH results correctly identified chromosomal location in all cases. Syntenic 
comparison with Drosophila indicates that 90% of the X-linked genes in Teleopsis 
are homologous to genes located on chromosome 2L in Drosophila melanogaster, 
suggesting the formation of a nearly complete neo-X chromosome from Muller 
element B in the dipteran lineage leading to Teleopsis. Analysis of gene 
movement both relative to Drosophila and within Teleopsis indicates that gene 
movement is significantly associated with 1) rates of protein evolution, 2) the 
pattern of gene duplication, and 3) the evolution of eyespan sexual dimorphism. 
Overall, this study reveals that diopsids are a critical group for understanding 
the evolution of sex chromosomes within Diptera. In addition, we demonstrate 
that CGH is a useful technique for identifying chromosomal sex-linkage and 
should be applicable to other organisms with EST or partial genomic information.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001121
PMCID: PMC2940734
PMID: 20862308 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.