1. J Nanobiotechnology. 2010 Sep 24;8:22. doi: 10.1186/1477-3155-8-22.

Development of PEGylated PLGA nanoparticle for controlled and sustained drug 
delivery in cystic fibrosis.

Vij N(1), Min T, Marasigan R, Belcher CN, Mazur S, Ding H, Yong KT, Roy I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Respiratory Sciences, Johns Hopkins University School 
of Medicine, Baltimore, 21287, USA. nvij1@jhmi.edu.

BACKGROUND: The mutation in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance 
regulator (CFTR) gene results in CF. The most common mutation, ΔF508-CFTR, is a 
temperature-sensitive, trafficking mutant with reduced chloride transport and 
exaggerated immune response. The ΔF508-CFTR is misfolded, ubiquitinated, and 
prematurely degraded by proteasome mediated- degradation. We recently 
demonstrated that selective inhibition of proteasomal pathway by the FDA 
approved drug PS-341 (pyrazylcarbonyl-Phe-Leuboronate, a.k.a. Velcade or 
bortezomib) ameliorates the inflammatory pathophysiology of CF cells. This 
proteasomal drug is an extremely potent, stable, reversible and selective 
inhibitor of chymotryptic threonine protease-activity. The apprehension in 
considering the proteasome as a therapeutic target is that proteasome inhibitors 
may affect proteostasis and consecutive processes. The affect on multiple 
processes can be mitigated by nanoparticle mediated PS-341 lung-delivery 
resulting in favorable outcome observed in this study.
RESULTS: To overcome this challenge, we developed a nano-based approach that 
uses drug loaded biodegradable nanoparticle (PLGA-PEGPS-341) to provide 
controlled and sustained drug delivery. The in vitro release kinetics of drug 
from nanoparticle was quantified by proteasomal activity assay from days 1-7 
that showed slow drug release from day 2-7 with maximum inhibition at day 7. For 
in vivo release kinetics and biodistribution, these drug-loaded nanoparticles 
were fluorescently labeled, and administered to C57BL6 mice by intranasal route. 
Whole-body optical imaging of the treated live animals demonstrates efficient 
delivery of particles to murine lungs, 24 hrs post treatment, followed by 
biodegradation and release over time, day 1-11. The efficacy of drug release in 
CF mice (Cftr-/-) lungs was determined by quantifying the changes in proteasomal 
activity (~2 fold decrease) and ability to rescue the Pseudomonas aeruginosa LPS 
(Pa-LPS) induced inflammation, which demonstrates the rescue of CF lung disease 
in murine model.
CONCLUSION: We have developed a novel drug delivery system to provide sustained 
delivery of CF "correctors" and "anti-inflammatories" to the lungs. Moreover, we 
demonstrate here the therapeutic efficacy of nano-based proteostasis-modulator 
to rescue Pa-LPS induced CF lung disease.

DOI: 10.1186/1477-3155-8-22
PMCID: PMC2954907
PMID: 20868490