1. Yonsei Med J. 2010 Nov;51(6):808-22. doi: 10.3349/ymj.2010.51.6.808.

Protease and protease-activated receptor-2 signaling in the pathogenesis of 
atopic dermatitis.

Lee SE(1), Jeong SK, Lee SH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Gangnam 
Severance Hospital, 712 Eonju-ro, Gangnam-gu, Seoul 135-720, Korea.

Proteases in the skin are essential to epidermal permeability barrier 
homeostasis. In addition to their direct proteolytic effects, certain proteases 
signal to cells by activating protease-activated receptors (PARs), the 
G-protein-coupled receptors. The expression of functional PAR-2 on human skin 
and its role in inflammation, pruritus, and skin barrier homeostasis have been 
demonstrated. Atopic dermatitis (AD) is a multifactorial inflammatory skin 
disease characterized by genetic barrier defects and allergic inflammation, 
which is sustained by gene-environmental interactions. Recent studies have 
revealed aberrant expression and activation of serine proteases and PAR-2 in the 
lesional skin of AD patients. The imbalance between proteases and protease 
inhibitors associated with genetic defects in the protease/protease inhibitor 
encoding genes, increase in skin surface pH, and exposure to proteolytically 
active allergens contribute to this aberrant protease/ PAR-2 signaling in AD. 
The increased protease activity in AD leads to abnormal desquamation, 
degradation of lipid-processing enzymes and antimicrobial peptides, and 
activation of primary cytokines, thereby leading to permeability barrier 
dysfunction, inflammation, and defects in the antimicrobial barrier. Moreover, 
up-regulated proteases stimulate PAR-2 in lesional skin of AD and lead to the 
production of cytokines and chemokines involved in inflammation and immune 
responses, itching sensation, and sustained epidermal barrier perturbation with 
easier allergen penetration. In addition, PAR-2 is an important sensor for 
exogenous danger molecules, such as exogenous proteases from various allergens, 
and plays an important role in AD pathogenesis. Together, these findings suggest 
that protease activity or PAR-2 may be a future target for therapeutic 
intervention for the treatment of AD.

DOI: 10.3349/ymj.2010.51.6.808
PMCID: PMC2995962
PMID: 20879045 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no financial conflicts of 
interest.