1. J Biomed Mater Res A. 2010 Dec 15;95(4):1055-66. doi: 10.1002/jbm.a.32904.
Epub  2010 Sep 28.

Biomimetic matrices for myocardial stabilization and stem cell transplantation.

Wall ST(1), Yeh CC, Tu RY, Mann MJ, Healy KE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Bioengineering, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, 
California, USA.

Although natural biological matrices have demonstrated modest improvement in the 
survival of cells transplanted into the infarcted myocardium, these materials 
have not been amenable to systematic optimization and therefore have limited 
potential to treat postinfarct cardiac injuries. Here we have developed tunable 
bioactive semi-interpenetrating polymer network (sIPN) hydrogels with matrix 
metalloproteinase (MMP) labile crosslinkers to be used as an assistive 
microenvironment for transplantation of bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem 
cells (BMSCs) into the infarcted myocardium. Injectable sIPN hydrogels were 
designed with a range of mechanical and biological properties that yielded 
material-dependent BMSC proliferation in vitro. Five groups were evaluated to 
treat myocardial infarction (MI) in adult mice: saline injection; green 
fluorescent protein (GFP)(+)-BMSCs delivered in saline; a sIPN matrix; a sIPN + 
GFP(+)-BMSCs; and Matrigel™ + GFP(+)-BMSCs. Injection of cells alone created a 
transient improvement in LV function that declined over time, and the synthetic 
hydrogel without cells resulted in the highest LV function at 6 weeks. Donor 
GFP-positive cells were detected after matrix-enhanced transplantation, but not 
without matrix support. Biomimetic sIPN hydrogel matrices succeeded both in 
mechanically supporting the injured myocardium and modestly enhancing donor cell 
survival. These matrices provide a foundation for systematic development of 
"pro-survival" microenvironments, and improvement in the long-term results of 
cardiac stem cell transplantation therapies.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jbm.a.32904
PMCID: PMC2975774
PMID: 20878934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures Authors have disclosed no conflict 
of interest.