1. PLoS One. 2010 Sep 23;5(9):e12922. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012922.

Microarray analysis of gene expression by skeletal muscle of three mouse models 
of Kennedy disease/spinal bulbar muscular atrophy.

Mo K(1), Razak Z, Rao P, Yu Z, Adachi H, Katsuno M, Sobue G, Lieberman AP, 
Westwood JT, Monks DA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Toronto at Mississauga, Mississauga, 
Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Emerging evidence implicates altered gene expression within skeletal 
muscle in the pathogenesis of Kennedy disease/spinal bulbar muscular atrophy 
(KD/SBMA). We therefore broadly characterized gene expression in skeletal muscle 
of three independently generated mouse models of this disease. The mouse models 
included a polyglutamine expanded (polyQ) AR knock-in model (AR113Q), a polyQ AR 
transgenic model (AR97Q), and a transgenic mouse that overexpresses wild type AR 
solely in skeletal muscle (HSA-AR). HSA-AR mice were included because they 
substantially reproduce the KD/SBMA phenotype despite the absence of polyQ AR.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We performed microarray analysis of lower 
hindlimb muscles taken from these three models relative to wild type controls 
using high density oligonucleotide arrays. All microarray comparisons were made 
with at least 3 animals in each condition, and only those genes having at least 
2-fold difference and whose coefficient of variance was less than 100% were 
considered to be differentially expressed. When considered globally, there was a 
similar overlap in gene changes between the 3 models: 19% between HSA-AR and 
AR97Q, 21% between AR97Q and AR113Q, and 17% between HSA-AR and AR113Q, with 8% 
shared by all models. Several patterns of gene expression relevant to the 
disease process were observed. Notably, patterns of gene expression typical of 
loss of AR function were observed in all three models, as were alterations in 
genes involved in cell adhesion, energy balance, muscle atrophy and myogenesis. 
We additionally measured changes similar to those observed in skeletal muscle of 
a mouse model of Huntington's Disease, and to those common to muscle atrophy 
from diverse causes.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: By comparing patterns of gene expression in three 
independent models of KD/SBMA, we have been able to identify candidate genes 
that might mediate the core myogenic features of KD/SBMA.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012922
PMCID: PMC2944863
PMID: 20886071 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.