1. Environ Health Perspect. 2011 Jan;119(1):84-91. doi: 10.1289/ehp.1002118. Epub
 2010 Oct 4.

Examining the joint effect of multiple risk factors using exposure risk 
profiles: lung cancer in nonsmokers.

Papathomas M(1), Molitor J, Richardson S, Riboli E, Vineis P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Imperial College London, United 
Kingdom. Michail.Papathomas@coventry.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Profile regression is a Bayesian statistical approach designed for 
investigating the joint effect of multiple risk factors. It reduces 
dimensionality by using as its main unit of inference the exposure profiles of 
the subjects that is, the sequence of covariate values that correspond to each 
subject.
OBJECTIVES: We applied profile regression to a case-control study of lung cancer 
in nonsmokers, nested within the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer 
and Nutrition (EPIC) cohort, to estimate the combined effect of environmental 
carcinogens and to explore possible gene-environment interactions.
METHODS: We tailored and extended the profile regression approach to the 
analysis of case-control studies, allowing for the analysis of ordinal data and 
the computation of posterior odds ratios. We compared and contrasted our results 
with those obtained using standard logistic regression and classification tree 
methods, including multifactor dimensionality reduction.
RESULTS: Profile regression strengthened previous observations in other study 
populations on the role of air pollutants, particularly particulate matter ≤ 10 
μm in aerodynamic diameter (PM10), in lung cancer for nonsmokers. Covariates 
including living on a main road, exposure to PM10 and nitrogen dioxide, and 
carrying out manual work characterized high-risk subject profiles. Such 
combinations of risk factors were consistent with a priori expectations. In 
contrast, other methods gave less interpretable results.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that profile regression is a powerful tool for 
identifying risk profiles that express the joint effect of etiologically 
relevant variables in multifactorial diseases.

DOI: 10.1289/ehp.1002118
PMCID: PMC3018505
PMID: 20920953 [Indexed for MEDLINE]