1. Minerva Anestesiol. 2010 Oct;76(10):787-94. Epub 2010 Jul 1.

The effect of homocysteine on the clinical outcomes of ventilated patients with 
severe sepsis.

Tsantes A(1), Tsangaris I, Nikolopoulos G, Bagos P, Kopterides P, Antonakos G, 
Dimopoulou I, Vrioni G, Kapsimali V, Dima K, Armaganidis A, Travlou A.

Author information:
(1)Attikon University General Hospital, Medical School, University of Athens, 
Athens 12462, Greece. atsantes@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: There is considerable evidence that elevated plasma homocysteine 
levels are associated with a prothrombotic milieu, whereas activation of the 
coagulation cascade is an important component of the pathogenesis of sepsis. The 
protein C pathway has been reported to play a central role both in the 
propagation of sepsis and a hyperhomocysteinemia-induced hypercoagulable state. 
Our primary aim was to measure plasma homocysteine levels in mechanically 
ventilated patients with severe sepsis/septic shock and to assess the 
association of these levels with relevant clinical outcomes.
METHODS: The study cohort included 102 mechanically ventilated patients with 
severe sepsis or septic shock. Demographics, comorbidities, clinical data and 
severity scores were recorded. Plasma homocysteine, vitamin B12, folate, 
creatinine, and protein C levels were measured in all study subjects upon 
enrollment, and genotyping for the C677T and A1298C polymorphisisms of the 
methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene and for factor V Leiden (FVL) 
mutations was performed as well. The primary outcomes were mortality at 28 and 
90 days; secondary outcomes included the number of days without renal or 
cardiovascular failure and the ventilator-free days during the study period.
RESULTS: Homocysteine levels were not significantly associated with any primary 
or secondary outcomes in the multivariable analysis. In addition, a synergistic 
effect of homocysteine with protein C levels was not detected.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggest that plasma homocysteine levels may not inform the 
prognosis of mechanically ventilated patients with severe sepsis/septic shock.

PMID: 20935614 [Indexed for MEDLINE]