1. Br J Ophthalmol. 2011 Jun;95(6):811-7. doi: 10.1136/bjo.2010.186882. Epub 2010
 Oct 17.

Phenotypic variability in patients with retinal dystrophies due to mutations in 
CRB1.

Henderson RH(1), Mackay DS, Li Z, Moradi P, Sergouniotis P, Russell-Eggitt I, 
Thompson DA, Robson AG, Holder GE, Webster AR, Moore AT.

Author information:
(1)Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, UK. r.henderson@ucl.ac.uk

OBJECTIVES: To identify CRB1 mutations in a large cohort of patients with 
recessive retinal dystrophies and to document the retinal phenotype and visual 
prognosis.
DESIGN: A hospital-based cross-sectional study of children and adults with 
recessive retinal dystrophies.
PARTICIPANTS: Three hundred and six patients with Leber congenital amaurosis 
(LCA), early-onset childhood retinal dystrophy or juvenile onset retinitis 
pigmentosa were recruited to the study and gave blood samples for molecular 
genetic analysis.
METHODS: A detailed clinical examination was performed, including: logMAR visual 
acuity, refraction, Goldmann visual fields, slit-lamp biomicroscopy, fundus 
photography, autofluorescence imaging and optical coherence tomography. The 
results of electrophysiology testing were available in all patients. DNA was 
obtained for molecular genetic analysis. Initial screening for mutations was 
performed using the LCA chip. Patients who had one or more CRB1 mutations 
identified on the chip, and other patients whose phenotype suggested a CRB1 
genotype, underwent direct sequencing. In addition, consanguineous families 
segregating recessive RP underwent a whole genome scan using Affymetrix gene 
chips, and affected family members showing linkage to the RP12 locus underwent 
sequencing of the CRB1 gene.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Identification of patients with mutations in CRB1 and 
detailed documentation of the clinical phenotype.
RESULTS: Mutations in CRB1, including 17 novel mutations, were identified in 41 
patients from 32 families. The authors identified both disease mutations in 34 
patients from 26 families, and these patients underwent detailed phenotyping. 
Common phenotypic features included hypermetropic refractive error, nummular 
pigmentation at the level of the RPE and increased retinal thickness on optical 
coherence tomography. Most patients had a clinical and electrophysiological 
phenotype consistent with a diagnosis of LCA or rod-cone dystrophy, but three 
patients had electroretinogram evidence of cone-rod degeneration. A minority of 
patients developed peripheral retinal telangiectasia, which in some cases led to 
seclusio pupillae and angle-closure glaucoma.
CONCLUSION: Mutations in CRB1 are associated with a range of recessively 
inherited retinal dystrophies, including LCA, childhood- and juvenile-onset 
rod-cone and cone-rod dystrophies. Although the phenotype is usually severe, in 
milder cases there is a window of opportunity for therapeutic intervention in 
early childhood.

DOI: 10.1136/bjo.2010.186882
PMID: 20956273 [Indexed for MEDLINE]