1. BMC Syst Biol. 2010 Oct 22;4:141. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-4-141.

A multi-level study of recombinant Pichia pastoris in different oxygen 
conditions.

Baumann K(1), Carnicer M, Dragosits M, Graf AB, Stadlmann J, Jouhten P, Maaheimo 
H, Gasser B, Albiol J, Mattanovich D, Ferrer P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, Autonomous University of Barcelona, 
Spain.

BACKGROUND: Yeasts are attractive expression platforms for many recombinant 
proteins, and there is evidence for an important interrelation between the 
protein secretion machinery and environmental stresses. While adaptive responses 
to such stresses are extensively studied in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, little is 
known about their impact on the physiology of Pichia pastoris. We have recently 
reported a beneficial effect of hypoxia on recombinant Fab secretion in P. 
pastoris chemostat cultivations. As a consequence, a systems biology approach 
was used to comprehensively identify cellular adaptations to low oxygen 
availability and the additional burden of protein production. Gene expression 
profiling was combined with proteomic analyses and the 13C isotope labelling 
based experimental determination of metabolic fluxes in the central carbon 
metabolism.
RESULTS: The physiological adaptation of P. pastoris to hypoxia showed distinct 
traits in relation to the model yeast S. cerevisiae. There was a positive 
correlation between the transcriptomic, proteomic and metabolic fluxes 
adaptation of P. pastoris core metabolism to hypoxia, yielding clear evidence of 
a strong transcriptional regulation component of key pathways such as 
glycolysis, pentose phosphate pathway and TCA cycle. In addition, the adaptation 
to reduced oxygen revealed important changes in lipid metabolism, stress 
responses, as well as protein folding and trafficking.
CONCLUSIONS: This systems level study helped to understand the physiological 
adaptations of cellular mechanisms to low oxygen availability in a recombinant 
P. pastoris strain. Remarkably, the integration of data from three different 
levels allowed for the identification of differences in the regulation of the 
core metabolism between P. pastoris and S. cerevisiae. Detailed comparative 
analysis of the transcriptomic data also led to new insights into the gene 
expression profiles of several cellular processes that are not only susceptible 
to low oxygen concentrations, but might also contribute to enhanced protein 
secretion.

DOI: 10.1186/1752-0509-4-141
PMCID: PMC2987880
PMID: 20969759 [Indexed for MEDLINE]