1. Clin Nephrol. 2010 Nov;74(5):327-35. doi: 10.5414/cnp74327.

Erythropoietin production by distal nephron in normal and familial amyloidotic 
adult human kidneys.

Beirão I(1), Moreira L, Barandela T, Lobato L, Silva P, Gouveia CM, Carneiro F, 
Fonseca I, Porto G, Pinho E Costa P.

Author information:
(1)Nephrology, Santo António Hospital, CHP, Porto, Portugal. bbeirao@iol.pt

BACKGROUND/AIM: the kidney is the major site of erythropoietin production. Many 
efforts have been made to identify renal erythropoietin-producing cells. 
Previous studies showed conflicting results, but the predominant localization 
reported was the peritubular interstitial and tubular epithelial cells. This 
study was conducted to identify the erythropoietin-producing cells in renal 
biopsies from 10 cadaveric donors and 45 patients with familial amyloidosis ATTR 
V30M, thirteen of them with anemia. Familial amyloidosis Type I (FAP-I) is a 
genetic disorder caused by a transthyretin (TTR) protein variant presenting a 
single amino acid substitution of methionine for valine at position 30 of the 
polypeptide chain (TTR V30M). Anemia in FAP-I is associated with inappropriately 
low serum erythropoietin levels.
METHODS: erythropoietin expression was detected by in situ hybridization (ISH) 
and confirmed by laser capture microdissection followed by PCR. Renal segments 
were identified by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: erythropoietin was mainly expressed by epithelial distal tubular cells 
and collecting tubules and additionally, in a few biopsies, by glomerular cells. 
A similar expression pattern was observed in donors and FAP-I patients. No 
increased mRNA erythropoietin expression was found in anemic patients, all of 
them presenting only a slight expression in medulla and cortex.
CONCLUSIONS: these results suggest the distal nephron as the major site of 
erythropoietin production, and support the notion that an inappropriate 
erythropoietin production is the cause of anemia in familial amyloidosis ATTR 
V30M.

DOI: 10.5414/cnp74327
PMID: 20979939 [Indexed for MEDLINE]