1. Hum Genet. 2011 Jan;129(1):101-10. doi: 10.1007/s00439-010-0905-5. Epub 2010
Oct  28.

A novel survival multifactor dimensionality reduction method for detecting 
gene-gene interactions with application to bladder cancer prognosis.

Gui J(1), Moore JH, Kelsey KT, Marsit CJ, Karagas MR, Andrew AS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Community and Family Medicine, Norris-Cotton Cancer Center, 
Dartmouth Medical School, One Medical Center Drive, Lebanon, NH 03756, USA.

The widespread use of high-throughput methods of single nucleotide polymorphism 
(SNP) genotyping has created a number of computational and statistical 
challenges. The problem of identifying SNP-SNP interactions in case-control 
studies has been studied extensively, and a number of new techniques have been 
developed. Little progress has been made, however, in the analysis of SNP-SNP 
interactions in relation to time-to-event data, such as patient survival time or 
time to cancer relapse. We present an extension of the two class multifactor 
dimensionality reduction (MDR) algorithm that enables detection and 
characterization of epistatic SNP-SNP interactions in the context of survival 
analysis. The proposed Survival MDR (Surv-MDR) method handles survival data by 
modifying MDR's constructive induction algorithm to use the log-rank test. 
Surv-MDR replaces balanced accuracy with log-rank test statistics as the score 
to determine the best models. We simulated datasets with a survival outcome 
related to two loci in the absence of any marginal effects. We compared Surv-MDR 
with Cox-regression for their ability to identify the true predictive loci in 
these simulated data. We also used this simulation to construct the empirical 
distribution of Surv-MDR's testing score. We then applied Surv-MDR to genetic 
data from a population-based epidemiologic study to find prognostic markers of 
survival time following a bladder cancer diagnosis. We identified several 
two-loci SNP combinations that have strong associations with patients' survival 
outcome. Surv-MDR is capable of detecting interaction models with weak main 
effects. These epistatic models tend to be dropped by traditional Cox regression 
approaches to evaluating interactions. With improved efficiency to handle genome 
wide datasets, Surv-MDR will play an important role in a research strategy that 
embraces the complexity of the genotype-phenotype mapping relationship since 
epistatic interactions are an important component of the genetic basis of 
disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-010-0905-5
PMCID: PMC3255326
PMID: 20981448 [Indexed for MEDLINE]