1. Front Behav Neurosci. 2010 Oct 13;4:160. doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2010.00160. 
eCollection 2010.

How neuroscience and behavioral genetics improve psychiatric assessment: report 
on a violent murder case.

Rigoni D(1), Pellegrini S, Mariotti V, Cozza A, Mechelli A, Ferrara SD, Pietrini 
P, Sartori G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental and Socialization Psychology, University of Padua 
Padua, Italy.

Despite the advances in the understanding of neural and genetic foundations of 
violence, the investigation of the biological bases of a mental disorder is 
rarely included in psychiatric evaluation of mental insanity. Here we report on 
a case in which cognitive neuroscience and behavioral genetics methods were 
applied to a psychiatric forensic evaluation conducted on a young woman, J.F., 
tried for a violent and impulsive murder. The defendant had a history of 
multidrug and alcohol abuse and non-forensic clinical evaluation concluded for a 
diagnosis of borderline personality disorder. We analyzed the defendant's brain 
structure in order to underlie possible brain structural abnormalities 
associated with pathological impulsivity. Voxel-based morphometry indexed a 
reduced gray matter volume in the left prefrontal cortex, in a region 
specifically associated with response inhibition. Furthermore, J.F.'s DNA was 
genotyped in order to identify genetic polymorphisms associated with various 
forms of violence and impulsive behavior. Five polymorphisms that are known to 
be associated with impulsivity, violence, and other severe psychiatric illnesses 
were identified in J.F.'s DNA. Taken together, these data provided evidence for 
the biological correlates of a mental disorder characterized by high impulsivity 
and aggressive tendencies. Our claim is that the use of neuroscience and 
behavioral genetics do not change the rationale underlying the determination of 
criminal liability, which must be based on a causal link between the mental 
disorder and the crime. Rather, their use is crucial in providing objective data 
on the biological bases of a defendant's mental disorder.

DOI: 10.3389/fnbeh.2010.00160
PMCID: PMC2965016
PMID: 21031162