1. Ophthalmology. 2011 Mar;118(3):564-73. doi: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2010.07.024. Epub
 2010 Oct 29.

Kjellin syndrome: long-term neuro-ophthalmologic follow-up and novel mutations 
in the SPG11 gene.

Puech B(1), Lacour A, Stevanin G, Sautiere BG, Devos D, Depienne C, Denis E, 
Mundwiller E, Ferriby D, Vermersch P, Defoort-Dhellemmes S.

Author information:
(1)Service d'Exploration de la Vision et Neuro-Ophtalmologie, Hôpital 
Roger-Salengro, CHRU de Lille, Lille Cedex, France. bpuech@nordnet.fr

OBJECTIVE: Kjellin's syndrome is a hereditary neuro-ophthalmologic syndrome. We 
describe the clinical phenotypes of 7 patients, identifying the responsible 
mutations for 4 of them. A 10-year ophthalmologic and neurologic follow-up of 5 
patients allowed us to describe the disease's characteristics, early symptoms 
and progression, associated ocular signs, and retinal changes in carriers.
DESIGN: Retrospective clinical study and molecular genetics investigation.
PARTICIPANTS: The records of 7 patients with Kjellin's syndrome were analyzed 
retrospectively.
METHODS: All patients underwent full neurologic and ophthalmologic examinations. 
The neurologic examinations included assessments of initial symptoms, 
intelligence quotient tests, psychologic tests, and either magnetic resonance 
imaging or computed tomography. The ophthalmologic examinations included visual 
acuity on an Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy Study chart, intraocular 
pressure color vision assessment, slit-lamp and fundus examination, Goldmann 
perimetry, fundus autofluorescence, optical coherence tomography and fluorescein 
angiography, electro-oculography, electroretinography, and flash visual evoked 
potentials. Direct sequencing of the SPG11 and SPG15 genes and gene-dosage 
analysis for the former were performed for 4 of these index patients.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Identification of new mutations in the SPG11 gene, 
validating its implication in Kjellin's syndrome.
RESULTS: The first signs appear before the age of 10 years, with late verbal 
development and difficulty running and walking. Life expectancy is between 30 
and 40 years. The secondary ophthalmologic symptoms only moderately affect 
visual acuity. In addition to the classic symptoms, 3 of the 7 patients 
displayed small whitish lens opacities, and 3 neurologically unaffected parents 
(father or mother), all heterozygous carriers, exhibited whitish retinal dots. 
All the patients who were tested carried SPG11, not SPG15, mutations.
CONCLUSIONS: Neurologic signs of SPG11 mutations emerge in early infancy, with 
walking and language difficulties. Onset of paraplegia occurs at the end of the 
first decade or during the second decade. Retinal changes, an integral part of 
SPG11 mutations in this series of patients, are only observed once the 
paraplegia has become apparent.

Copyright © 2011 American Academy of Ophthalmology. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2010.07.024
PMID: 21035867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]