1. PLoS One. 2010 Oct 29;5(10):e13761. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013761.

Channelrhodopsin-2 localised to the axon initial segment.

Grubb MS(1), Burrone J.

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Council Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, King's 
College London, London, United Kingdom. matthew.grubb@kcl.ac.uk

The light-gated cation channel Channelrhodopsin-2 (ChR2) is a powerful and 
versatile tool for controlling neuronal activity. Currently available versions 
of ChR2 either distribute uniformly throughout the plasma membrane or are 
localised specifically to somatodendritic or synaptic domains. Localising ChR2 
instead to the axon initial segment (AIS) could prove an extremely useful 
addition to the optogenetic repertoire, targeting the channel directly to the 
site of action potential initiation, and limiting depolarisation and associated 
calcium entry elsewhere in the neuron. Here, we describe a ChR2 construct that 
we localised specifically to the AIS by adding the ankyrinG-binding loop of 
voltage-gated sodium channels (Na(v)II-III) to its intracellular terminus. 
Expression of ChR2-YFP-Na(v)II-III did not significantly affect the passive or 
active electrical properties of cultured rat hippocampal neurons. However, the 
tiny ChR2 currents and small membrane depolarisations resulting from AIS 
targeting meant that optogenetic control of action potential firing with 
ChR2-YFP-Na(v)II-III was unsuccessful in baseline conditions. We did succeed in 
stimulating action potentials with light in some ChR2-YFP-Na(v)II-III-expressing 
neurons, but only when blocking KCNQ voltage-gated potassium channels. We 
discuss possible alternative approaches to obtaining precise control of neuronal 
spiking with AIS-targeted optogenetic constructs and propose potential uses for 
our ChR2-YFP-Na(v)II-III probe where subthreshold modulation of action potential 
initiation is desirable.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013761
PMCID: PMC2966437
PMID: 21048938 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.