1. PLoS Pathog. 2010 Nov 11;6(11):e1001186. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1001186.

Ubiquitin-regulated nuclear-cytoplasmic trafficking of the Nipah virus matrix 
protein is important for viral budding.

Wang YE(1), Park A, Lake M, Pentecost M, Torres B, Yun TE, Wolf MC, Holbrook MR, 
Freiberg AN, Lee B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, UCLA, Los Angeles, California, United States of 
America.

Paramyxoviruses are known to replicate in the cytoplasm and bud from the plasma 
membrane. Matrix is the major structural protein in paramyxoviruses that 
mediates viral assembly and budding. Curiously, the matrix proteins of a few 
paramyxoviruses have been found in the nucleus, although the biological function 
associated with this nuclear localization remains obscure. We report here that 
the nuclear-cytoplasmic trafficking of the Nipah virus matrix (NiV-M) protein 
and associated post-translational modification play a critical role in 
matrix-mediated virus budding. Nipah virus (NiV) is a highly pathogenic emerging 
paramyxovirus that causes fatal encephalitis in humans, and is classified as a 
Biosafety Level 4 (BSL4) pathogen. During live NiV infection, NiV-M was first 
detected in the nucleus at early stages of infection before subsequent 
localization to the cytoplasm and the plasma membrane. Mutations in the putative 
bipartite nuclear localization signal (NLS) and the leucine-rich nuclear export 
signal (NES) found in NiV-M impaired its nuclear-cytoplasmic trafficking and 
also abolished NiV-M budding. A highly conserved lysine residue in the NLS 
served dual functions: its positive charge was important for mediating nuclear 
import, and it was also a potential site for monoubiquitination which regulates 
nuclear export of the protein. Concordantly, overexpression of ubiquitin 
enhanced NiV-M budding whereas depletion of free ubiquitin in the cell (via 
proteasome inhibitors) resulted in nuclear retention of NiV-M and blocked viral 
budding. Live Nipah virus budding was exquisitely sensitive to proteasome 
inhibitors: bortezomib, an FDA-approved proteasome inhibitor for treating 
multiple myeloma, reduced viral titers with an IC(50) of 2.7 nM, which is 
100-fold less than the peak plasma concentration that can be achieved in humans. 
This opens up the possibility of using an "off-the-shelf" therapeutic against 
acute NiV infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1001186
PMCID: PMC2978725
PMID: 21085610 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.