1. J Neuroinflammation. 2010 Dec 7;7:90. doi: 10.1186/1742-2094-7-90.

Human intravenous immunoglobulin provides protection against Aβ toxicity by 
multiple mechanisms in a mouse model of Alzheimer's disease.

Magga J(1), Puli L, Pihlaja R, Kanninen K, Neulamaa S, Malm T, Härtig W, Grosche 
J, Goldsteins G, Tanila H, Koistinaho J, Koistinaho M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology, A, I, Virtanen Institute for Molecular Sciences, 
University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland. Johanna.Magga@uef.fi

BACKGROUND: Purified intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) obtained from the plasma 
of healthy humans is indicated for the treatment of primary immunodeficiency 
disorders associated with defects in humoral immunity. IVIG contains naturally 
occurring auto-antibodies, including antibodies (Abs) against β-amyloid (Aβ) 
peptides accumulating in the brains of Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients. IVIG 
has been shown to alleviate AD pathology when studied with mildly affected AD 
patients. Although its mechanisms-of-action have been broadly studied, it 
remains unresolved how IVIG affects the removal of natively formed brain Aβ 
deposits by primary astrocytes and microglia, two major cell types involved in 
the neuroinflammatory responses.
METHODS: We first determined the effect of IVIG on Aβ toxicity in primary 
neuronal cell culture. The mechanisms-of-action of IVIG in reduction of Aβ 
burden was analyzed with ex vivo assay. We studied whether IVIG solubilizes 
natively formed Aβ deposits from brain sections of APP/PS1 mice or promotes Aβ 
removal by primary glial cells. We determined the role of lysosomal degradation 
pathway and Aβ Abs in the IVIG-promoted reduction of Aβ. Finally, we studied the 
penetration of IVIG into the brain parenchyma and interaction with brain 
deposits of human Aβ in a mouse model of AD in vivo.
RESULTS: IVIG was protective against Aβ toxicity in a primary mouse hippocampal 
neuron culture. IVIG modestly inhibited the fibrillization of synthetic Aβ1-42 
but did not solubilize natively formed brain Aβ deposits ex vivo. IVIG enhanced 
microglia-mediated Aβ clearance ex vivo, with a mechanism linked to Aβ Abs and 
lysosomal degradation. The IVIG-enhanced Aβ clearance appears specific for 
microglia since IVIG did not affect Aβ clearance by astrocytes. The cellular 
mechanisms of Aβ clearance we observed have potential relevance in vivo since 
after peripheral administration IVIG penetrated to mouse brain tissue reaching 
highest concentrations in the hippocampus and bound selectively to Aβ deposits 
in co-localization with microglia.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate that IVIG promotes recognition and removal 
of natively formed brain Aβ deposits by primary microglia involving natural Aβ 
Abs in IVIG. These findings may have therapeutic relevance in vivo as IVIG 
penetrates through the blood-brain barrier and specifically binds to Aβ deposits 
in brain parenchyma.

DOI: 10.1186/1742-2094-7-90
PMCID: PMC3004875
PMID: 21138577 [Indexed for MEDLINE]