1. BMC Bioinformatics. 2010 Dec 13;11:597. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-11-597.

Extending pathways and processes using molecular interaction networks to analyse 
cancer genome data.

Glaab E(1), Baudot A, Krasnogor N, Valencia A.

Author information:
(1)Nottingham University, UK.

BACKGROUND: Cellular processes and pathways, whose deregulation may contribute 
to the development of cancers, are often represented as cascades of proteins 
transmitting a signal from the cell surface to the nucleus. However, recent 
functional genomic experiments have identified thousands of interactions for the 
signalling canonical proteins, challenging the traditional view of pathways as 
independent functional entities. Combining information from pathway databases 
and interaction networks obtained from functional genomic experiments is 
therefore a promising strategy to obtain more robust pathway and process 
representations, facilitating the study of cancer-related pathways.
RESULTS: We present a methodology for extending pre-defined protein sets 
representing cellular pathways and processes by mapping them onto a 
protein-protein interaction network, and extending them to include densely 
interconnected interaction partners. The added proteins display distinctive 
network topological features and molecular function annotations, and can be 
proposed as putative new components, and/or as regulators of the communication 
between the different cellular processes. Finally, these extended pathways and 
processes are used to analyse their enrichment in pancreatic mutated genes. 
Significant associations between mutated genes and certain processes are 
identified, enabling an analysis of the influence of previously non-annotated 
cancer mutated genes.
CONCLUSIONS: The proposed method for extending cellular pathways helps to 
explain the functions of cancer mutated genes by exploiting the synergies of 
canonical knowledge and large-scale interaction data.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-11-597
PMCID: PMC3017081
PMID: 21144022 [Indexed for MEDLINE]