1. PLoS One. 2011 Jan 13;6(1):e16216. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016216.

Directed evolution and in silico analysis of reaction centre proteins reveal 
molecular signatures of photosynthesis adaptation to radiation pressure.

Rea G(1), Lambreva M, Polticelli F, Bertalan I, Antonacci A, Pastorelli S, 
Damasso M, Johanningmeier U, Giardi MT.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Crystallography, National Research Council, Monterotondo, Italy. 
giuseppina.rea@mlib.ic.cnr.it

Evolutionary mechanisms adopted by the photosynthetic apparatus to modifications 
in the Earth's atmosphere on a geological time-scale remain a focus of intense 
research. The photosynthetic machinery has had to cope with continuously 
changing environmental conditions and particularly with the complex ionizing 
radiation emitted by solar flares. The photosynthetic D1 protein, being the site 
of electron tunneling-mediated charge separation and solar energy transduction, 
is a hot spot for the generation of radiation-induced radical injuries. We 
explored the possibility to produce D1 variants tolerant to ionizing radiation 
in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii and clarified the effect of radiation-induced 
oxidative damage on the photosynthetic proteins evolution. In vitro directed 
evolution strategies targeted at the D1 protein were adopted to create libraries 
of chlamydomonas random mutants, subsequently selected by exposures to 
radical-generating proton or neutron sources. The common trend observed in the 
D1 aminoacidic substitutions was the replacement of less polar by more polar 
amino acids. The applied selection pressure forced replacement of residues more 
sensitive to oxidative damage with less sensitive ones, suggesting that ionizing 
radiation may have been one of the driving forces in the evolution of the 
eukaryotic photosynthetic apparatus. A set of the identified aminoacidic 
substitutions, close to the secondary plastoquinone binding niche and oxygen 
evolving complex, were introduced by site-directed mutagenesis in un-transformed 
strains, and their sensitivity to free radicals attack analyzed. Mutants 
displayed reduced electron transport efficiency in physiological conditions, and 
increased photosynthetic performance stability and oxygen evolution capacity in 
stressful high-light conditions. Finally, comparative in silico analyses of D1 
aminoacidic sequences of organisms differently located in the evolution chain, 
revealed a higher ratio of residues more sensitive to oxidative damage in the 
eukaryotic/cyanobacterial proteins compared to their bacterial orthologs. These 
results led us to hypothesize an archaean atmosphere less challenging in terms 
of ionizing radiation than the present one.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016216
PMCID: PMC3020971
PMID: 21249156 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.