1. BMC Biochem. 2011 Feb 3;12:5. doi: 10.1186/1471-2091-12-5.

The evolution of farnesoid X, vitamin D, and pregnane X receptors: insights from 
the green-spotted pufferfish (Tetraodon nigriviridis) and other non-mammalian 
species.

Krasowski MD(1), Ai N, Hagey LR, Kollitz EM, Kullman SW, Reschly EJ, Ekins S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics, Iowa City, 
IA 52242, USA. mkrasows@healthcare.uiowa.edu

BACKGROUND: The farnesoid X receptor (FXR), pregnane X receptor (PXR), and 
vitamin D receptor (VDR) are three closely related nuclear hormone receptors in 
the NR1H and 1I subfamilies that share the property of being activated by bile 
salts. Bile salts vary significantly in structure across vertebrate species, 
suggesting that receptors binding these molecules may show adaptive evolutionary 
changes in response. We have previously shown that FXRs from the sea lamprey 
(Petromyzon marinus) and zebrafish (Danio rerio) are activated by planar bile 
alcohols found in these two species. In this report, we characterize FXR, PXR, 
and VDR from the green-spotted pufferfish (Tetraodon nigriviridis), an 
actinopterygian fish that unlike the zebrafish has a bile salt profile similar 
to humans. We utilize homology modelling, docking, and pharmacophore studies to 
understand the structural features of the Tetraodon receptors.
RESULTS: Tetraodon FXR has a ligand selectivity profile very similar to human 
FXR, with strong activation by the synthetic ligand GW4064 and by the primary 
bile acid chenodeoxycholic acid. Homology modelling and docking studies suggest 
a ligand-binding pocket architecture more similar to human and rat FXRs than to 
lamprey or zebrafish FXRs. Tetraodon PXR was activated by a variety of bile 
acids and steroids, although not by the larger synthetic ligands that activate 
human PXR such as rifampicin. Homology modelling predicts a larger 
ligand-binding cavity than zebrafish PXR. We also demonstrate that VDRs from the 
pufferfish and Japanese medaka were activated by small secondary bile acids such 
as lithocholic acid, whereas the African clawed frog VDR was not.
CONCLUSIONS: Our studies provide further evidence of the relationship between 
both FXR, PXR, and VDR ligand selectivity and cross-species variation in bile 
salt profiles. Zebrafish and green-spotted pufferfish provide a clear contrast 
in having markedly different primary bile salt profiles (planar bile alcohols 
for zebrafish and sterically bent bile acids for the pufferfish) and receptor 
selectivity that matches these differences in endogenous ligands. Our 
observations to date present an integrated picture of the co-evolution of bile 
salt structure and changes in the binding pockets of three nuclear hormone 
receptors across the species studied.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2091-12-5
PMCID: PMC3042382
PMID: 21291553 [Indexed for MEDLINE]