1. PLoS One. 2011 Jan 31;6(1):e16647. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016647.

Genomic stability over 9 years of an isoniazid resistant Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis outbreak strain in Sweden.

Sandegren L(1), Groenheit R, Koivula T, Ghebremichael S, Advani A, Castro E, 
Pennhag A, Hoffner S, Mazurek J, Pawlowski A, Kan B, Bruchfeld J, Melefors Ö, 
Källenius G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University, 
Uppsala, Sweden. Linus.Sandegren@imbim.uu.se

In molecular epidemiological studies of drug resistant Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis (TB) in Sweden a large outbreak of an isoniazid resistant strain 
was identified, involving 115 patients, mainly from the Horn of Africa. During 
the outbreak period, the genomic pattern of the outbreak strain has stayed 
virtually unchanged with regard to drug resistance, IS6110 restriction fragment 
length polymorphism and spoligotyping patterns. Here we present the complete 
genome sequence analyses of the index isolate and two isolates sampled nine 
years after the index case as well as experimental data on the virulence of this 
outbreak strain. Even though the strain has been present in the community for 
nine years and passaged between patients at least five times in-between the 
isolates, we only found four single nucleotide polymorphisms in one of the later 
isolates and a small (4 amino acids) deletion in the other compared to the index 
isolate. In contrast to many other evolutionarily successful outbreak lineages 
(e.g. the Beijing lineage) this outbreak strain appears to be genetically very 
stable yet evolutionarily successful in a low endemic country such as Sweden. 
These findings further illustrate that the rate of genomic variation in TB can 
be highly strain dependent, something that can have important implications for 
epidemiological studies as well as development of resistance.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016647
PMCID: PMC3031603
PMID: 21304944 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.