1. Protein Sci. 2011 Apr;20(4):656-69. doi: 10.1002/pro.594.

Crystal structure of the sensory domain of Escherichia coli CadC, a member of 
the ToxR-like protein family.

Eichinger A(1), Haneburger I, Koller C, Jung K, Skerra A.

Author information:
(1)Munich Center for Integrated Protein Science and Lehrstuhl für Biologische 
Chemie, Technische Universität München, Freising-Weihenstephan, Germany.

The membrane-integral transcriptional activator CadC comprises sensory and 
transcriptional regulatory functions within one polypeptide chain. Its 
C-terminal periplasmic domain, CadC(pd), is responsible for sensing of 
environmental pH as well as for binding of the feedback inhibitor cadaverine. 
Here we describe the crystal structure of CadC(pd) (residues 188-512) solved at 
a resolution of 1.8 Å via multiple wavelength anomalous dispersion (MAD) using a 
ReCl(6)(2-) derivative. CadC(pd) reveals a novel fold comprising two subdomains: 
an N-terminal subdomain dominated by a β-sheet in contact with three α-helices 
and a C-terminal subdomain formed by an eleven-membered α-helical bundle, which 
is oriented almost perpendicular to the helices in the first subdomain. Further 
to the native protein, crystal structures were also solved for its variants 
D471N and D471E, which show functionally different behavior in pH sensing. 
Interestingly, in the heavy metal derivative of CadC(pd) used for MAD phasing a 
ReCl(6)(2-) ion was found in a cavity located between the two subdomains. Amino 
acid side chains that coordinate this complex ion are conserved in CadC 
homologues from various bacterial species, suggesting a function of the cavity 
in the binding of cadaverine, which was supported by docking studies. Notably, 
CadC(pd) forms a homo-dimer in solution, which can be explained by an extended, 
albeit rather polar interface between two symmetry-related monomers in the 
crystal structure. The occurrence of several acidic residues in this region 
suggests protonation-dependent changes in the mode of dimerization, which could 
eventually trigger transcriptional activation by CadC in the bacterial 
cytoplasm.

Copyright © 2011 The Protein Society.

DOI: 10.1002/pro.594
PMCID: PMC3081544
PMID: 21308846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]