1. Cell Death Dis. 2010 Sep 2;1(9):e71. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2010.51.

Cathepsin B-like and cell death in the unicellular human pathogen Leishmania.

El-Fadili AK(1), Zangger H, Desponds C, Gonzalez IJ, Zalila H, Schaff C, Ives A, 
Masina S, Mottram JC, Fasel N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Biology and Medicine, University of 
Lausanne, Epalinges, Switzerland.

In several studies reporting cell death (CD) in lower eukaryotes and in the 
human protozoan parasite Leishmania, proteolytic activity was revealed using 
pan-caspase substrates or inhibitors such as 
carbobenzoxy-valyl-alanyl-aspartyl-[O-methyl]-fluoromethylketone (Z-VAD-FMK). 
However, most of the lower eukaryotes do not encode caspase(s) but MCA, which 
differs from caspase(s) in its substrate specificity and cannot be accountable 
for the recognition of Z-VAD-FMK. In the present study, we were interested in 
identifying which enzyme was capturing the Z-VAD substrate. We show that heat 
shock (HS) induces Leishmania CD and leads to the intracellular binding of 
Z-VAD-FMK. We excluded binding and inhibition of Z-VAD-FMK to Leishmania major 
metacaspase (LmjMCA), and identified cysteine proteinase C (LmjCPC), a cathepsin 
B-like (CPC) enzyme, as the Z-VAD-FMK binding enzyme. We confirmed the specific 
interaction of Z-VAD-FMK with CPC by showing that Z-VAD binding is absent in a 
Leishmania mexicana strain in which the cpc gene was deleted. We also show that 
parasites exposed to various stress conditions release CPC into a soluble 
fraction. Finally, we confirmed the role of CPC in Leishmania CD by showing 
that, when exposed to the oxidizing agent hydrogen peroxide (H(2)O(2)), cpc 
knockout parasites survived better than wild-type parasites (WT). In conclusion, 
this study identified CPC as the substrate of Z-VAD-FMK in Leishmania and as a 
potential additional executioner protease in the CD cascade of Leishmania and 
possibly in other lower eukaryotes.

DOI: 10.1038/cddis.2010.51
PMCID: PMC3032344
PMID: 21364675 [Indexed for MEDLINE]