1. J Proteome Res. 2011 May 6;10(5):2508-24. doi: 10.1021/pr1012812. Epub 2011
Mar  29.

Analysis of the Aspergillus fumigatus proteome reveals metabolic changes and the 
activation of the pseurotin A biosynthesis gene cluster in response to hypoxia.

Vödisch M(1), Scherlach K, Winkler R, Hertweck C, Braun HP, Roth M, Haas H, 
Werner ER, Brakhage AA, Kniemeyer O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Applied Microbiology, Leibniz Institute for 
Natural Product Research and Infection Biology-Hans-Knöll-Institute and 
Friedrich Schiller University, Jena, Germany.

The mold Aspergillus fumigatus is the most important airborne fungal pathogen. 
Adaptation to hypoxia represents an important virulence attribute for A. 
fumigatus. Therefore, we aimed at obtaining a comprehensive overview about this 
process on the proteome level. To ensure highly reproducible growth conditions, 
an oxygen-controlled, glucose-limited chemostat cultivation was established. 
Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis analysis of mycelial and mitochondrial 
proteins as well as two-dimensional Blue Native/SDS-gel separation of 
mitochondrial membrane proteins led to the identification of 117 proteins with 
an altered abundance under hypoxic in comparison to normoxic conditions. Hypoxia 
induced an increased activity of glycolysis, the TCA-cycle, respiration, and 
amino acid metabolism. Consistently, the cellular contents in heme, iron, 
copper, and zinc increased. Furthermore, hypoxia induced biosynthesis of the 
secondary metabolite pseurotin A as demonstrated at proteomic, transcriptional, 
and metabolite levels. The observed and so far not reported stimulation of the 
biosynthesis of a secondary metabolite by oxygen depletion may also affect the 
survival of A. fumigatus in hypoxic niches of the human host. Among the proteins 
so far not implicated in hypoxia adaptation, an NO-detoxifying flavohemoprotein 
was one of the most highly up-regulated proteins which indicates a link between 
hypoxia and the generation of nitrosative stress in A. fumigatus.

DOI: 10.1021/pr1012812
PMCID: PMC3091480
PMID: 21388144 [Indexed for MEDLINE]