1. PLoS One. 2011 Mar 18;6(3):e18030. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0018030.

In vivo functional genomic studies of sterol carrier protein-2 gene in the 
yellow fever mosquito.

Peng R(1), Maklokova VI, Chandrashekhar JH, Lan Q.

Author information:
(1)College of Life Sciences, Central China Normal University, Wuhan, Hubei, 
China.

A simple and efficient DNA delivery method to introduce extrachromosomal DNA 
into mosquito embryos would significantly aid functional genomic studies. The 
conventional method for delivery of DNA into insects is to inject the DNA 
directly into the embryos. Taking advantage of the unique aspects of mosquito 
reproductive physiology during vitellogenesis and an in vivo transfection 
reagent that mediates DNA uptake in cells via endocytosis, we have developed a 
new method to introduce DNA into mosquito embryos vertically via microinjection 
of DNA vectors in vitellogenic females without directly manipulating the 
embryos. Our method was able to introduce inducible gene expression vectors 
transiently into F0 mosquitoes to perform functional studies in vivo without 
transgenic lines. The high efficiency of expression knockdown was reproducible 
with more than 70% of the F0 individuals showed sufficient gene expression 
suppression (<30% of the controls' levels). At the cohort level, AeSCP-2 
expression knockdown in early instar larvae resulted in detectable phenotypes of 
the expression deficiency such as high mortality, lowered fertility, and 
distorted sex ratio after induction of AeSCP-2 siRNA expression in vivo. The 
results further confirmed the important role of AeSCP-2 in the development and 
reproduction of A. aegypti. In this study, we proved that extrachromosomal 
transient expression of an inducible gene from a DNA vector vertically delivered 
via vitellogenic females can be used to manipulate gene expression in F0 
generation. This new method will be a simple and efficient tool for in vivo 
functional genomic studies in mosquitoes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0018030
PMCID: PMC3060925
PMID: 21437205 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.