1. PLoS One. 2011 Mar 29;6(3):e17387. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017387.

Transient receptor potential channel polymorphisms are associated with the 
somatosensory function in neuropathic pain patients.

Binder A(1), May D, Baron R, Maier C, Tölle TR, Treede RD, Berthele A, Faltraco 
F, Flor H, Gierthmühlen J, Haenisch S, Huge V, Magerl W, Maihöfner C, Richter H, 
Rolke R, Scherens A, Uçeyler N, Ufer M, Wasner G, Zhu J, Cascorbi I.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurological Pain Research and Therapy, Department of Neurology, 
University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Kiel, Kiel, Germany. 
a.binder@neurologie.uni-kiel.de

Transient receptor potential channels are important mediators of thermal and 
mechanical stimuli and play an important role in neuropathic pain. The 
contribution of hereditary variants in the genes of transient receptor potential 
channels to neuropathic pain is unknown. We investigated the frequency of 
transient receptor potential ankyrin 1, transient receptor potential melastin 8 
and transient receptor potential vanilloid 1 single nucleotide polymorphisms and 
their impact on somatosensory abnormalities in neuropathic pain patients. Within 
the German Research Network on Neuropathic Pain (Deutscher Forscbungsverbund 
Neuropathischer Schmerz) 371 neuropathic pain patients were phenotypically 
characterized using standardized quantitative sensory testing. Pyrosequencing 
was employed to determine a total of eleven single nucleotide polymorphisms in 
transient receptor potential channel genes of the neuropathic pain patients and 
a cohort of 253 German healthy volunteers. Associations of quantitative sensory 
testing parameters and single nucleotide polymorphisms between and within groups 
and subgroups, based on sensory phenotypes, were analyzed. Single nucleotide 
polymorphisms frequencies did not differ between both the cohorts. However, in 
neuropathic pain patients transient receptor potential ankyrin 1 710G>A 
(rs920829, E179K) was associated with the presence of paradoxical heat sensation 
(p = 0.03), and transient receptor potential vanilloid 1 1911A>G (rs8065080, 
I585V) with cold hypoalgesia (p = 0.0035). Two main subgroups characterized by 
preserved (1) and impaired (2) sensory function were identified. In subgroup 1 
transient receptor potential vanilloid 1 1911A>G led to significantly less heat 
hyperalgesia, pinprick hyperalgesia and mechanical hypaesthesia (p = 0.006, 
p = 0.005 and p<0.001) and transient receptor potential vanilloid 1 1103C>G 
(rs222747, M315I) to cold hypaesthesia (p = 0.002), but there was absence of 
associations in subgroup 2. In this study we found no evidence that genetic 
variants of transient receptor potential channels are involved in the expression 
of neuropathic pain, but transient receptor potential channel polymorphisms 
contributed significantly to the somatosensory abnormalities of neuropathic pain 
patients.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017387
PMCID: PMC3066165
PMID: 21468319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: A. Binder received support 
for travel from the BMBF, honoraria for lectures from Grünenthal, Allergan and 
Pfizer, payment for development of educational presentations from Pfizer and 
travel/accommodation expenses from Pfizer, Allergan and Grünenthal and his 
institution received financial support from the BMBF. RB received support for 
travel from the BMBF, has consultancies with and received honoraria and 
travel/accommodation expenses from Pfizer, Genzyme, Grünenthal, Mundipharma, 
Allergan, Sanofi Pasteur, Medtronic, Eisai, UCB, Lilly, Astellas, received 
grants from Pfizer, Grünenthal, Genzyme, received payment for development of 
educational presentations from Pfizer, Medtronic and his institution received 
financial support from the BMBF. TT is board member at Pfizer, Lilly, Boehringer 
Grünenthal, and has consultancies with and received travel /accommodation 
expenses from Pfizer, Lilly, Boehringer, Grünenthal, Mundipharma, UCB/Schwarz. 
A. Berthele received honoraria and travel/accommodations expenses from Pfizer 
and his institution a grant from the BMBF. JG received support for travel from 
the BMBF and her institution received financial support from the BMBF. VH's 
institution received financial support from the BMBF. CMh received honoraria 
from Pfizer and travel/accommodation expenses from Allergan. RR is a board 
member at Astellas Pharma and received honoraria for lectures from Lilly and 
Pfizer. GW received honoraria and travel/accommodation expenses from Grünenthal, 
Medtronic, Pfizer, Mundipharma, his institution received financial support from 
the BMBF and Pfizer Pharma, and he received financial support for research from 
the National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia (NHMRC), the 
EFIC-Grünenthal-Grant (EGG), the Ministry of Science, Commerce and 
Transportation of Schleswig-Holstein, Germany and the Alexander von 
Humboldt-Stiftung. IC received honoraria and travel/accommodation expenses from 
MSD, Bayer-Schering and Sanofi Aventis for lectures. DM, RDT, FF, HF, SH, CM, 
AS, MU, NÜ, JZ, WM, HR have disclosed no competing interests. There are no 
patents, products in development or marketed products to declare. This does not 
alter the authors' adherence to all the PLoS ONE policies on sharing data and 
materials.