1. J Chem Inf Model. 2011 May 23;51(5):1132-50. doi: 10.1021/ci200055s. Epub 2011
 Apr 8.

Rigorous treatment of multispecies multimode ligand-receptor interactions in 
3D-QSAR: CoMFA analysis of thyroxine analogs binding to transthyretin.

Natesan S(1), Wang T, Lukacova V, Bartus V, Khandelwal A, Balaz S.

Author information:
(1)Albany College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences , Vermont Campus, Colchester, 
Vermont 05446, United States.

For a rigorous analysis of the receptor-ligand binding, speciation of the 
ligands caused by ionization, tautomerism, covalent hydration, and dynamic 
stereoisomerism needs to be considered. Each species may bind in several 
orientations or conformations (modes), especially for flexible ligands and 
receptors. A thermodynamic description of the multispecies (MS), multimode (MM) 
binding events shows that the overall association constant is equal to the 
weighted sum of the sums of microscopic association constants of individual 
modes for each species, with the weights given by the unbound fractions of 
individual species. This expression is a prerequisite for a precise quantitative 
characterization of the ligand-receptor interactions in both structure-based and 
ligand-based structure-activity analyses. We have implemented the MS-MM 
correlation expression into the comparative molecular field analysis (CoMFA), 
which deduces a map of the binding site from structures and binding affinities 
of a ligand set, in the absence of experimental structural information on the 
receptor. The MS-MM CoMFA approach was applied to published data for binding to 
transthyretin of 28 thyroxine analogs, each forming up to four ionization 
species under physiological conditions. The published X-ray structures of 
several analogs, exhibiting multiple binding modes, served as templates for the 
MS-MM superposition of thyroxine analogs. Additional modes were generated for 
compounds with flexible alkyl substituents, to identify bound conformations. The 
results demonstrate that the MS-MM modification improved predictive abilities of 
the CoMFA models, even for the standard procedure with MS-MM selected species 
and modes. The predicted prevalences of individual modes and the generated 
receptor site model are in reasonable agreement with the available X-ray data. 
The calibrated model can help in the design of inhibitors of transthyretin 
amyloid fibril formation.

DOI: 10.1021/ci200055s
PMCID: PMC3223556
PMID: 21476521 [Indexed for MEDLINE]