1. Langmuir. 2011 May 17;27(10):6107-15. doi: 10.1021/la104924c. Epub 2011 Apr
19.

Single vesicle observations of the cardiolipin-cytochrome C interaction: 
induction of membrane morphology changes.

Beales PA(1), Bergstrom CL, Geerts N, Groves JT, Vanderlick TK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical and Environmental Engineering, Yale University, New 
Haven, Connecticut 06511, United States.

We present a novel platform for investigating the composition-specific 
interactions of proteins (or other biologically relevant molecules) with model 
membranes composed of compositionally distinct domains. We focus on the 
interaction between a mitochondrial-specific lipid, cardiolipin (CL), and a 
peripheral membrane protein, cytochrome c (cyt c). We engineer vesicles with 
compositions such that they phase separate into coexisting liquid phases and the 
lipid of interest, CL, preferentially localizes into one of the domains (the 
liquid disordered (L(d)) phase). The presence of CL-rich and CL-depleted domains 
within the same vesicle provides a built-in control experiment to simultaneously 
observe the behavior of two membrane compositions under identical conditions. We 
find that cyt c binds strongly to CL-rich domains and observe fascinating 
morphological transitions within these regions of membrane. CL-rich domains 
start to form small buds and eventually fold up into a collapsed state. We also 
observe that cyt c can induce a strong attraction between the CL-rich domains of 
adjacent vesicles as demonstrated by the development of large osculating regions 
between these domains. Qualitatively similar behavior is observed when other 
polycationic proteins or polymers of a similar size and net charge are used 
instead of cyt c. We argue that these striking phenomena can be simply 
understood by consideration of colloidal forces between the protein and the 
membrane. We discuss the possible biological implications of our observations in 
relation to the structure and function of mitochondria.

DOI: 10.1021/la104924c
PMCID: PMC3103708
PMID: 21504165 [Indexed for MEDLINE]