1. J Neuroinflammation. 2011 May 2;8:41. doi: 10.1186/1742-2094-8-41.

Increased expression of the chemokines CXCL1 and MIP-1α by resident brain cells 
precedes neutrophil infiltration in the brain following prolonged soman-induced 
status epilepticus in rats.

Johnson EA(1), Dao TL, Guignet MA, Geddes CE, Koemeter-Cox AI, Kan RK.

Author information:
(1)Research Division, Pharmacology Branch, US Army Medical Research Institute of 
Chemical Defense, Aberdeen Proving Ground, MD 21010, USA. 
erik.a.johnson1@us.army.mil

BACKGROUND: Exposure to the nerve agent soman (GD) causes neuronal cell death 
and impaired behavioral function dependent on the induction of status 
epilepticus (SE). Little is known about the maturation of this pathological 
process, though neuroinflammation and infiltration of neutrophils are prominent 
features. The purpose of this study is to quantify the regional and temporal 
progression of early chemotactic signals, describe the cellular expression of 
these factors and the relationship between expression and neutrophil 
infiltration in damaged brain using a rat GD seizure model.
METHODS: Protein levels of 4 chemokines responsible for neutrophil infiltration 
and activation were quantified up to 72 hours in multiple brain regions (i.e. 
piriform cortex, hippocampus and thalamus) following SE onset using multiplex 
bead immunoassays. Chemokines with significantly increased protein levels were 
localized to resident brain cells (i.e. neurons, astrocytes, microglia and 
endothelial cells). Lastly, neutrophil infiltration into these brain regions was 
quantified and correlated to the expression of these chemokines.
RESULTS: We observed significant concentration increases for CXCL1 and MIP-1α 
after seizure onset. CXCL1 expression originated from neurons and endothelial 
cells while MIP-1α was expressed by neurons and microglia. Lastly, the 
expression of these chemokines directly preceded and positively correlated with 
significant neutrophil infiltration in the brain. These data suggest that 
following GD-induced SE, a strong chemotactic response originating from various 
brain cells, recruits circulating neutrophils to the injured brain.
CONCLUSIONS: A strong induction of neutrophil attractant chemokines occurs 
following GD-induced SE resulting in neutrophil influx into injured brain 
tissues. This process may play a key role in the progressive secondary brain 
pathology observed in this model though further study is warranted.

DOI: 10.1186/1742-2094-8-41
PMCID: PMC3104356
PMID: 21535896 [Indexed for MEDLINE]