1. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 26;6(4):e19164. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019164.

Abcg2 overexpression represents a novel mechanism for acquired resistance to the 
multi-kinase inhibitor Danusertib in BCR-ABL-positive cells in vitro.

Balabanov S(1), Gontarewicz A, Keller G, Raddrizzani L, Braig M, Bosotti R, Moll 
J, Jost E, Barett C, Rohe I, Bokemeyer C, Holyoake TL, Brümmendorf TH.

Author information:
(1)Klinik für Onkologie, Hämatologie und Knochenmarktransplantation mit Sektion 
Pneumologie, Universitäres Cancer Center Hamburg, Universitäts-Klinikum 
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.

The success of Imatinib (IM) therapy in chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is 
compromised by the development of IM resistance and by a limited IM effect on 
hematopoietic stem cells. Danusertib (formerly PHA-739358) is a potent 
pan-aurora and ABL kinase inhibitor with activity against known BCR-ABL 
mutations, including T315I. Here, the individual contribution of both signaling 
pathways to the therapeutic effect of Danusertib as well as mechanisms 
underlying the development of resistance and, as a consequence, strategies to 
overcome resistance to Danusertib were investigated. Starting at low 
concentrations, a dose-dependent inhibition of BCR-ABL activity was observed, 
whereas inhibition of aurora kinase activity required higher concentrations, 
pointing to a therapeutic window between the two effects. Interestingly, the 
emergence of resistant clones during Danusertib exposure in vitro occurred 
considerably less frequently than with comparable concentrations of IM. In 
addition, Danusertib-resistant clones had no mutations in BCR-ABL or aurora 
kinase domains and remained IM-sensitive. Overexpression of Abcg2 efflux 
transporter was identified and functionally validated as the predominant 
mechanism of acquired Danusertib resistance in vitro. Finally, the combined 
treatment with IM and Danusertib significantly reduced the emergence of drug 
resistance in vitro, raising hope that this drug combination may also achieve 
more durable disease control in vivo.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019164
PMCID: PMC3082549
PMID: 21541334 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Laura Raddrizzani, Roberta 
Bosotti and Jürgen Moll are employed at Nerviano Medical Sciences S.r.l. They 
had a role in data collection and preparation of the manuscript. This does not 
alter the authors' adherence to all the PLoS ONE policies on sharing data and 
materials.