1. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 29;6(4):e19118. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019118.

Intracellular eukaryotic parasites have a distinct unfolded protein response.

Gosline SJ(1), Nascimento M, McCall LI, Zilberstein D, Thomas DY, Matlashewski 
G, Hallett M.

Author information:
(1)McGill Centre for Bioinformatics, McGill University, Montréal, Québec, 
Canada.

Insult to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) activates the Unfolded Protein Response 
(UPR), a set of signaling pathways that protect the cell from the potential 
damage caused by improperly folded proteins. Accumulation of misfolded proteins 
in the ER lumen initiates a series of signal transduction events via activation 
of three transmembrane ER proteins: Ire1, Atf6 and PERK. Activation of these 
proteins results in the transcriptional up-regulation of the components of the 
folding, trafficking and degradation machinery in the ER. PERK further reduces 
the load on the ER via the phosphorylation of eIF2α, attenuating general protein 
translation. It is believed that the UPR evolved as a transcriptional response 
that up-regulates protein folding machinery in the ER and later gained the 
ability to decrease ER load by attenuating general protein translation in 
metazoa. However, our in silico analyses of protozoan parasites revealed an 
absence of proteins involved in the transcriptionally mediated UPR and the 
presence of both PERK and its target eIF2α. Consistent with these observations, 
stimulation of the UPR in Leishmania donovani identified an absence of 
up-regulation of the ER chaperone BiP, the canonical ER chaperone modulated by 
the UPR in higher eukaryotes, while exhibiting increased phosphorylation of 
eIF2α which has been shown to attenuate protein translation. We further observed 
that L. donovani is more sensitive to UPR inducing agents than host macrophages, 
suggesting that the less evolved stress response could provide a new avenue for 
therapeutic treatment of parasitic infections.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019118
PMCID: PMC3084755
PMID: 21559456 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.