1. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 29;6(4):e19011. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019011.

Clustered coding variants in the glutamate receptor complexes of individuals 
with schizophrenia and bipolar disorder.

Frank RA(1), McRae AF, Pocklington AJ, van de Lagemaat LN, Navarro P, Croning 
MD, Komiyama NH, Bradley SJ, Challiss RA, Armstrong JD, Finn RD, Malloy MP, 
MacLean AW, Harris SE, Starr JM, Bhaskar SS, Howard EK, Hunt SE, Coffey AJ, 
Ranganath V, Deloukas P, Rogers J, Muir WJ, Deary IJ, Blackwood DH, Visscher PM, 
Grant SG.

Author information:
(1)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridgeshire, 
United Kingdom.

Current models of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder implicate multiple genes, 
however their biological relationships remain elusive. To test the genetic role 
of glutamate receptors and their interacting scaffold proteins, the exons of ten 
glutamatergic 'hub' genes in 1304 individuals were re-sequenced in case and 
control samples. No significant difference in the overall number of 
non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms (nsSNPs) was observed between 
cases and controls. However, cluster analysis of nsSNPs identified two exons 
encoding the cysteine-rich domain and first transmembrane helix of GRM1 as a 
risk locus with five mutations highly enriched within these domains. A new 
splice variant lacking the transmembrane GPCR domain of GRM1 was discovered in 
the human brain and the GRM1 mutation cluster could perturb the regulation of 
this variant. The predicted effect on individuals harbouring multiple mutations 
distributed in their ten hub genes was also examined. Diseased individuals 
possessed an increased load of deleteriousness from multiple concurrent rare and 
common coding variants. Together, these data suggest a disease model in which 
the interplay of compound genetic coding variants, distributed among glutamate 
receptors and their interacting proteins, contribute to the pathogenesis of 
schizophrenia and bipolar disorders.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019011
PMCID: PMC3084736
PMID: 21559497 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.