1. Front Neurosci. 2011 May 3;5:52. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2011.00052. eCollection 
2011.

Acquisition of an olfactory associative task triggers a regionalized 
down-regulation of adult born neuron cell death.

Sultan S(1), Lefort JM, Sacquet J, Mandairon N, Didier A.

Author information:
(1)CNRS, UMR5020; INSERM, U1028; Lyon Neuroscience Research Center, 
Neuroplasticity and Neuropathology of olfactory perception Team, University of 
Lyon, Lyon; University Lyon1 Villeurbanne, France.

Associative olfactory learning increased survival of adult born granule 
interneurons in the olfactory bulb (OB) at regions which are specific to the 
learned odorant. However, the mechanism shaping this odor-specific distribution 
of newborn neurons and its temporal relationship with the learning process are 
unknown. In the present study, using Bromodeoxyuridine or activated-caspase3 
labeling, newborn and apoptotic cells respectively were mapped in the granule 
cell layer (GCL) of the OB, just before, during, and at the end of odor 
conditioning or pseudo-conditioning in adult mice. Results indicate that before 
and during training, when the task is not yet acquired, conditioned and 
pseudo-conditioned animals displayed the same density of newborn neurons. 
However, at the end of the conditioning, when the animals mastered the task, the 
density of newborn cells remained elevated in conditioned animals while it 
decreased in pseudo-conditioned animals suggesting newborn cell death in that 
group. Indeed, using Activated-Caspase3/BrdU co-labeling, we found that the 
proportion of newborn cells among dying cells was reduced in conditioned animals 
mastering the task compared to non-expert conditioned or pseudo-conditioned 
animals. The overall level of cell death did not change across training and was 
similar in conditioned and pseudo-conditioned groups, indicating that 
BrdU-positive cells were spared to the detriment of non-labeled cells. In 
addition, a fine analysis of cell distribution showed an uneven distribution of 
apoptotic cells, with lower densities in the medial part of the GCL where the 
density of newborn cells is high in conditioned animals. We conclude that 
acquisition of the task triggered the rescue of newborn neurons by a targeted 
regulation of cell death.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2011.00052
PMCID: PMC3088868
PMID: 21577252