1. RNA Biol. 2011 Mar-Apr;8(2):270-9. doi: 10.4161/rna.8.2.15013. Epub 2011 Mar
1.

Coronaviruses: an RNA proofreading machine regulates replication fidelity and 
diversity.

Denison MR(1), Graham RL, Donaldson EF, Eckerle LD, Baric RS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Microbiology & Immunology, Vanderbilt University 
Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA.

In order to survive and propagate, RNA viruses must achieve a balance between 
the capacity for adaptation to new environmental conditions or host cells with 
the need to maintain an intact and replication competent genome. Several virus 
families in the order Nidovirales, such as the coronaviruses (CoVs) must achieve 
these objectives with the largest and most complex replicating RNA genomes 
known, up to 32 kb of positive-sense RNA. The CoVs encode sixteen nonstructural 
proteins (nsp 1-16) with known or predicted RNA synthesis and modification 
activities, and it has been proposed that they are also responsible for the 
evolution of large genomes. The CoVs, including murine hepatitis virus (MHV) and 
SARS-CoV, encode a 3'-to-5' exoribonuclease activity (ExoN) in nsp14. Genetic 
inactivation of ExoN activity in engineered SARS-CoV and MHV genomes by alanine 
substitution at conserved DE-D-D active site residues results in viable mutants 
that demonstrate 15- to 20-fold increases in mutation rates, up to 18 times 
greater than those tolerated for fidelity mutants of other RNA viruses. Thus 
nsp14-ExoN is essential for replication fidelity, and likely serves either as a 
direct mediator or regulator of a more complex RNA proofreading machine, a 
process previously unprecedented in RNA virus biology. Elucidation of the 
mechanisms of nsp14-mediated proofreading will have major implications for our 
understanding of the evolution of RNA viruses, and also will provide a robust 
model to investigate the balance between fidelity, diversity and pathogenesis. 
The discovery of a protein distinct from a viral RdRp that regulates replication 
fidelity also raises the possibility that RNA genome replication fidelity may be 
adaptable to differing replication environments and selective pressures, rather 
than being a fixed determinant.

DOI: 10.4161/rna.8.2.15013
PMCID: PMC3127101
PMID: 21593585 [Indexed for MEDLINE]