1. J Neurosci. 2011 May 25;31(21):7817-30. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.6412-10.2011.

Lysosomal proteolysis inhibition selectively disrupts axonal transport of 
degradative organelles and causes an Alzheimer's-like axonal dystrophy.

Lee S(1), Sato Y, Nixon RA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience/Physiology, New York University Langone Medical 
Center, New York, New York 10016, USA.

In the hallmark neuritic dystrophy of Alzheimer's disease (AD), autophagic 
vacuoles containing incompletely digested proteins selectively accumulate in 
focal axonal swellings, reflecting defects in both axonal transport and 
autophagy. Here, we investigated the possibility that impaired lysosomal 
proteolysis could be a basis for both of these defects leading to neuritic 
dystrophy. In living primary mouse cortical neurons expressing 
fluorescence-tagged markers, LC3-positive autophagosomes forming in axons 
rapidly acquired the endo-lysosomal markers Rab7 and LAMP1 and underwent 
exclusive retrograde movement. Proteolytic clearance of these transported 
autophagic vacuoles was initiated after fusion with bidirectionally moving 
lysosomes that increase in number at more proximal axon levels and in the 
perikaryon. Disrupting lysosomal proteolysis by either inhibiting cathepsins 
directly or by suppressing lysosomal acidification slowed the axonal transport 
of autolysosomes, late endosomes, and lysosomes and caused their selective 
accumulation within dystrophic axonal swellings. Mitochondria and other 
organelles lacking cathepsins moved normally under these conditions, indicating 
that the general functioning of the axonal transport system was preserved. 
Dystrophic swellings induced by lysosomal proteolysis inhibition resembled in 
composition those in several mouse models of AD and also acquired other AD-like 
features, including immunopositivity for ubiquitin, amyloid precursor protein, 
and hyperphosphorylated neurofilament proteins. Restoration of lysosomal 
proteolysis reversed the affected movements of proteolytic Rab7 vesicles, which 
in turn essentially cleared autophagic substrates and reversed the axonal 
dystrophy. These studies identify the AD-associated defects in neuronal 
lysosomal proteolysis as a possible basis for the selective transport 
abnormalities and highly characteristic pattern of neuritic dystrophy associated 
with AD.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.6412-10.2011
PMCID: PMC3351137
PMID: 21613495 [Indexed for MEDLINE]