1. J Med Genet. 2011 Aug;48(8):540-8. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2011.089144. Epub 2011 Jun
 9.

NLRP7 in the spectrum of reproductive wastage: rare non-synonymous variants 
confer genetic susceptibility to recurrent reproductive wastage.

Messaed C(1), Chebaro W, Di Roberto RB, Rittore C, Cheung A, Arseneau J, 
Schneider A, Chen MF, Bernishke K, Surti U, Hoffner L, Sauthier P, Buckett W, 
Qian J, Lau NM, Bagga R, Engert JC, Coullin P, Touitou I, Slim R; H M 
Collaborative Group.

Collaborators: Tan SL, Benjamin A, Gilbert L, Golfier F, Breguet M, Srinivasan 
R, El-Hassan A, Stipoljev F, Krishnamurty S, Seoud M, Zaatari G, Cohen D, Girard 
I, Gardner RJ.

Author information:
(1)Montreal General Hospital Research Institute, 1650 Cedar Avenue, Montreal, 
Quebec, Canada.

BACKGROUND: NLRP7 mutations are responsible for recurrent molar pregnancies and 
associated reproductive wastage. To investigate the role of NLRP7 in sporadic 
moles and other forms of reproductive wastage, the authors sequenced this gene 
in a cohort of 135 patients with at least one hydatidiform mole or three 
spontaneous abortions; 115 of these were new patients.
METHODS/RESULTS: All mutations were reviewed and their number, nature and 
locations correlated with the reproductive outcomes of the patients and 
histopathology of their products of conception. The presence of NLRP7 mutations 
was demonstrated in two patients with recurrent spontaneous abortions, and some 
rare non-synonymous variants (NSVs), present in the general population, were 
found to be associated with recurrent reproductive wastage. These rare NSVs were 
shown to be associated with lower secretion of interleukin 1β and tumour 
necrosis factor and therefore to have functional consequences similar to those 
seen in cells from patients with NLRP7 mutations. The authors also attempted to 
elucidate the cause of stillbirths observed in 13% of the patients with NLRP7 
mutations by examining available placentas of the stillborn babies and live 
births from patients with mutations or rare NSVs. A number of severe to mild 
placental abnormalities were found, all of which are known risk factors for 
perinatal morbidity.
CONCLUSIONS: The authors recommend close follow-up of patients with NLRP7 
mutations and rare NSVs to prevent the death of the rare or reduced number of 
babies that reach term.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.2011.089144
PMID: 21659348 [Indexed for MEDLINE]