1. PLoS Genet. 2011 Jun;7(6):e1002117. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002117. Epub
2011  Jun 16.

Mechanisms for the evolution of a derived function in the ancestral 
glucocorticoid receptor.

Carroll SM(1), Ortlund EA, Thornton JW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.

Understanding the genetic, structural, and biophysical mechanisms that caused 
protein functions to evolve is a central goal of molecular evolutionary studies. 
Ancestral sequence reconstruction (ASR) offers an experimental approach to these 
questions. Here we use ASR to shed light on the earliest functions and evolution 
of the glucocorticoid receptor (GR), a steroid-activated transcription factor 
that plays a key role in the regulation of vertebrate physiology. Prior work 
showed that GR and its paralog, the mineralocorticoid receptor (MR), duplicated 
from a common ancestor roughly 450 million years ago; the ancestral functions 
were largely conserved in the MR lineage, but the functions of GRs-reduced 
sensitivity to all hormones and increased selectivity for glucocorticoids-are 
derived. Although the mechanisms for the evolution of glucocorticoid specificity 
have been identified, how reduced sensitivity evolved has not yet been studied. 
Here we report on the reconstruction of the deepest ancestor in the GR lineage 
(AncGR1) and demonstrate that GR's reduced sensitivity evolved before the 
acquisition of restricted hormone specificity, shortly after the GR-MR split. 
Using site-directed mutagenesis, X-ray crystallography, and computational 
analyses of protein stability to recapitulate and determine the effects of 
historical mutations, we show that AncGR1's reduced ligand sensitivity evolved 
primarily due to three key substitutions. Two large-effect mutations weakened 
hydrogen bonds and van der Waals interactions within the ancestral protein, 
reducing its stability. The degenerative effect of these two mutations is 
extremely strong, but a third permissive substitution, which has no apparent 
effect on function in the ancestral background and is likely to have occurred 
first, buffered the effects of the destabilizing mutations. Taken together, our 
results highlight the potentially creative role of substitutions that partially 
degrade protein structure and function and reinforce the importance of 
permissive mutations in protein evolution.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002117
PMCID: PMC3116920
PMID: 21698144 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.