1. PLoS One. 2011;6(6):e20501. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020501. Epub 2011 Jun
10.

Protective effects of positive lysosomal modulation in Alzheimer's disease 
transgenic mouse models.

Butler D(1), Hwang J, Estick C, Nishiyama A, Kumar SS, Baveghems C, 
Young-Oxendine HB, Wisniewski ML, Charalambides A, Bahr BA.

Author information:
(1)Neurosciences Program, University of Connecticut, Storrs, Connecticut, United 
States of America.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is an age-related neurodegenerative pathology in which 
defects in proteolytic clearance of amyloid β peptide (Aβ) likely contribute to 
the progressive nature of the disorder. Lysosomal proteases of the cathepsin 
family exhibit up-regulation in response to accumulating proteins including 
Aβ(1-42). Here, the lysosomal modulator Z-Phe-Ala-diazomethylketone (PADK) was 
used to test whether proteolytic activity can be enhanced to reduce the 
accumulation events in AD mouse models expressing different levels of Aβ 
pathology. Systemic PADK injections in APP(SwInd) and APPswe/PS1ΔE9 mice caused 
3- to 8-fold increases in cathepsin B protein levels and 3- to 10-fold increases 
in the enzyme's activity in lysosomal fractions, while neprilysin and 
insulin-degrading enzyme remained unchanged. Biochemical analyses indicated the 
modulation predominantly targeted the active mature forms of cathepsin B and 
markedly changed Rab proteins but not LAMP1, suggesting the involvement of 
enhanced trafficking. The modulated lysosomal system led to reductions in both 
Aβ immunostaining as well as Aβ(x-42) sandwich ELISA measures in APP(SwInd) mice 
of 10-11 months. More extensive Aβ deposition in 20-22-month APPswe/PS1ΔE9 mice 
was also reduced by PADK. Selective ELISAs found that a corresponding production 
of the less pathogenic Aβ(1-38) occurs as Aβ(1-42) levels decrease in the mouse 
models, indicating that PADK treatment leads to Aβ truncation. Associated with 
Aβ clearance was the elimination of behavioral and synaptic protein deficits 
evident in the two transgenic models. These findings indicate that 
pharmacologically-controlled lysosomal modulation reduces Aβ(1-42) accumulation, 
possibly through intracellular truncation that also influences extracellular 
deposition, and in turn offsets the defects in synaptic composition and 
cognitive functions. The selective modulation promotes clearance at different 
levels of Aβ pathology and provides proof-of-principle for small molecule 
therapeutic development for AD and possibly other protein accumulation 
disorders.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020501
PMCID: PMC3112200
PMID: 21695208 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.