1. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2011 Jul;68(7):665-74. doi: 
10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2011.71.

Downregulated kynurenine 3-monooxygenase gene expression and enzyme activity in 
schizophrenia and genetic association with schizophrenia endophenotypes.

Wonodi I(1), Stine OC, Sathyasaikumar KV, Roberts RC, Mitchell BD, Hong LE, 
Kajii Y, Thaker GK, Schwarcz R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Maryland School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD 21228. iwonodi@mprc.umaryland.edu

CONTEXT: Kynurenic acid, a metabolite of the kynurenine pathway of tryptophan 
degradation, is an antagonist at N-methyl-d-aspartate and α7 nicotinic 
acetylcholine receptors and modulates glutamate, dopamine, and acetylcholine 
signaling. Cortical kynurenic acid concentrations are elevated in the brain and 
cerebrospinal fluid of schizophrenia patients. The proximal cause may be an 
impairment of kynurenine 3-monooxygenase (KMO), a rate-limiting enzyme at the 
branching point of the kynurenine pathway.
OBJECTIVES: To examine KMO messenger RNA expression and KMO enzyme activity in 
postmortem tissue from the frontal eye field (FEF; Brodmann area 6) obtained 
from schizophrenia individuals compared with healthy control individuals and to 
explore the relationship between KMO single-nucleotide polymorphisms and 
schizophrenia oculomotor endophenotypes.
DESIGN: Case-control postmortem and clinical study.
SETTING: Maryland Brain Collection, outpatient clinics.
PARTICIPANTS: Postmortem specimens from schizophrenia patients (n = 32) and 
control donors (n = 32) and a clinical sample of schizophrenia patients 
(n = 248) and healthy controls (n = 228).
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Comparison of quantitative KMO messenger RNA expression 
and KMO enzyme activity in postmortem FEF tissue between schizophrenia patients 
and controls and association of KMO single-nucleotide polymorphisms with 
messenger RNA expression in postmortem FEF and schizophrenia and oculomotor 
endophenotypes (ie, smooth pursuit eye movements and oculomotor delayed 
response).
RESULTS: In postmortem tissue, we found a significant and correlated reduction 
in KMO gene expression and KMO enzyme activity in the FEF in schizophrenia 
patients. In the clinical sample, KMO rs2275163 was not associated with a 
diagnosis of schizophrenia but showed modest effects on predictive pursuit and 
visuospatial working memory endophenotypes.
CONCLUSION: Our results provide converging lines of evidence implicating reduced 
KMO activity in the etiopathophysiology of schizophrenia and related 
neurocognitive deficits.

DOI: 10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2011.71
PMCID: PMC3855543
PMID: 21727251 [Indexed for MEDLINE]