1. Biomacromolecules. 2011 Aug 8;12(8):2933-45. doi: 10.1021/bm2005214. Epub 2011
 Jul 18.

Primary structure and phosphorylation of dentin matrix protein 1 (DMP1) and 
dentin phosphophoryn (DPP) uniquely determine their role in biomineralization.

Deshpande AS(1), Fang PA, Zhang X, Jayaraman T, Sfeir C, Beniash E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral Biology, Center for Craniofacial Regeneration, University 
of Pittsburgh School of Dental Medicine, McGowan Institute for Regenerative 
Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States.

The SIBLING (small integrin-binding ligand N-linked glycoproteins) family is the 
major group of noncollagenous proteins in bone and dentin. These extremely 
acidic and highly phosphorylated extracellular proteins play critical roles in 
the formation of collagenous mineralized tissues. Whereas the lack of individual 
SIBLINGs causes significant mineralization defects in vivo, none of them led to 
a complete cessation of mineralization suggesting that these proteins have 
overlapping functions. To assess whether different SIBLINGs regulate 
biomineralization in a similar manner and how phosphorylation impacts their 
activity, we studied the effects of two SIBLINGs, dentin matrix protein 1 (DMP1) 
and dentin phosphophoryn (DPP), on mineral morphology and organization in vitro. 
Our results demonstrate distinct differences in the effects of these proteins on 
mineralization. We show that phosphorylation has a profound effect on the 
regulation of mineralization by both proteins. Specifically, both phosphorylated 
proteins facilitated organized mineralization of collagen fibrils and 
phosphorylated DMP1-induced formation of organized mineral bundles in the 
absence of collagen. In summary, these results indicate that the primary 
structure and phosphorylation uniquely determine functions of individual 
SIBLINGs in regulation of mineral morphology and organization.

DOI: 10.1021/bm2005214
PMCID: PMC3171794
PMID: 21736373 [Indexed for MEDLINE]