1. PLoS One. 2011;6(7):e21966. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0021966. Epub 2011 Jul
14.

Chlorpromazine protects against apoptosis induced by exogenous stimuli in the 
developing rat brain.

Wu J(1), Song R, Song W, Li Y, Zhang Q, Chen Y, Fu Y, Fang W, Wang J, Zhong Z, 
Ling H, Zhang L, Zhang F.

Author information:
(1)The Heilongjiang Key Laboratory of Immunity and Infection, Pathogenic 
Biology, Department of Microbiology, Harbin Medical University, Harbin, 
Heilongjiang, China.

BACKGROUND: Chlorpromazine (CPZ), a commonly used antipsychotic drug, was found 
to play a neuroprotective role in various models of toxicity. However, whether 
CPZ has the potential to affect brain apoptosis in vivo is still unknown. The 
purpose of this study was to investigate the potential effect of CPZ on the 
apoptosis induced by exogenous stimuli.
METHODOLOGY: The ethanol treated infant rat was utilized as a valid apoptotic 
model, which is commonly used and could trigger robust apoptosis in brain 
tissue. Prior to the induction of apoptosis by subcutaneous injection of 
ethanol, 7-day-old rats were treated with CPZ at several doses (5 mg/kg, 10 
mg/kg and 20 mg/kg) by intraperitoneal injection. Apoptotic cells in the brain 
were measured using TUNEL analysis, and the levels of cleaved caspase-3, 
cytochrome c, the pro-apoptotic factor Bax and the anti-apoptotic factor Bcl-2 
were assessed by immunostaining or western blot.
FINDINGS: Compared to the group injected with ethanol only, the brains of the 
CPZ-pretreated rats had fewer apoptotic cells, lower expression of cleaved 
caspase-3, cytochrome c and Bax, and higher expression of Bcl-2. These results 
demonstrate that CPZ could prevent apoptosis in the brain by regulating the 
mitochondrial pathway.
CONCLUSIONS: CPZ exerts an inhibitory effect on apoptosis induced by ethanol in 
the rat brain, intimating that it may offer a means of protecting nerve cells 
from apoptosis induced by exogenous stimuli.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0021966
PMCID: PMC3136481
PMID: 21779358 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.