1. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 2011;7:357-64. doi: 10.2147/NDT.S18953. Epub 2011
Jun  21.

Is serum brain-derived neurotrophic factor related to craving for or use of 
alcohol, cocaine, or methamphetamine?

Hilburn C(1), Nejtek VA, Underwood WA, Singh M, Patel G, Gangwani P, Forster MJ.

Author information:
(1)University of North Texas Health Science Center at Fort Worth, TX, USA.

BACKGROUND: Data suggests that brain-derived neurotropic factor (BDNF) plays a 
neuroadaptive role in addiction. Whether serum BDNF levels are different in 
alcohol or psychostimulants as a function of craving is unknown. Here, we 
examined craving and serum BDNF levels in persons with alcohol versus 
psychostimulant dependence. Our goals were to explore BDNF as an objective 
biomarker for 1) craving 2) abstinence, and 3) years of chronic substance use.
METHODS: An exploratory, cross-sectional study was designed. Men and women 
between 20-65 years old with alcohol, cocaine, or methamphetamine dependence 
were eligible. A craving questionnaire was used to measure alcohol, cocaine and 
methamphetamine cravings. Serum levels of BDNF were measured using enzyme linked 
immunoassay. Analysis of variance, chi-square, and correlations were performed 
using a 95% confidence interval and a significance level of P < 0.05.
RESULTS: We found a significant difference in the mean craving score among 
alcohol, cocaine and methamphetamine dependent subjects. There were no 
significant influences of race, gender, psychiatric disorder or psychotropic 
medication on serum BDNF levels. We found that among psychostimulant users BDNF 
levels were significantly higher in men than in women when the number of 
abstinent days was statistically controlled. Further, a significant correlation 
between serum BDNF levels and the number of abstinent days since last 
psychostimulant use was found.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that BDNF may be a biomarker of abstinence in 
psychostimulant dependent subjects and inform clinicians about treatment 
initiatives. The results are interpreted with caution due to small sample size 
and lack of a control group.

DOI: 10.2147/NDT.S18953
PMCID: PMC3140291
PMID: 21792305