1. PLoS One. 2011;6(7):e22636. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022636. Epub 2011 Jul
22.

An evolutionary conserved role for anaplastic lymphoma kinase in behavioral 
responses to ethanol.

Lasek AW(1), Lim J, Kliethermes CL, Berger KH, Joslyn G, Brush G, Xue L, 
Robertson M, Moore MS, Vranizan K, Morris SW, Schuckit MA, White RL, Heberlein 
U.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Ernest Gallo Clinic and Research Center, University 
of California San Francisco, Emeryville, California, United States of America. 
alasek@gallo.ucsf.edu

Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (Alk) is a gene expressed in the nervous system that 
encodes a receptor tyrosine kinase commonly known for its oncogenic function in 
various human cancers. We have determined that Alk is associated with altered 
behavioral responses to ethanol in the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster, in 
mice, and in humans. Mutant flies containing transposon insertions in dAlk 
demonstrate increased resistance to the sedating effect of ethanol. Database 
analyses revealed that Alk expression levels in the brains of recombinant inbred 
mice are negatively correlated with ethanol-induced ataxia and ethanol 
consumption. We therefore tested Alk gene knockout mice and found that they 
sedate longer in response to high doses of ethanol and consume more ethanol than 
wild-type mice. Finally, sequencing of human ALK led to the discovery of four 
polymorphisms associated with a low level of response to ethanol, an 
intermediate phenotype that is predictive of future alcohol use disorders 
(AUDs). These results suggest that Alk plays an evolutionary conserved role in 
ethanol-related behaviors. Moreover, ALK may be a novel candidate gene 
conferring risk for AUDs as well as a potential target for pharmacological 
intervention.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022636
PMCID: PMC3142173
PMID: 21799923 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.