1. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e22781. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022781. Epub 2011 Aug
3.

Nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase/visfatin does not catalyze nicotinamide 
mononucleotide formation in blood plasma.

Hara N(1), Yamada K, Shibata T, Osago H, Tsuchiya M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Shimane University Faculty of Medicine, Izumo, 
Shimane, Japan. nhara@med.shimane-u.ac.jp

Nicotinamide (Nam) phosphoribosyltransferase (NAMPT) is the rate-limiting enzyme 
in mammalian NAD synthesis, catalyzing nicotinamide mononucleotide (NMN) 
formation from Nam and 5-phosphoribosyl 1-pyrophosphate (PRPP). NAMPT has also 
been described as an adipocytokine visfatin with a variety of actions, although 
physiological significance of this protein remains unclear. It has been proposed 
that possible actions of visfatin are mediated through the extracellular 
formation of NMN. However, we did not detect NMN in mouse blood plasma, even 
with a highly specific and sensitive liquid chromatography/tandem mass 
spectrometry. Furthermore, there is no or little ATP, the activator of NAMPT, in 
extracellular spaces. We thus questioned whether visfatin catalyzes the in situ 
formation of NMN under such extracellular milieus. To address this question, we 
here determined K(m) values for the substrates Nam and PRPP in the NAMPT 
reaction without or with ATP using a recombinant human enzyme and found that 1 
mM ATP dramatically decreases K(m) values for the substrates, in particular PRPP 
to its intracellular concentration. Consistent with the kinetic data, only when 
ATP is present at millimolar levels, NAMPT efficiently catalyzed the NMN 
formation at the intracellular concentrations of the substrates. Much lower 
concentrations of Nam and almost the absence of PRPP and ATP in the blood plasma 
suggest that NAMPT should not efficiently catalyze its reaction under the 
extracellular milieu. Indeed, NAMPT did not form NMN in the blood plasma. From 
these kinetic analyses of the enzyme and quantitative determination of its 
substrates, activator, and product, we conclude that visfatin does not 
participate in NMN formation under the extracellular milieus. Together with the 
absence of NMN in the blood plasma, our conclusion does not support the concept 
of "NAMPT-mediated systemic NAD biosynthesis." Our study would advance current 
understanding of visfatin physiology.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022781
PMCID: PMC3149623
PMID: 21826208 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.