1. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e22655. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022655. Epub 2011 Aug
3.

Anti-inflammatory effect of fluvastatin on IL-8 production induced by 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Aspergillus fumigatus antigens in cystic fibrosis.

Jouneau S(1), Bonizec M, Belleguic C, Desrues B, Brinchault G, Galaine J, 
Gangneux JP, Martin-Chouly C.

Author information:
(1)EA 4427 Signalisation et Réponse aux Agents Infectieux et Chimiques, 
Université de Rennes 1, Institut de Recherche Santé Environnement Travail, 
Institut Fédératif de Recherche 140, Rennes, France.

BACKGROUND: Early in life, patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) are infected with 
microorganisms including bacteria and fungi, particularly Pseudomonas aeruginosa 
and Aspergillus fumigatus. Since recent research has identified the 
anti-inflammatory properties of statins (besides their lipid-lowering effects), 
we investigated the effect of fluvastatin on the production of the potent 
neutrophil chemoattractant chemokine, IL-8, in whole blood from CF patients, 
stimulated by Pseudomonas aeruginosa (LPS) and Aspergillus fumigatus (AFA) 
antigens.
RESULTS: Whole blood from adult patients with CF and from healthy volunteers was 
collected at the Rennes University Hospital (France). Blood was pretreated for 1 
h with fluvastatin (0-300 µM) and incubated for 24 h with LPS (10 µg/mL) and/or 
AFA (diluted 1/200). IL-8 protein levels, quantified by ELISA, were increased in 
a concentration-dependent manner when cells were stimulated by LPS or AFA. 
Fluvastatin strongly decreased the levels of IL-8, in a concentration-dependent 
manner, in whole blood from CF patients. However, its inhibitory effect was 
decreased or absent in whole blood from healthy subjects. Furthermore, the 
inhibition induced by fluvastatin in CF whole blood was reversed in the presence 
of intermediates within the cholesterol biosynthesis pathway, mevalonate, 
farnesyl pyprophosphate or geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate that activate small 
GTPases by isoprenylation.
CONCLUSIONS: For the first time, the inhibitory effects of fluvastatin on CF 
systemic inflammation may reveal the important therapeutic potential of statins 
in pathological conditions associated with the over-production of 
pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines as observed during the manifestation 
of CF. The anti-inflammatory effect could be related to the modulation of the 
prenylation of signalling proteins.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022655
PMCID: PMC3149602
PMID: 21826199 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.