1. Front Mol Neurosci. 2011 Jul 25;4:11. doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2011.00011.
eCollection  2011.

The role of insulin-like growth factor-I in the physiopathology of hearing.

Murillo-Cuesta S(1), Rodríguez-de la Rosa L, Cediel R, Lassaletta L, 
Varela-Nieto I.

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Evaluación Neurofuncional no Invasiva, Instituto de 
Investigaciones Biomédicas Alberto Sols, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones 
Científicas-Universidad Autónoma de Madrid Madrid, Spain.

Insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) belongs to the family of polypeptides of 
insulin, which play a central role in embryonic development and adult nervous 
system homeostasis by endocrine, autocrine, and paracrine mechanisms. IGF-I is 
fundamental for the regulation of cochlear development, growth, and 
differentiation, and its mutations are associated with hearing loss in mice and 
men. Low levels of IGF-I have been shown to correlate with different human 
syndromes showing hearing loss and with presbyacusis. Animal models are 
fundamental to understand the genetic, epigenetic, and environmental factors 
that contribute to human hearing loss. In the mouse, IGF-I serum levels decrease 
with aging and there is a concomitant hearing loss and retinal degeneration. In 
the Igf1(-/-) null mouse, hearing loss is due to neuronal loss, poor innervation 
of the sensory hair cells, and age-related stria vascularis alterations. In the 
inner ear, IGF-I actions are mediated by intracellular signaling networks, RAF, 
AKT, and p38 MAPK protein kinases modulate the expression and activity of 
transcription factors, as AP1, MEF2, FoxM1, and FoxP3, leading to the regulation 
of cell cycle and metabolism. Therapy with rhIGF-I has been approved in humans 
for the treatment of poor linear growth and certain neurodegenerative diseases. 
This review will discuss these findings and their implications in new 
IGF-I-based treatments for the protection or repair of hearing loss.

DOI: 10.3389/fnmol.2011.00011
PMCID: PMC3146045
PMID: 21845174