1. J Alzheimers Dis. 2011;27(2):361-76. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2011-110608.

Biochemical and morphological characterization of the AβPP/PS/tau triple 
transgenic mouse model and its relevance to sporadic Alzheimer's disease.

Hunter JM(1), Bowers WJ, Maarouf CL, Mastrangelo MA, Daugs ID, Kokjohn TA, 
Kalback WM, Luehrs DC, Valla J, Beach TG, Roher AE.

Author information:
(1)The Longtine Center for Neurodegenerative Biochemistry, Banner Sun Health 
Research Institute, Sun City, AZ, USA.

Transgenic (Tg) mouse models of Alzheimer's disease (AD) have been genetically 
altered with human familial AD genes driven by powerful promoters. However, a Tg 
model must accurately mirror the pathogenesis of the human disease, not merely 
the signature amyloid and/or tau pathology, as such hallmarks can arise via 
multiple convergent or even by pathogenic mechanisms unrelated to human sporadic 
AD. The 3 × Tg-AD mouse simultaneously expresses 3 rare familial mutant genes 
that in humans independently produce devastating amyloid-β protein precursor 
(AβPP), presenilin-1, and frontotemporal dementias; hence, technically speaking, 
these mice are not a model of sporadic AD, but are informative in assessing 
co-evolving amyloid and tau pathologies. While end-stage amyloid and tau 
pathologies in 3 × Tg-AD mice are similar to those observed in sporadic AD, the 
pathophysiological mechanisms leading to these lesions are quite different. 
Comprehensive biochemical and morphological characterizations are important to 
gauge the predictive value of Tg mice. Investigation of AβPP, amyloid-β (Aβ), 
and tau in the 3 × Tg-AD model demonstrates AD-like pathology with some key 
differences compared to human sporadic AD. The biochemical dissection of AβPP 
reveals different cleavage patterns of the C-terminus of AβPP when compared to 
human AD, suggesting divergent pathogenic mechanisms. Human tau is concomitantly 
expressed with AβPP/Aβ from an early age while abundant extracellular amyloid 
plaques and paired helical filaments are manifested from 18 months on. 
Understanding the strengths and limitations of Tg mouse AD models through 
rigorous biochemical, pathological, and functional analyses will facilitate the 
derivation of models that better approximate human sporadic AD.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-2011-110608
PMCID: PMC3327160
PMID: 21860086 [Indexed for MEDLINE]