1. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e23697. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023697. Epub 2011 Aug
24.

Combined SAXS/EM based models of the S. elongatus post-translational circadian 
oscillator and its interactions with the output His-kinase SasA.

Pattanayek R(1), Williams DR, Rossi G, Weigand S, Mori T, Johnson CH, Stewart 
PL, Egli M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Vanderbilt University, 
Nashville, Tennessee, United States of America.

The circadian clock in the cyanobacterium Synechococcus elongatus is composed of 
a post-translational oscillator (PTO) that can be reconstituted in vitro from 
three different proteins in the presence of ATP and a transcription-translation 
feedback loop (TTFL). The homo-hexameric KaiC kinase, phosphatase and ATPase 
alternates between hypo- and hyper-phosphorylated states over the 24-h cycle, 
with KaiA enhancing phosphorylation, and KaiB antagonizing KaiA and promoting 
KaiC subunit exchange. SasA is a His kinase that relays output signals from the 
PTO formed by the three Kai proteins to the TTFL. Although the crystal 
structures for all three Kai proteins are known, atomic resolution structures of 
Kai and Kai/SasA protein complexes have remained elusive. Here, we present 
models of the KaiAC and KaiBC complexes derived from solution small angle X-ray 
scattering (SAXS), which are consistent with previous EM based models. We also 
present a combined SAXS/EM model of the KaiC/SasA complex, which has two 
N-terminal SasA sensory domains occupying positions on the C-terminal KaiC ring 
reminiscent of the orientations adopted by KaiB dimers. Using EM we demonstrate 
that KaiB and SasA compete for similar binding sites on KaiC. We also propose an 
EM based model of the ternary KaiABC complex that is consistent with the 
sequestering of KaiA by KaiB on KaiC during the PTO dephosphorylation phase. 
This work provides the first 3D-catalogue of protein-protein interactions in the 
KaiABC PTO and the output pathway mediated by SasA.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023697
PMCID: PMC3161067
PMID: 21887298 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.