1. BMC Neurosci. 2011 Sep 2;12:88. doi: 10.1186/1471-2202-12-88.

Transcriptomic analysis of the zebrafish inner ear points to growth hormone 
mediated regeneration following acoustic trauma.

Schuck JB(1), Sun H, Penberthy WT, Cooper NG, Li X, Smith ME.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Western Kentucky University, 1906 College Heights 
Blvd, Bowling Green, KY 42101, USA.

BACKGROUND: Unlike mammals, teleost fishes are capable of regenerating sensory 
inner ear hair cells that have been lost following acoustic or ototoxic trauma. 
Previous work indicated that immediately following sound exposure, zebrafish 
saccules exhibit significant hair cell loss that recovers to pre-treatment 
levels within 14 days. Following acoustic trauma in the zebrafish inner ear, we 
used microarray analysis to identify genes involved in inner ear repair 
following acoustic exposure. Additionally, we investigated the effect of growth 
hormone (GH) on cell proliferation in control zebrafish utricles and saccules, 
since GH was significantly up-regulated following acoustic trauma.
RESULTS: Microarray analysis, validated with the aid of quantitative real-time 
PCR, revealed several genes that were highly regulated during the process of 
regeneration in the zebrafish inner ear. Genes that had fold changes of ≥ 1.4 
and P -values ≤ 0.05 were considered significantly regulated and were used for 
subsequent analysis. Categories of biological function that were significantly 
regulated included cancer, cellular growth and proliferation, and inflammation. 
Of particular significance, a greater than 64-fold increase in growth hormone 
(gh1) transcripts occurred, peaking at 2 days post-sound exposure (dpse) and 
decreasing to approximately 5.5-fold by 4 dpse. Pathway Analysis software was 
used to reveal networks of regulated genes and showed how GH affected these 
networks. Subsequent experiments showed that intraperitoneal injection of salmon 
growth hormone significantly increased cell proliferation in the zebrafish inner 
ear. Many other gene transcripts were also differentially regulated, including 
heavy and light chain myosin transcripts, both of which were down-regulated 
following sound exposure, and major histocompatability class I and II genes, 
several of which were significantly regulated on 2 dpse.
CONCLUSIONS: Transcripts for GH, MHC Class I and II genes, and heavy- and 
light-chain myosins, as well as many others genes, were differentially regulated 
in the zebrafish inner ear following overexposure to sound. GH injection 
increased cell proliferation in the inner ear of non-sound-exposed zebrafish, 
suggesting that GH could play an important role in sensory hair cell 
regeneration in the teleost ear.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2202-12-88
PMCID: PMC3175199
PMID: 21888654 [Indexed for MEDLINE]