1. Crit Care. 2011 Aug 11;15(4):226. doi: 10.1186/cc8224.

Bench-to-bedside review: Vasopressin in the management of septic shock.

Russell JA(1).

Author information:
(1)Critical Care Medicine, St Paul's Hospital, 1081 Burrard Street, Vancouver, 
BC, Canada V6Z 1Y6. jrussell@mrl.ubc.ca

This review of vasopressin in septic shock differs from previous reviews by 
providing more information on the physiology and pathophysiology of vasopressin 
and vasopressin receptors, particularly because of recent interest in more 
specific AVPR1a agonists and new information from the Vasopressin and Septic 
Shock Trial (VASST), a randomized trial of vasopressin versus norepinephrine in 
septic shock. Relevant literature regarding vasopressin and other AVPR1a 
agonists was reviewed and synthesized. Vasopressin, a key stress hormone in 
response to hypotension, stimulates a family of receptors: AVPR1a, AVPR1b, 
AVPR2, oxytocin receptors and purinergic receptors. Rationales for use of 
vasopressin in septic shock are as follows: first, a deficiency of vasopressin 
in septic shock; second, low-dose vasopressin infusion improves blood pressure, 
decreases requirements for norepinephrine and improves renal function; and 
third, a recent randomized, controlled, concealed trial of vasopressin versus 
norepinephrine (VASST) suggests low-dose vasopressin may decrease mortality of 
less severe septic shock. Previous clinical studies of vasopressin in septic 
shock were small or not controlled. There was no difference in 28-day mortality 
between vasopressin-treated versus norepinephrine-treated patients (35% versus 
39%, respectively) in VASST. There was potential benefit in the prospectively 
defined stratum of patients with less severe septic shock (5 to 14 μg/minute 
norepinephrine at randomization): vasopressin may have lowered mortality 
compared with norepinephrine (26% versus 36%, respectively, P = 0.04 within 
stratum). The result was robust: vasopressin also decreased mortality (compared 
with norepinephrine) if less severe septic shock was defined by the lowest 
quartile of arterial lactate or by use of one (versus more than one) vasopressor 
at baseline. Other investigators found greater hemodynamic effects of higher 
dose of vasopressin (0.06 units/minute) but also unique adverse effects 
(elevated liver enzymes and serum bilirubin). Use of higher dose vasopressin 
requires further evaluation of efficacy and safety. There are very few studies 
of interactions of therapies in critical care--or septic shock--and effects on 
mortality. Therefore, the interaction of vasopressin infusion, corticosteroid 
treatment and mortality of septic shock was evaluated in VASST. Low-dose 
vasopressin infusion plus corticosteroids significantly decreased 28-day 
mortality compared with corticosteroids plus norepinephrine (44% versus 35%, 
respectively, P = 0.03; P = 0.008 interaction statistic). Prospective randomized 
controlled trials would be necessary to confirm this interesting interaction. In 
conclusion, low-dose vasopressin may be effective in patients who have less 
severe septic shock already receiving norepinephrine (such as patients with 
modest norepinephrine infusion (5 to 15 μg/minute) or low serum lactate levels). 
The interaction of vasopressin infusion and corticosteroid treatment in septic 
shock requires further study.

DOI: 10.1186/cc8224
PMCID: PMC3387647
PMID: 21892977 [Indexed for MEDLINE]