1. Adv Appl Bioinform Chem. 2010;3:97-110. doi: 10.2147/AABC.S14368. Epub 2010
Dec  7.

A kinetic platform for in silico modeling of the metabolic dynamics in 
Escherichia coli.

Barve A(1), Gupta A, Solapure SM, Kumar A, Ramachandran V, Seshadri K, Vali S, 
Datta S.

Author information:
(1)Cellworks Research India Pvt. Ltd, Bangalore, India.

BACKGROUND: A prerequisite for a successful design and discovery of an 
antibacterial drug is the identification of essential targets as well as potent 
inhibitors that adversely affect the survival of bacteria. In order to 
understand how intracellular perturbations occur due to inhibition of essential 
metabolic pathways, we have built, through the use of ordinary differential 
equations, a mathematical model of 8 major Escherichia coli pathways.
RESULTS: Individual in vitro enzyme kinetic parameters published in the 
literature were used to build the network of pathways in such a way that the 
flux distribution matched that reported from whole cells. Gene regulation at the 
transcription level as well as feedback regulation of enzyme activity was 
incorporated as reported in the literature. The unknown kinetic parameters were 
estimated by trial and error through simulations by observing network stability. 
Metabolites, whose biosynthetic pathways were not represented in this platform, 
were provided at a fixed concentration. Unutilized products were maintained at a 
fixed concentration by removing excess quantities from the platform. This 
approach enabled us to achieve steady state levels of all the metabolites in the 
cell. The output of various simulations correlated well with those previously 
published.
CONCLUSION: Such a virtual platform can be exploited for target identification 
through assessment of their vulnerability, desirable mode of target enzyme 
inhibition, and metabolite profiling to ascribe mechanism of action following a 
specific target inhibition. Vulnerability of targets in the biosynthetic pathway 
of coenzyme A was evaluated using this platform. In addition, we also report the 
utility of this platform in understanding the impact of a physiologically 
relevant carbon source, glucose versus acetate, on metabolite profiles of 
bacterial pathogens.

DOI: 10.2147/AABC.S14368
PMCID: PMC3170011
PMID: 21918631