1. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e24466. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0024466. Epub 2011 Sep
12.

West Nile virus genetic diversity is maintained during transmission by Culex 
pipiens quinquefasciatus mosquitoes.

Brackney DE(1), Pesko KN, Brown IK, Deardorff ER, Kawatachi J, Ebel GD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of New Mexico School of Medicine, 
Albuquerque, New Mexico, United States of America.

Due to error-prone replication, RNA viruses exist within hosts as a 
heterogeneous population of non-identical, but related viral variants. These 
populations may undergo bottlenecks during transmission that stochastically 
reduce variability leading to fitness declines. Such bottlenecks have been 
documented for several single-host RNA viruses, but their role in the population 
biology of obligate two-host viruses such as arthropod-borne viruses 
(arboviruses) in vivo is unclear, but of central importance in understanding 
arbovirus persistence and emergence. Therefore, we tracked the composition of 
West Nile virus (WNV; Flaviviridae, Flavivirus) populations during infection of 
the vector mosquito, Culex pipiens quinquefasciatus to determine whether WNV 
populations undergo bottlenecks during transmission by this host. Quantitative, 
qualitative and phylogenetic analyses of WNV sequences in mosquito midguts, 
hemolymph and saliva failed to document reductions in genetic diversity during 
mosquito infection. Further, migration analysis of individual viral variants 
revealed that while there was some evidence of compartmentalization, anatomical 
barriers do not impose genetic bottlenecks on WNV populations. Together, these 
data suggest that the complexity of WNV populations are not significantly 
diminished during the extrinsic incubation period of mosquitoes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0024466
PMCID: PMC3171416
PMID: 21935412 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.