1. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e24279. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0024279. Epub 2011 Sep
9.

Transcription factor binding site positioning in yeast: proximal promoter motifs 
characterize TATA-less promoters.

Erb I(1), van Nimwegen E.

Author information:
(1)Bioinformatics and Genomics program, Center for Genomic Regulation and Pompeu 
Fabra University, Barcelona, Spain.

The availability of sequence specificities for a substantial fraction of yeast's 
transcription factors and comparative genomic algorithms for binding site 
prediction has made it possible to comprehensively annotate transcription factor 
binding sites genome-wide. Here we use such a genome-wide annotation for 
comprehensively studying promoter architecture in yeast, focusing on the 
distribution of transcription factor binding sites relative to transcription 
start sites, and the architecture of TATA and TATA-less promoters. For most 
transcription factors, binding sites are positioned further upstream and vary 
over a wider range in TATA promoters than in TATA-less promoters. In contrast, a 
group of 6 'proximal promoter motifs' (GAT1/GLN3/DAL80, FKH1/2, PBF1/2, RPN4, 
NDT80, and ROX1) occur preferentially in TATA-less promoters and show a strong 
preference for binding close to the transcription start site in these promoters. 
We provide evidence that suggests that pre-initiation complexes are recruited at 
TATA sites in TATA promoters and at the sites of the other proximal promoter 
motifs in TATA-less promoters. TATA-less promoters can generally be classified 
by the proximal promoter motif they contain, with different classes of TATA-less 
promoters showing different patterns of transcription factor binding site 
positioning and nucleosome coverage. These observations suggest that different 
modes of regulation of transcription initiation may be operating in the 
different promoter classes. In addition we show that, across all promoter 
classes, there is a close match between nucleosome free regions and regions of 
highest transcription factor binding site density. This close agreement between 
transcription factor binding site density and nucleosome depletion suggests a 
direct and general competition between transcription factors and nucleosomes for 
binding to promoters.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0024279
PMCID: PMC3170328
PMID: 21931670 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.