1. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e24698. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0024698. Epub 2011 Sep
9.

Growth-arrest-specific protein 2 inhibits cell division in Xenopus embryos.

Zhang T(1), Dayanandan B, Rouiller I, Lawrence EJ, Mandato CA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. 
tong.zhang1@mail.mcgill.ca

BACKGROUND: Growth-arrest-specific 2 gene was originally identified in murine 
fibroblasts under growth arrest conditions. Furthermore, serum stimulation of 
quiescent, non-dividing cells leads to the down-regulation of gas2 and results 
in re-entry into the cell cycle. Cytoskeleton rearrangements are critical for 
cell cycle progression and cell division and the Gas2 protein has been shown to 
co-localize with actin and microtubules in interphase mammalian cells. Despite 
these findings, direct evidence supporting a role for Gas2 in the mechanism of 
cell division has not been reported.
METHODOLOGY AND PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: To determine whether the Gas2 protein plays 
a role in cell division, we over-expressed the full-length Gas2 protein and Gas2 
truncations containing either the actin-binding CH domain or the tubulin-binding 
Gas2 domain in Xenopus laevis embryos. We found that both the full-length Gas2 
protein and the Gas2 domain, but not the CH domain, inhibited cell division and 
resulted in multinucleated cells. The observation that Gas2 domain alone can 
arrest cell division suggests that Gas2 function is mediated by microtubule 
binding. Gas2 co-localized with microtubules at the cell cortex of Gas2-injected 
Xenopus embryos using cryo-confocal microscopy and co-sedimented with 
microtubules in cytoskeleton co-sedimentation assays. To investigate the 
mechanism of Gas2-induced cell division arrest, we showed, using a wound-induced 
contractile array assay, that Gas2 stabilized microtubules. Finally, electron 
microscopy studies demonstrated that Gas2 bundled microtubules into higher-order 
structures.
CONCLUSION AND SIGNIFICANCE: Our experiments show that Gas2 inhibits cell 
division in Xenopus embryos. We propose that Gas2 function is mediated by 
binding and bundling microtubules, leading to cell division arrest.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0024698
PMCID: PMC3170402
PMID: 21931817 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.