1. Genome Biol. 2011 Sep 21;12(9):R90. doi: 10.1186/gb-2011-12-9-r90.

Exome sequencing identifies a missense mutation in Isl1 associated with low 
penetrance otitis media in dearisch mice.

Hilton JM(1), Lewis MA, Grati M, Ingham N, Pearson S, Laskowski RA, Adams DJ, 
Steel KP.

Author information:
(1)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SA, UK.

BACKGROUND: Inflammation of the middle ear (otitis media) is very common and can 
lead to serious complications if not resolved. Genetic studies suggest an 
inherited component, but few of the genes that contribute to this condition are 
known. Mouse mutants have contributed significantly to the identification of 
genes predisposing to otitis media
RESULTS: The dearisch mouse mutant is an ENU-induced mutant detected by its 
impaired Preyer reflex (ear flick in response to sound). Auditory brainstem 
responses revealed raised thresholds from as early as three weeks old. Pedigree 
analysis suggested a dominant but partially penetrant mode of inheritance. The 
middle ear of dearisch mutants shows a thickened mucosa and cellular effusion 
suggesting chronic otitis media with effusion with superimposed acute infection. 
The inner ear, including the sensory hair cells, appears normal. Due to the low 
penetrance of the phenotype, normal backcross mapping of the mutation was not 
possible. Exome sequencing was therefore employed to identify a non-conservative 
tyrosine to cysteine (Y71C) missense mutation in the Islet1 gene, Isl1(Drsh). 
Isl1 is expressed in the normal middle ear mucosa. The findings suggest the 
Isl1(Drsh) mutation is likely to predispose carriers to otitis media.
CONCLUSIONS: Dearisch, Isl1(Drsh), represents the first point mutation in the 
mouse Isl1 gene and suggests a previously unrecognized role for this gene. It is 
also the first recorded exome sequencing of the C3HeB/FeJ background relevant to 
many ENU-induced mutants. Most importantly, the power of exome resequencing to 
identify ENU-induced mutations without a mapped gene locus is illustrated.

DOI: 10.1186/gb-2011-12-9-r90
PMCID: PMC3308053
PMID: 21936904 [Indexed for MEDLINE]