1. J Transl Med. 2011 Sep 27;9:164. doi: 10.1186/1479-5876-9-164.

Replication efficiency of oncolytic vaccinia virus in cell cultures 
prognosticates the virulence and antitumor efficacy in mice.

Chen NG(1), Yu YA, Zhang Q, Szalay AA.

Author information:
(1)Genelux Corporation, San Diego Science Center, San Diego, CA 92109, USA.

BACKGROUND: We have shown that insertion of the three vaccinia virus (VACV) 
promoter-driven foreign gene expression cassettes encoding Renilla 
luciferase-Aequorea GFP fusion protein, β-galactosidase, and β-glucuronidase 
into the F14.5L, J2R, and A56R loci of the VACV LIVP genome, respectively, 
results in a highly attenuated mutant strain GLV-1h68. This strain shows 
tumor-specific replication and is capable of eradicating tumors with little or 
no virulence in mice. This study aimed to distinguish the contribution of added 
VACV promoter-driven transcriptional units as inserts from the effects of 
insertional inactivation of three viral genes, and to determine the correlation 
between replication efficiency of oncolytic vaccinia virus in cell cultures and 
the virulence and antitumor efficacy in mice
METHODS: A series of recombinant VACV strains was generated by replacing one, 
two, or all three of the expression cassettes in GLV-1h68 with short non-coding 
DNA sequences. The replication efficiency and tumor cell killing capacity of 
these newly generated VACV strains were compared with those of the parent virus 
GLV-1h68 in cell cultures. The virus replication efficiency in tumors and 
antitumor efficacy as well as the virulence were evaluated in nu/nu (nude) mice 
bearing human breast tumor xenografts.
RESULTS: we found that virus replication efficiency increased with removal of 
each of the expression cassettes. The increase in virus replication efficiency 
was proportionate to the strength of removed VACV promoters linked to foreign 
genes. The replication efficiency of the new VACV strains paralleled their 
cytotoxicity in cell cultures. The increased replication efficiency in tumor 
xenografts resulted in enhanced antitumor efficacy in nude mice. Similarly, the 
enhanced virus replication efficiency was indicative of increased virulence in 
nude mice.
CONCLUSIONS: These data demonstrated that insertion of VACV promoter-driven 
transcriptional units into the viral genome for the purpose of insertional 
mutagenesis did modulate the efficiency of virus replication together with 
antitumor efficacy as well as virulence. Replication efficiency of oncolytic 
VACV in cell cultures can predict the virulence and therapeutic efficacy in nude 
mice. These findings may be essential for rational design of safe and potent 
VACV strains for vaccination and virotherapy of cancer in humans and animals.

DOI: 10.1186/1479-5876-9-164
PMCID: PMC3192684
PMID: 21951588 [Indexed for MEDLINE]