1. Skelet Muscle. 2011 Oct 5;1(1):31. doi: 10.1186/2044-5040-1-31.

Level of muscle regeneration in limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 2I relates 
to genotype and clinical severity.

Krag TO(1), Hauerslev S, Sveen ML, Schwartz M, Vissing J.

Author information:
(1)Neuromuscular Research Unit, Department of Neurology Rigshospitalet, 
University of Copenhagen, Denmark. thomas.krag@rh.regionh.dk.

BACKGROUND: The balance between muscle regeneration and ongoing degeneration is 
a relationship that greatly influences the progression of muscular dystrophy. 
Numerous factors may influence the muscle regeneration, but more information 
about the relationship between genotype, clinical severity and the ability to 
regenerate is needed.
METHODS: Muscle biopsies were obtained from the tibialis anterior muscle, and 
frozen sections were stained for general histopathological and 
immunohistological evaluation. Differences between groups were considered 
statistical significant at P < 0.05 using Student's unpaired t-test.
RESULTS: We found that all patients with limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 2I 
(LGMD2I) had a large number of internally nucleated fibers, a sign of previous 
regeneration. The level of expression of muscle-specific developmental proteins, 
such as neonatal myosin heavy chain (nMHC) and myogenin, was related to the 
clinical severity. Additionally, we found that the majority of nMHC-positive 
fibers did not stain positively for utrophin in patients who were compound 
heterozygous for the L276I mutation, suggesting that the predominant form of 
regeneration in these patients is fiber repair rather than formation of new 
fibers. Double staining showed that many smaller nMHC-positive fibers were 
positive for antibodies against the glycosylation on α-dystroglycan, suggesting 
that such glycosylation may be a result of muscle regeneration.
CONCLUSION: Severely affected patients with LGMD2I have a high level of muscle 
degeneration, which leads to a high rate of regeneration, but this is 
insufficient to change the imbalance between degeneration and regeneration, 
ultimately leading to progressive muscle wasting. Detailed information regarding 
the level and rate of muscle regeneration and potential obstructions of the 
regenerative pathway should be of use for future therapies involving 
satellite-cell activation.

DOI: 10.1186/2044-5040-1-31
PMCID: PMC3197566
PMID: 21970816