1. BMC Bioinformatics. 2011;12 Suppl 4(Suppl 4):S5. doi: 
10.1186/1471-2105-12-S4-S5. Epub 2011 Jul 5.

A formalized description of the standard human variant nomenclature in Extended 
Backus-Naur Form.

Laros JF(1), Blavier A, den Dunnen JT, Taschner PE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden 
University Medical Center, Leiden, the Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: The use of a standard human sequence variant nomenclature is 
advocated by the Human Genome Variation Society in order to unambiguously 
describe genetic variants in databases and literature. There is a clear need for 
tools that allow the mining of data about human sequence variants and their 
functional consequences from databases and literature. Existing text mining 
focuses on the recognition of protein variants and their effects. The 
recognition of variants at the DNA and RNA levels is essential for dissemination 
of variant data for diagnostic purposes. Development of new tools is hampered by 
the complexity of the current nomenclature, which requires processing at the 
character level to recognize the specific syntactic constructs used in variant 
descriptions.
RESULTS: We approached the gene variant nomenclature as a scientific sublanguage 
and created two formal descriptions of the syntax in Extended Backus-Naur Form: 
one at the DNA-RNA level and one at the protein level. To ensure compatibility 
to older versions of the human sequence variant nomenclature, previously 
recommended variant description formats have been included. The first grammar 
versions were designed to help build variant description handling in the Alamut 
mutation interpretation software. The DNA and RNA level descriptions were then 
updated and used to construct the context-free parser of the Mutalyzer 2 
sequence variant nomenclature checker, which has already been used to check more 
than one million variant descriptions.
CONCLUSIONS: The Extended Backus-Naur Form provided an overview of the full 
complexity of the syntax of the sequence variant nomenclature, which remained 
hidden in the textual format and the division of the recommendations across the 
DNA, RNA and protein sections of the Human Genome Variation Society nomenclature 
website (http://www.hgvs.org/mutnomen/). This insight into the syntax of the 
nomenclature could be used to design detailed and clear rules for software 
development. The Mutalyzer 2 parser demonstrated that it facilitated 
decomposition of complex variant descriptions into their individual parts. The 
Extended Backus-Naur Form or parts of it can be used or modified by adding 
rules, allowing the development of specific sequence variant text mining tools 
and other programs, which can generate or handle sequence variant descriptions.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-12-S4-S5
PMCID: PMC3194197
PMID: 21992071 [Indexed for MEDLINE]