1. Neurotherapeutics. 2011 Oct;8(4):704-20. doi: 10.1007/s13311-011-0076-7.

Cellular treatments for spinal cord injury: the time is right for clinical 
trials.

Fehlings MG(1), Vawda R.

Author information:
(1)University Health Network, Toronto Western Hospital, Toronto, ON M5T2S8, 
Canada. Michael.Fehlings@uhn.on.ca

More than 1 million people in the United States live with a spinal cord injury 
(SCI). Despite medical advances, many patients with SCIs still experience 
substantial neurological disability, with loss of motor, sensory, and autonomic 
function. Cell therapy is ideally suited to address the multifactorial nature of 
the secondary events following SCI. Remarkable advances in our understanding of 
the pathophysiology of SCI, structural and functional magnetic resonance 
imaging, image-guided micro-neurosurgical techniques, and transplantable cell 
biology have enabled the use of cell-based regenerative techniques in the 
clinic. It is important to note that there are more than a dozen recently 
completed, ongoing, or recruiting cell therapy clinical trials for SCI that 
reflect the views of many key stakeholders. The field of regenerative 
neuroscience has reached a stage in which the clinical trials are scientifically 
and ethically justified. Although experimental models and analysis methods and 
techniques continue to evolve, no model will completely replicate the human 
condition. It is recognized that more work with cervical models of 
contusive/compressive SCI are required in parallel with clinical trials. It is 
also important that the clinical translation of advances made through 
well-established and validated experimental approaches in animal models move 
forward to meet the compelling needs of individuals with SCI and to advance the 
field of regenerative neuroscience. However, it is imperative that such efforts 
at translation be done in the most rigorous and informed fashion to determine 
safety and possible efficacy, and to provide key information to clinicians and 
basic scientists, which will allow improvements in regenerative techniques and 
the validation and refinement of existing preclinical animal models and research 
approaches. The field of regenerative neuroscience should not be stalled at the 
animal model stage, but instead the clinical trials need to be focused, safe, 
and ethical, backed up by a robust, translationally relevant preclinical 
research strategy.

DOI: 10.1007/s13311-011-0076-7
PMCID: PMC3210356
PMID: 22002087 [Indexed for MEDLINE]