1. Microb Cell Fact. 2011 Oct 20;10:83. doi: 10.1186/1475-2859-10-83.

Regulation of mtl operon promoter of Bacillus subtilis: requirements of its use 
in expression vectors.

Heravi KM(1), Wenzel M, Altenbuchner J.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Industrielle Genetik, Universität Stuttgart, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Several vector systems have been developed to express any gene 
desired to be studied in Bacillus subtilis. Among them, the transcriptionally 
regulated promoters involved in carbohydrate utilization are a research 
priority. Expression systems based on Bacillus promoters for xylose, maltose, 
and mannose utilization, as well as on the heterologous E. coli lactose 
promoter, have been successfully constructed. The promoter of the mtlAFD operon 
for utilization of mannitol is another promising candidate for its use in 
expression vectors. In this study, we investigated the regulation of the mtl 
genes in order to identify the elements needed to construct a strong mannitol 
inducible expression system in B. subtilis.
RESULTS: Regulation of the promoters of mtlAFD operon (P(mtlA)) and mtlR 
(P(mtlR)) encoding the activator were investigated by fusion to lacZ. 
Identification of the P(mtlA) and P(mtlR) transcription start sites revealed the 
σ(A) like promoter structures. Also, the operator of P(mtlA) was determined by 
shortening, nucleotide exchange, and alignment of P(mtlA) and P(mtlR) operator 
regions. Deletion of the mannitol-specific PTS genes (mtlAF) resulted in P(mtlA) 
constitutive expression demonstrating the inhibitory effect of EIICB(Mtl) and 
EIIA(Mtl) on MtlR in the absence of mannitol. Disruption of mtlD made the cells 
sensitive to mannitol and glucitol. Both P(mtlA) and P(mtlR) were influenced by 
carbon catabolite repression (CCR). However, a CcpA deficient mutant showed only 
a slight reduction in P(mtlR) catabolite repression. Similarly, using P(groE) as 
a constitutive promoter, putative cre sites of P(mtlA) and P(mtlR) slightly 
reduced the promoter activity in the presence of glucose. In contrast, glucose 
repression of P(mtlA) and P(mtlR) was completely abolished in a ΔptsG mutant and 
significantly reduced in a MtlR (H342D) mutant.
CONCLUSIONS: The mtl operon promoter (P(mtlA)) is a strong promoter that reached 
a maximum of 13,000 Miller units with lacZ as a reporter on low copy plasmids. 
It is tightly regulated by just one copy of the mtlR gene on the chromosome and 
subject to CCR. CCR can be switched off by mutations in MtlR and the glucose 
transporter. These properties and the low costs of the inducers, i.e. mannitol 
and glucitol, make the promoter ideal for designing regulated expression 
systems.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2859-10-83
PMCID: PMC3217849
PMID: 22014119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]