1. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e25482. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025482. Epub 2011 Oct 
13.

Enteric microbiome metabolites correlate with response to simvastatin treatment.

Kaddurah-Daouk R(1), Baillie RA, Zhu H, Zeng ZB, Wiest MM, Nguyen UT, Wojnoonski 
K, Watkins SM, Trupp M, Krauss RM.

Author information:
(1)Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, United States of 
America. kaddu001@mc.duke.edu

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2013;8(5). 
doi:10.1371/annotation/8e8e95ca-1ac3-4acf-abcb-223cd11ac1c1.

Although statins are widely prescribed medications, there remains considerable 
variability in therapeutic response. Genetics can explain only part of this 
variability. Metabolomics is a global biochemical approach that provides 
powerful tools for mapping pathways implicated in disease and in response to 
treatment. Metabolomics captures net interactions between genome, microbiome and 
the environment. In this study, we used a targeted GC-MS metabolomics platform 
to measure a panel of metabolites within cholesterol synthesis, dietary sterol 
absorption, and bile acid formation to determine metabolite signatures that may 
predict variation in statin LDL-C lowering efficacy. Measurements were performed 
in two subsets of the total study population in the Cholesterol and 
Pharmacogenetics (CAP) study: Full Range of Response (FR), and Good and Poor 
Responders (GPR) were 100 individuals randomly selected from across the entire 
range of LDL-C responses in CAP. GPR were 48 individuals, 24 each from the top 
and bottom 10% of the LDL-C response distribution matched for body mass index, 
race, and gender. We identified three secondary, bacterial-derived bile acids 
that contribute to predicting the magnitude of statin-induced LDL-C lowering in 
good responders. Bile acids and statins share transporters in the liver and 
intestine; we observed that increased plasma concentration of simvastatin 
positively correlates with higher levels of several secondary bile acids. 
Genetic analysis of these subjects identified associations between levels of 
seven bile acids and a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP), rs4149056, in the 
gene encoding the organic anion transporter SLCO1B1. These findings, along with 
recently published results that the gut microbiome plays an important role in 
cardiovascular disease, indicate that interactions between genome, gut 
microbiome and environmental influences should be considered in the study and 
management of cardiovascular disease. Metabolic profiles could provide valuable 
information about treatment outcomes and could contribute to a more personalized 
approach to therapy.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025482
PMCID: PMC3192752
PMID: 22022402 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: RKD is equity holder in a 
biotechnology company in the metabolomics domain, and also an inventor on 
patents in the metabolomics field. RKD, RMK, RAB, and SW are inventors on a 
patent application on statin effects on metabolism. RAB is an employee of Rosa 
and Company. SW is an employee of Tethys Bioscience. MT is an employee of SRI 
International. In none of these cases do these affiliations alter the authors' 
adherence to all the PLoS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.