1. Pain. 2012 Jan;153(1):86-94. doi: 10.1016/j.pain.2011.09.021. Epub 2011 Oct
24.

Activation of descending pain-facilitatory pathways from the rostral 
ventromedial medulla by cholecystokinin elicits release of prostaglandin-E₂ in 
the spinal cord.

Marshall TM(1), Herman DS, Largent-Milnes TM, Badghisi H, Zuber K, Holt SC, Lai 
J, Porreca F, Vanderah TW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Arizona Health Sciences Center, 
College of Medicine, Tucson, AZ, USA.

Cholecystokinin (CCK) has been suggested to be both pro-nociceptive and 
"anti-opioid" by actions on pain-modulatory cells within the rostral 
ventromedial medulla (RVM). One consequence of activation of RVM CCK₂ receptors 
may be enhanced spinal nociceptive transmission; but how this might occur, 
especially in states of pathological pain, is unknown. Here, in vivo 
microdialysis was used to demonstrate that levels of RVM CCK increased by 
approximately 2-fold after ligation of L₅/L₆ spinal nerves (SNL). Microinjection 
of CCK into the RVM of naïve rats elicited hypersensitivity to tactile 
stimulation of the hindpaw. In addition, RVM CCK elicited a time-related 
increase in (prostaglandin-E₂) PGE₂ measured in cerebrospinal fluid from the 
lumbar spinal cord. The peak increase in spinal PGE₂ was approximately 5-fold 
and was observed at approximately 80 minutes post-RVM CCK, a time coincident 
with maximal RVM CCK-induced mechanical hypersensitivity. Spinal administration 
of naproxen, a nonselective COX-inhibitor, significantly attenuated RVM 
CCK-induced hindpaw tactile hypersensitivity. RVM-CCK also resulted in a 2-fold 
increase in spinal 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA), a 5-hydoxytryptophan 
(5-HT) metabolite, as compared with controls, and mechanical hypersensitivity 
that was attenuated by spinal application of ondansetron, a 5-HT₃ antagonist. 
The present studies suggest that chronic nerve injury can result in activation 
of descending facilitatory mechanisms that may promote hyperalgesia via ultimate 
release of PGE₂ and 5-HT in the spinal cord.

Copyright © 2011 International Association for the Study of Pain. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pain.2011.09.021
PMCID: PMC3245767
PMID: 22030324 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No authors have a financial or conflict of 
interest in the presented work.