1. J Biol Chem. 1990 Sep 5;265(25):14777-83.

Phosphorylation state and biological function of a mutant human insulin receptor 
Val996.

Yamamoto-Honda R(1), Koshio O, Tobe K, Shibasaki Y, Momomura K, Odawara M, 
Kadowaki T, Takaku F, Akanuma Y, Kasuga M.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Diabetes Care and Research, Asahi Life Foundation, Tokyo, 
Japan.

Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cell transfectants that expressed human insulin 
receptors whose glycine 996 was substituted by valine were studied. Receptor 
processing and insulin binding were unaffected by this mutation; however, this 
mutant insulin receptor had little or no tyrosine kinase activity. Nevertheless, 
the Val996 mutant exhibited seryl and threonyl phosphorylation in both the basal 
and insulin-stimulated state in intact cells. This is in contrast to the 
Lys----Ala1018 tyrosine kinase deficient mutant (Russell, D. S., Gherzi, R., 
Johnson, E. L., Chou, C-K., and Rosen, O. M. (1987) J. Biol. Chem. 262, 
11833-11840). Cells expressing the normal human receptor were 10-fold more 
sensitive to insulin than the untransfected CHO cells with respect to 
phosphorylation of a cellular substrate (pp 185) on tyrosyl residues, glucose 
incorporation into glycogen, thymidine incorporation into DNA, and 
phosphorylation of ribosomal protein S6. Cells expressing the mutant receptor 
exhibited the same insulin sensitivity as the untransfected CHO cells. Insulin 
was rapidly internalized in cells expressing the normal human receptor and the 
number of receptors expressed on the cell surface was decreased in response to 
exposure to insulin. However, little insulin was internalized in cells 
expressing the mutant receptor, and the number of receptors on the cell surface 
was not significantly diminished in response to exposure to insulin. It is 
concluded that despite the occurrence of seryl and threonyl phosphorylations, 
post-receptor effects of insulin described above are not mediated by the 
tyrosine kinase-deficient receptor, Val996.

PMID: 2203761 [Indexed for MEDLINE]