1. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e25466. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025466. Epub 2011 Oct 
17.

Liquid facets-related (lqfR) is required for egg chamber morphogenesis during 
Drosophila oogenesis.

Leventis PA(1), Da Sylva TR, Rajwans N, Wasiak S, McPherson PS, Boulianne GL.

Author information:
(1)Program in Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, Hospital for Sick Children, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Clathrin interactor 1 [CLINT1] (also called enthoprotin/EpsinR) is an Epsin 
N-terminal homology (ENTH) domain-containing adaptor protein that functions in 
anterograde and retrograde clathrin-mediated trafficking between the trans-Golgi 
network and the endosome. Removal of both Saccharomyces cerevisiae homologs, 
Ent3p and Ent5p, result in yeast that are viable, but that display a 
cold-sensitive growth phenotype and mistrafficking of various vacuolar proteins. 
Similarly, either knock-down or overexpression of vertebrate CLINT1 in cell 
culture causes mistrafficking of proteins. Here, we have characterized 
Drosophila CLINT1, liquid-facets Related (lqfR). LqfR is ubiquitously expressed 
throughout development and is localized to the Golgi and endosome. Strong 
hypomorphic mutants generated by imprecise P-element excision exhibit extra 
macrochaetae, rough eyes and are female sterile. Although essentially no eggs 
are laid, the ovaries do contain late-stage egg chambers that exhibit abnormal 
morphology. Germline clones reveal that LqfR expression in the somatic follicle 
cells is sufficient to rescue the oogenesis defects. Clones of mutant lqfR 
follicle cells have a decreased cell size consistent with a downregulation of 
Akt1. We find that while total Akt1 levels are increased there is also a 
significant decrease in activated phosphorylated Akt1. Taken together, these 
results show that LqfR function is required to regulate follicle cell size and 
signaling during Drosophila oogenesis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025466
PMCID: PMC3197181
PMID: 22043285 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.