1. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e26789. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0026789. Epub 2011 Oct 
28.

N-cofilin can compensate for the loss of ADF in excitatory synapses.

Görlich A(1), Wolf M, Zimmermann AM, Gurniak CB, Al Banchaabouchi M, 
Sassoè-Pognetto M, Witke W, Friauf E, Rust MB.

Author information:
(1)Neurobiology/Neurophysiology Group, University of Kaiserslautern, 
Kaiserslautern, Germany.

Actin plays important roles in a number of synaptic processes, including 
synaptic vesicle organization and exocytosis, mobility of postsynaptic 
receptors, and synaptic plasticity. However, little is known about the 
mechanisms that control actin at synapses. Actin dynamics crucially depend on 
LIM kinase 1 (LIMK1) that controls the activity of the actin depolymerizing 
proteins of the ADF/cofilin family. While analyses of mouse mutants revealed the 
importance of LIMK1 for both pre- and postsynaptic mechanisms, the ADF/cofilin 
family member n-cofilin appears to be relevant merely for postsynaptic 
plasticity, and not for presynaptic physiology. By means of immunogold electron 
microscopy and immunocytochemistry, we here demonstrate the presence of ADF 
(actin depolymerizing factor), a close homolog of n-cofilin, in excitatory 
synapses, where it is particularly enriched in presynaptic terminals. 
Surprisingly, genetic ablation of ADF in mice had no adverse effects on synapse 
structure or density as assessed by electron microscopy and by the morphological 
analysis of Golgi-stained hippocampal pyramidal cells. Moreover, a series of 
electrophysiological recordings in acute hippocampal slices revealed that 
presynaptic recruitment and exocytosis of synaptic vesicles as well as 
postsynaptic plasticity were unchanged in ADF mutant mice. The lack of synaptic 
defects may be explained by the elevated n-cofilin levels observed in synaptic 
structures of ADF mutants. Indeed, synaptic actin regulation was impaired in 
compound mutants lacking both ADF and n-cofilin, but not in ADF single mutants. 
From our results we conclude that n-cofilin can compensate for the loss of ADF 
in excitatory synapses. Further, our data suggest that ADF and n-cofilin 
cooperate in controlling synaptic actin content.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0026789
PMCID: PMC3203908
PMID: 22046357 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.