1. BMC Cell Biol. 2011 Nov 13;12:49. doi: 10.1186/1471-2121-12-49.

Tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin by the FAK-Src complex at focal adhesions 
regulates cell motility.

Wang W(1), Liu Y, Liao K.

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell 
Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: Cell migration plays an important role in many physiological and 
pathological processes, including immune cell chemotaxis and cancer metastasis. 
It is a coordinated process that involves dynamic changes in the actin 
cytoskeleton and its interplay with focal adhesions. At the leading edge of a 
migrating cell, it is the re-arrangement of actin and its attachment to focal 
adhesions that generates the driving force necessary for movement. However, the 
mechanisms involved in the attachment of actin filaments to focal adhesions are 
still not fully understood.
RESULTS: Signaling by the FAK-Src complex plays a crucial role in regulating the 
formation of protein complexes at focal adhesions to which the actin filaments 
are attached. Cortactin, an F-actin associated protein and a substrate of Src 
kinase, was found to interact with FAK through its SH3 domain and the C-terminal 
proline-rich regions of FAK. We found that the autophosphorylation of Tyr(397) 
in FAK, which is necessary for FAK activation, was not required for the 
interaction with cortactin, but was essential for the tyrosine phosphorylation 
of the associated cortactin. At focal adhesions, cortactin was phosphorylated at 
tyrosine residues known to be phosphorylated by Src. The tyrosine 
phosphorylation of cortactin and its ability to associate with the actin 
cytoskeleton were required in tandem for the regulation of cell motility. Cell 
motility could be inhibited by truncating the N-terminal F-actin binding domains 
of cortactin or by blocking tyrosine phosphorylation (Y421/466/475/482F 
mutation). In addition, the mutant cortactin phosphorylation mimic 
(Y421/466/475/482E) had a reduced ability to interact with FAK and promoted cell 
motility. The promotion of cell motility by the cortactin phosphorylation mimic 
could also be inhibited by truncating its N-terminal F-actin binding domains.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that cortactin acts as a bridging molecule 
between actin filaments and focal adhesions. The cortactin N-terminus associates 
with F-actin, while its C-terminus interacts with focal adhesions. The tyrosine 
phosphorylation of cortactin by the FAK-Src complex modulates its interaction 
with FAK and increases its turnover at focal adhesions to promote cell motility.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2121-12-49
PMCID: PMC3245448
PMID: 22078467 [Indexed for MEDLINE]