1. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e27852. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0027852. Epub 2011 Nov 
18.

Anticoagulants and the propagation phase of thrombin generation.

Orfeo T(1), Gissel M, Butenas S, Undas A, Brummel-Ziedins KE, Mann KG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Vermont, Colchester, Vermont, 
United States of America.

The view that clot time-based assays do not provide a sufficient assessment of 
an individual's hemostatic competence, especially in the context of 
anticoagulant therapy, has provoked a search for new metrics, with significant 
focus directed at techniques that define the propagation phase of thrombin 
generation. Here we use our deterministic mathematical model of tissue-factor 
initiated thrombin generation in combination with reconstructions using purified 
protein components to characterize how the interplay between anticoagulant 
mechanisms and variable composition of the coagulation proteome result in 
differential regulation of the propagation phase of thrombin generation. 
Thrombin parameters were extracted from computationally derived thrombin 
generation profiles generated using coagulation proteome factor data from 
warfarin-treated individuals (N = 54) and matching groups of control individuals 
(N = 37). A computational clot time prolongation value (cINR) was devised that 
correlated with their actual International Normalized Ratio (INR) values, with 
differences between individual INR and cINR values shown to derive from the 
insensitivity of the INR to tissue factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI). The analysis 
suggests that normal range variation in TFPI levels could be an important 
contributor to the failure of the INR to adequately reflect the anticoagulated 
state in some individuals. Warfarin-induced changes in thrombin propagation 
phase parameters were then compared to those induced by unfractionated heparin, 
fondaparinux, rivaroxaban, and a reversible thrombin inhibitor. Anticoagulants 
were assessed at concentrations yielding equivalent cINR values, with each 
anticoagulant evaluated using 32 unique coagulation proteome compositions. The 
analyses showed that no anticoagulant recapitulated all features of warfarin 
propagation phase dynamics; differences in propagation phase effects suggest 
that anticoagulants that selectively target fXa or thrombin may provoke fewer 
bleeding episodes. More generally, the study shows that computational modeling 
of the response of core elements of the coagulation proteome to a 
physiologically relevant tissue factor stimulus may improve the monitoring of a 
broad range of anticoagulants.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0027852
PMCID: PMC3220702
PMID: 22125631 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: This work was supported in 
part by a grant from Johnson & Johnson. Kenneth G. Mann was a consultant for 
Johnson & Johnson during the time of this research. This does not alter the 
authors' adherence to all the PLoS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.