1. J Neuroinflammation. 2011 Nov 28;8:166. doi: 10.1186/1742-2094-8-166.

The acute inflammatory response to intranigral α-synuclein differs significantly 
from intranigral lipopolysaccharide and is exacerbated by peripheral 
inflammation.

Couch Y(1), Alvarez-Erviti L, Sibson NR, Wood MJ, Anthony DC.

Author information:
(1)Experimental Neuropathology, Department of Pharmacology, University of 
Oxford, Oxford OX1 3QT, UK.

BACKGROUND: Activated microglia are a feature of the host response to 
neurodegeneration in Parkinson's disease (PD) and are thought to contribute to 
disease progression. Recent evidence suggests that extracellular α-synuclein 
(eSNCA) may play an important role in the pathogenesis of PD and that this may 
be mediated by a microglial response.
METHODS: We wished to discover whether the host response to eSNCA would be 
sufficient to induce significant cytokine production. In vitro cultured BV-2 
microglia were used to determine the basic inflammatory response to eSNCA. In 
vivo, 8-week old Biozzi mice were subjected to a single intranigral injection of 
either 3 μg SNCA, lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or serum protein (BSA) and allowed to 
recover for 24 hours. A second cohort of animals were peripherally challenged 
with LPS (0.5 mg/kg) 6 hours prior to tissue collection. Inflammation was 
studied by quantitative real-time PCR for a number of pro-inflammatory genes and 
immunohistochemistry for microglial activation, endothelial activation and cell 
death.
RESULTS: In vitro data showed a robust microglial response to SNCA, including a 
positive NFĸB response and the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines. Direct 
injection of SNCA into the substantia nigra resulted in the upregulation of mRNA 
expression of proinflammatory cytokines, the expression of endothelial markers 
of inflammation and microglial activation. However, these results were 
significantly different to those obtained after direct injection of LPS. By 
contrast, when the animals were injected intracerebrally with SNCA and 
subsequently challenged with systemic LPS, the level of production of IL-1β in 
the substantia nigra became comparable to that induced by the direct injection 
of LPS into the brain. The injection of albumin into the nigra with a peripheral 
LPS challenge did not provoke the production of a significant inflammatory 
response. Direct injection of LPS into the substantia nigra also induces cell 
death in a more robust manner than direct injection of either SNCA or BSA.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that the presence of eSNCA protein 'primes' 
microglia, making them susceptible to environmental proinflammatory challenge. 
For this reason, we hypothesise that where 'inflammation' contributes to the 
disease progression in PD, it does so in a punctuate manner (on-off) as a result 
of systemic events.

DOI: 10.1186/1742-2094-8-166
PMCID: PMC3239418
PMID: 22122884 [Indexed for MEDLINE]