1. Cancer Metastasis Rev. 2012 Jun;31(1-2):1-19. doi: 10.1007/s10555-011-9325-9.

Potential roles for prions and protein-only inheritance in cancer.

Antony H(1), Wiegmans AP, Wei MQ, Chernoff YO, Khanna KK, Munn AL.

Author information:
(1)Griffith Health Institute, Griffith University, Southport, Queensland, 
Australia. helmageorge@gmail.com

Inherited mutations are known to cause familial cancers. However, the cause of 
sporadic cancers, which likely represent the majority of cancers, is yet to be 
elucidated. Sporadic cancers contain somatic mutations (including oncogenic 
mutations); however, the origin of these mutations is unclear. An intriguing 
possibility is that a stable alteration occurs in somatic cells prior to 
oncogenic mutations and promotes the subsequent accumulation of oncogenic 
mutations. This review explores the possible role of prions and protein-only 
inheritance in cancer. Genetic studies using lower eukaryotes, primarily yeast, 
have identified a large number of proteins as prions that confer dominant 
phenotypes with cytoplasmic (non-Mendelian) inheritance. Many of these have 
mammalian functional homologs. The human prion protein (PrP) is known to cause 
neurodegenerative diseases and has now been found to be upregulated in multiple 
cancers. PrP expression in cancer cells contributes to cancer progression and 
resistance to various cancer therapies. Epigenetic changes in the gene 
expression and hyperactivation of MAP kinase signaling, processes that in lower 
eukaryotes are affected by prions, play important roles in oncogenesis in 
humans. Prion phenomena in yeast appear to be influenced by stresses, and there 
is considerable evidence of the association of some amyloids with biologically 
positive functions. This suggests that if protein-only somatic inheritance 
exists in mammalian cells, it might contribute to cancer phenotypes. Here, we 
highlight evidence in the literature for an involvement of prion or prion-like 
mechanisms in cancer and how they may in the future be viewed as diagnostic 
markers and potential therapeutic targets.

DOI: 10.1007/s10555-011-9325-9
PMCID: PMC3315606
PMID: 22138778 [Indexed for MEDLINE]