1. Mol Vis. 2011;17:2956-69. Epub 2011 Nov 16.

Novel strategy for subretinal delivery in Xenopus.

Gonzalez-Fernandez F(1), Dann CA, Garlipp MA.

Author information:
(1)Ross Eye Institute and Department of Ophthalmology, State University of New 
York, Buffalo, NY, USA. fg23@buffalo.edu

PURPOSE: The subretinal space, which borders the retinal pigment epithelium 
(RPE), photoreceptors, and Müller cells, is an ideal location to deliver genetic 
vectors, morpholino oligos, and nanopharmaceuticals. Unfortunately, materials 
injected into the space tend to stay localized, and degenerative changes 
secondary to retinal detachment limit its usefulness. Furthermore, such 
injection requires penetration of the sclera, RPE/choroid, or the retina itself. 
Here, we developed a strategy in Xenopus to utilize the continuity of the brain 
ventricle and optic vesicle lumen during embryogenesis as a means to access the 
subretinal space.
METHODS: Wild-type and transgenic embryos expressing green fluorescent protein 
under the rod-opsin promoter were used for optic vesicle and brain ventricle 
injections. For injection directly into the optic vesicle, embryos were laid on 
one side in clay troughs. For brain ventricle injections, embryos were placed 
standing in foxholes cored from agarose dishes. Linear arrays with each embryo 
positioned dorsal side toward the micromanipulator facilitated high throughput 
injections. Twenty-five micrometer micropipettes, which were positioned with a 
micromanipulator or by hand, were used to pressure inject ~1.0 nl of test 
solution (brilliant blue, India ink, fluorescein isothiocyanate dextran, or 0.04 
µm of latex polystyrene microspheres [FluoSpheres®]). FluroSpheres® were 
particularly useful in confirming successful injections in living embryos. 
Anesthetized embryos and tadpoles were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde and 
cryoprotected for frozen sections, or dehydrated in ethanol and embedded in 
methacrylate resin compatible with the microspheres.
RESULTS: Direct optic vesicle injections resulted in filling of the brain 
ventricle, contralateral optic vesicle, and central canal. Stages 24 and 25 gave 
the most consistent results. However, even with experience, the success rate was 
only ~25%. Targeting the vesicle was even more difficult beyond stage 26 due to 
the flattening of the lumen. In contrast, brain ventricle injections were easier 
to perform and had a ~90% success rate. The most consistent results were 
obtained in targeting the diencephalic ventricle, which is located along the 
midline, and protrudes anteriorly just under the frontal ectoderm and 
prosencephalon. An anterior midline approach conveniently accessed the ventricle 
without disturbing the optic vesicles. Beyond stage 30, optic vesicle filling 
did not occur, presumably due to closure of the connection between the 
ventricular system and the optic vesicles. Securing the embryos in an upright 
position in the agarose foxholes allowed convenient access to the frontal 
cephalic region. On methacrylate sections, the RPE-neural retina interphase was 
intact and labeled with the microspheres. As development continued, no 
distortion or malformation of the orbital structures was detected. In green 
fluorescent protein (GFP), transgenic embryos allowed to develop to stage 41, 
retinal FluoSpheres® labeling and photoreceptor GFP expression could be observed 
through the pupil. On cryosections, it was found that the FluoSpheres® extended 
from the diencephalon along the embryonic optic nerve to the ventral subretinal 
area. GFP expression was restricted to rod photoreceptors. The microspheres were 
restricted to the subretinal region, except focally at the lip of the optic cup, 
where they were present within the retina; this was presumably due to incomplete 
formation of the peripheral zonulae adherens. Embryos showed normal anatomic 
relationships, and formation of eye and lens appeared to take place normally 
with lamination of the retina into its ganglion cell and the inner and outer 
nuclear layers.
CONCLUSIONS: Diencephalic ventricular injection before stage 31 provides an 
efficient strategy to introduce molecules into the embryonic Xenopus subretinal 
space with minimal to the developing eye or retina.

PMCID: PMC3236072
PMID: 22171152 [Indexed for MEDLINE]