1. Front Cell Neurosci. 2011 Dec 12;5:26. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2011.00026. 
eCollection 2011.

Gender-Specific Mechanism of Synaptic Impairment and Its Prevention by GCSF in a 
Mouse Model of ALS.

Naumenko N(1), Pollari E, Kurronen A, Giniatullina R, Shakirzyanova A, Magga J, 
Koistinaho J, Giniatullin R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology, A. I. Virtanen Institute for Molecular Sciences, 
University of Eastern Finland Kuopio, Finland.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a neurodegenerative disease of 
motoneurons which progresses differentially in males and females for unknown 
reason. Here we measured gender differences in pre- and post-synaptic parameters 
of the neuromuscular transmission in a mutant G93A-SOD1 mouse model of ALS. 
Using intracellular microelectrode technique we recorded miniature and evoked 
end-plate potentials (MEPPs and EPPs) in the diaphragm muscle of G93A-SOD1 mice 
at early symptomatic stage. While no evident alterations in the amplitude of 
MEPPs was observed in male or female G93A-SOD1 mice, G93A-SOD1 mice displayed 
dramatically reduced probability of spontaneous acetylcholine release. In 
contrast, the EPPs evoked by single nerve stimulation had unchanged amplitude 
and quantal content. In males, but not females, this was accompanied by reduced 
readily releasable transmitter pool. Transmitter release in both sexes was 
sensitive to the inhibitory action of reactive oxygen species (ROS), but the 
production of ROS was increased in the spinal cords of male but not female 
G93A-SOD1 mice. Treatment with granulocyte colony stimulating factor (GCSF), 
which we previously found to be beneficial in males, attenuated the increased 
ROS production indicating involvement of the antioxidant mechanisms and improved 
ALS-induced synaptic dysfunctions only in males being ineffective in females. 
Consistent with our findings at synaptic level, GCSF did not change the survival 
rate or motor performance of female ALS mice. In summary, neuromuscular 
transmission in ALS mice is impaired at early symptomatic stage when a dramatic 
presynaptic decline of spontaneous release occurs. Beneficial effects of GCSF 
treatment on survival in males may be explained by GCSF-improved presynaptic 
functions in male G93A-SOD1 mice. Development of efficient treatment strategies 
for ALS may need to be directed in a gender-specific manner.

DOI: 10.3389/fncel.2011.00026
PMCID: PMC3238042
PMID: 22180738