1. PLoS One. 2011;6(12):e28589. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0028589. Epub 2011 Dec 
21.

The Plasmodium falciparum malaria M1 alanyl aminopeptidase (PfA-M1): insights of 
catalytic mechanism and function from MD simulations.

Jones PM(1), Robinson MW, Dalton JP, George AM.

Author information:
(1)School of Medical and Molecular Biosciences, Sydney, New South Wales, 
Australia.

Malaria caused by several species of Plasmodium is major parasitic disease of 
humans, causing 1-3 million deaths worldwide annually. The widespread resistance 
of the human parasite to current drug therapies is of major concern making the 
identification of new drug targets urgent. While the parasite grows and 
multiplies inside the host erythrocyte it degrades the host cell hemoglobin and 
utilizes the released amino acids to synthesize its own proteins. The P. 
falciparum malarial M1 alanyl-aminopeptidase (PfA-M1) is an enzyme involved in 
the terminal stages of hemoglobin digestion and the generation of an amino acid 
pool within the parasite. The enzyme has been validated as a potential drug 
target since inhibitors of the enzyme block parasite growth in vitro and in 
vivo. In order to gain further understanding of this enzyme, molecular dynamics 
simulations using data from a recent crystal structure of PfA-M1 were performed. 
The results elucidate the pentahedral coordination of the catalytic Zn in these 
metallo-proteases and provide new insights into the roles of this cation and 
important active site residues in ligand binding and in the hydrolysis of the 
peptide bond. Based on the data, we propose a two-step catalytic mechanism, in 
which the conformation of the active site is altered between the Michaelis 
complex and the transition state. In addition, the simulations identify global 
changes in the protein in which conformational transitions in the catalytic 
domain are transmitted at the opening of the N-terminal 8 Å-long channel and at 
the opening of the 30 Å-long C-terminal internal chamber that facilitates entry 
of peptides to the active site and exit of released amino acids. The possible 
implications of these global changes with regard to enzyme function are 
discussed.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0028589
PMCID: PMC3244404
PMID: 22205955 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.