1. J Neuroinflammation. 2012 Jan 2;9:1. doi: 10.1186/1742-2094-9-1.

Innate immunity in multiple sclerosis white matter lesions: expression of 
natural cytotoxicity triggering receptor 1 (NCR1).

Durrenberger PF(1), Ettorre A, Kamel F, Webb LV, Sim M, Nicholas RS, Malik O, 
Reynolds R, Boyton RJ, Altmann DM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Section of Infectious Diseases and Immunity, 
Commonwealth Building, Hammersmith Campus, Imperial College London, UK.

BACKGROUND: Pathogenic or regulatory effects of natural killer (NK) cells are 
implicated in many autoimmune diseases, but evidence in multiple sclerosis (MS) 
and its murine models remains equivocal. In an effort to illuminate this, we 
have here analysed expression of the prototypic NK cell marker, NCR1 (natural 
cytotoxicity triggering receptor; NKp46; CD335), an activating receptor 
expressed by virtually all NK cells and therefore considered a pan-marker for NK 
cells. The only definitive ligand of NCR1 is influenza haemagglutinin, though 
there are believed to be others. In this study, we investigated whether there 
were differences in NCR1+ cells in the peripheral blood of MS patients and 
whether NCR1+ cells are present in white matter lesions.
RESULTS: We first investigated the expression of NCR1 on peripheral blood 
mononuclear cells and found no significant difference between healthy controls 
and MS patients. We then investigated mRNA levels in central nervous system 
(CNS) tissue from MS patients: NCR1 transcripts were increased more than 5 times 
in active disease lesions. However when we performed immunohistochemical 
staining of this tissue, few NCR1+ NK cells were identified. Rather, the major 
part of NCR1 expression was localised to astrocytes, and was considerably more 
pronounced in MS patients than controls. In order to further validate de novo 
expression of NCR1 in astrocytes, we used an in vitro staining of the human 
astrocytoma U251 cell line grown to model whether cell stress could be 
associated with expression of NCR1. We found up-regulation of NCR1 expression in 
U251 cells at both the mRNA and protein levels.
CONCLUSIONS: The data presented here show very limited expression of NCR1+ NK 
cells in MS lesions, the majority of NCR1 expression being accounted for by 
expression on astrocytes. This is compatible with a role of this cell-type and 
NCR1 ligand/receptor interactions in the innate immune response in the CNS in MS 
patients. This is the first report of NCR1 expression on astrocytes in MS 
tissue: it will now be important to unravel the nature of cellular interactions 
and signalling mediated through innate receptor expression on astrocytes.

DOI: 10.1186/1742-2094-9-1
PMCID: PMC3269367
PMID: 22212381 [Indexed for MEDLINE]