1. Endocr Pract. 2012 May-Jun;18(3):412-7. doi: 10.4158/EP11272.RA.

Primary hyperparathyroidism and familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia: 
relationships and clinical implications.

Eldeiry LS(1), Ruan DT, Brown EM, Gaglia JL, Garber JR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Harvard Vanguard Medical Associates, Boston, 
Massachusetts 02215, USA. leslie_eldeiry@vmed.org

OBJECTIVE: To discuss the unusual occurrence of both familial hypocalciuric 
hypercalcemia (FHH) and primary hyperparathyroidism in the same patient and to 
explore potential mechanisms of association and issues related to clinical 
management.
METHODS: We discuss the diagnosis, compare the clinical presentations of FHH and 
primary hyperparathyroidism, review the literature regarding patients who have 
presented with both disorders, and discuss management considerations. We also 
describe 2 patients who have both FHH (confirmed by genetic testing for a 
mutation in the gene encoding the calcium-sensing receptor [CASR]) and primary 
hyperparathyroidism.
RESULTS: The occurrence of both FHH and primary hyperparathyroidism in the same 
patient has been reported in a few cases, including 2 patients described here, 
one of whom was documented to have a novel CASR mutation. In those with clinical 
sequelae of hyperparathyroidism, parathyroidectomy has led to reduction, but not 
normalization, of serum calcium levels.
CONCLUSIONS: The coexistence of FHH and primary hyperparathyroidism should be 
considered in patients with hypercalcemia, hypophosphatemia, frankly elevated 
parathyroid hormone levels, and low urinary calcium excretion. Genetic testing 
for inactivating CASR gene mutations can confirm the diagnosis of FHH. Although 
surgical intervention does not resolve hypercalcemia, it may be beneficial by 
reducing the degree of hypercalcemia, alleviating the symptoms, and preventing 
potential complications of hyperparathyroidism.

DOI: 10.4158/EP11272.RA
PMID: 22232026 [Indexed for MEDLINE]