1. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e30504. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0030504. Epub 2012 Jan
17.

Distribution of GABAergic interneurons and dopaminergic cells in the functional 
territories of the human striatum.

Bernácer J(1), Prensa L, Giménez-Amaya JM.

Author information:
(1)Laboratorio de Neuromorfología Funcional, Clínica Universitaria de Navarra, 
Pamplona, Spain. javier.bernacer@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: The afferent projections of the striatum (caudate nucleus and 
putamen) are segregated in three territories: associative, sensorimotor and 
limbic. Striatal interneurons are in part responsible for the integration of 
these different types of information. Among them, GABAergic interneurons are the 
most abundant, and can be sorted in three populations according to their content 
in the calcium binding proteins calretinin (CR), parvalbumin (PV) and calbindin 
(CB). Conversely, striatal dopaminergic cells (whose role as interneurons is 
still unclear) are scarce. This study aims to analyze the interneuron 
distribution in the striatal functional territories, as well as their 
organization regarding to the striosomal compartment.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We used immunohistochemical methods to visualize 
CR, PV, CB and tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) positive striatal neurons. The 
interneuronal distribution was assessed by stereological methods applied to 
every striatal functional territory. Considering the four cell groups 
altogether, their density was higher in the associative (2120±91 cells/mm(3)) 
than in the sensorimotor (959±47 cells/mm(3)) or limbic (633±119 cells/mm(3)) 
territories. CB- and TH-immunoreactive(-ir) cells were distributed rather 
homogeneously in the three striatal territories. However, the density of CR and 
PV interneurons were more abundant in the associative and sensorimotor striatum, 
respectively. Regarding to their compartmental organization, CR-ir interneurons 
were frequently found in the border between compartments in the associative and 
sensorimotor territories, and CB-ir interneurons abounded at the 
striosome/matrix border in the sensorimotor domain.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The present study demonstrates that the architecture 
of the human striatum in terms of its interneuron composition varies in its 
three functional territories. Furthermore, our data highlight the importance of 
CR-ir striatal interneurons in the integration of associative information, and 
the selective role of PV-ir interneurons in the motor territory. On the other 
hand, the low density of dopaminergic cells casts doubts about their role in the 
normal human striatum.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0030504
PMCID: PMC3260284
PMID: 22272358 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.