1. Bioconjug Chem. 2012 Mar 21;23(3):450-60. doi: 10.1021/bc200482z. Epub 2012
Feb  15.

Fluorinated colloidal gold immunolabels for imaging select proteins in parallel 
with lipids using high-resolution secondary ion mass spectrometry.

Wilson RL(1), Frisz JF, Hanafin WP, Carpenter KJ, Hutcheon ID, Weber PK, Kraft 
ML.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign , Urbana, 
Illinois 61801, USA.

The local abundance of specific lipid species near a membrane protein is 
hypothesized to influence the protein's activity. The ability to simultaneously 
image the distributions of specific protein and lipid species in the cell 
membrane would facilitate testing these hypotheses. Recent advances in imaging 
the distribution of cell membrane lipids with mass spectrometry have created the 
desire for membrane protein probes that can be simultaneously imaged with 
isotope labeled lipids. Such probes would enable conclusive tests to determine 
whether specific proteins colocalize with particular lipid species. Here, we 
describe the development of fluorine-functionalized colloidal gold immunolabels 
that facilitate the detection and imaging of specific proteins in parallel with 
lipids in the plasma membrane using high-resolution SIMS performed with a 
NanoSIMS. First, we developed a method to functionalize colloidal gold 
nanoparticles with a partially fluorinated mixed monolayer that permitted 
NanoSIMS detection and rendered the functionalized nanoparticles dispersible in 
aqueous buffer. Then, to allow for selective protein labeling, we attached the 
fluorinated colloidal gold nanoparticles to the nonbinding portion of 
antibodies. By combining these functionalized immunolabels with metabolic 
incorporation of stable isotopes, we demonstrate that influenza hemagglutinin 
and cellular lipids can be imaged in parallel using NanoSIMS. These labels 
enable a general approach to simultaneously imaging specific proteins and lipids 
with high sensitivity and lateral resolution, which may be used to evaluate 
predictions of protein colocalization with specific lipid species.

DOI: 10.1021/bc200482z
PMCID: PMC3951754
PMID: 22284327 [Indexed for MEDLINE]