1. Pharmacogenet Genomics. 2012 Apr;22(4):261-72. doi: 
10.1097/FPC.0b013e328350ca5f.

The limits of genome-wide methods for pharmacogenomic testing.

Gamazon ER(1), Skol AD, Perera MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Section of Genetic Medicine, University of Chicago, 
Chicago, Illinois, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The goal of pharmacogenomics is the translation of genomic 
discoveries into individualized patient care. Recent advances in the means to 
survey human genetic variation are fundamentally transforming our understanding 
of the genetic basis of interindividual variation in therapeutic response. The 
goal of this study was to systematically evaluate high-throughput genotyping 
technologies for their ability to assay variation in pharmacogenetically 
important genes (pharmacogenes). These platforms are either being proposed for 
or are already being widely used for clinical implementation; therefore, 
knowledge of coverage of pharmacogenes on these platforms would serve to better 
evaluate current or proposed pharmacogenetic association studies.
METHOD: Among the genes included in our study are drug-metabolizing enzymes, 
transporters, receptors, and drug targets, of interest to the entire 
pharmacogenetic community. We considered absolute and linkage disequilibrium 
(LD)-informed coverage, minor allele frequency spectrum, and functional 
annotation for a Caucasian population. We also examined the effect of LD, effect 
size, and cohort size on the power to detect single nucleotide polymorphism 
associations.
RESULTS: In our analysis of 253 pharmacogenes, we found that no platform showed 
more than 85% coverage of these genes (after accounting for LD). Furthermore, 
the lack of coverage showed a marked increase at minor allele frequencies of 
less than 20%. Even after accounting for LD, only 30% of the missense 
polymorphisms (which are enriched for low-frequency alleles) were covered by 
HapMap, with still lower coverage on the other platforms.
CONCLUSION: We have conducted the first systematic evaluation of the Axiom 
Genomic Database, Omni 2.5 M, and the Drug Metabolizing Enzymes and Transporters 
chip. This study is the first to utilize the 1000 Genomes Project to present a 
comprehensive evaluative framework. Our results provide a much-needed assessment 
of microarray-based genotyping and next-generation sequencing technologies' 
ability to survey fully the variation in genes of particular interest to the 
pharmacogenetics community. Our findings demonstrate the limitations of 
genome-wide methods and the challenges of implementing pharmacogenomic tests 
into the clinical context.

DOI: 10.1097/FPC.0b013e328350ca5f
PMCID: PMC3655533
PMID: 22344246 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: none declared.