1. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e31119. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031119. Epub 2012 Feb
15.

Involvement of noradrenergic transmission in the PVN on CREB activation, TORC1 
levels, and pituitary-adrenal axis activity during morphine withdrawal.

Martín F(1), Núñez C, Marín MT, Laorden ML, Kovács KJ, Milanés MV.

Author information:
(1)Group of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, Department of Pharmacology, 
School of Medicine, University of Murcia, Murcia, Spain.

Experimental and clinical findings have shown that administration of 
adrenoceptor antagonists alleviated different aspects of drug withdrawal and 
dependence. The present study tested the hypothesis that changes in CREB 
activation and phosphorylated TORC1 levels in the hypothalamic paraventricular 
nucleus (PVN) after naloxone-precipitated morphine withdrawal as well as the HPA 
axis activity arises from α(1)- and/or β-adrenoceptor activation. The effects of 
morphine dependence and withdrawal on CREB phosphorylation (pCREB), 
phosphorylated TORC1 (pTORC1), and HPA axis response were measured by 
Western-blot, immunohistochemistry and radioimmunoassay in rats pretreated with 
prazosin (α(1)-adrenoceptor antagonist) or propranolol (β-adrenoceptor 
antagonist). In addition, the effects of morphine withdrawal on MHPG (the main 
NA metabolite at the central nervous system) and NA content and turnover were 
evaluated by HPLC. We found an increase in MHPG and NA turnover in 
morphine-withdrawn rats, which were accompanied by increased pCREB 
immunoreactivity and plasma corticosterone concentrations. Levels of the 
inactive form of TORC1 (pTORC1) were decreased during withdrawal. Prazosin but 
not propranolol blocked the rise in pCREB level and the decrease in pTORC1 
immunoreactivity. In addition, the HPA axis response to morphine withdrawal was 
attenuated in prazosin-pretreated rats. Present results suggest that, during 
acute morphine withdrawal, NA may control the HPA axis activity through CREB 
activation at the PVN level. We concluded that the combined increase in CREB 
phosphorylation and decrease in pTORC1 levels might represent, in part, two of 
the mechanisms of CREB activation at the PVN during morphine withdrawal.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031119
PMCID: PMC3280277
PMID: 22355339 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.