1. mBio. 2012 Feb 28;3(2):e00310-11. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00310-11. Print 2012.

A unique chromosomal rearrangement in the Cryptococcus neoformans var. grubii 
type strain enhances key phenotypes associated with virulence.

Morrow CA(1), Lee IR, Chow EW, Ormerod KL, Goldinger A, Byrnes EJ 3rd, Nielsen 
K, Heitman J, Schirra HJ, Fraser JA.

Author information:
(1)Australian Infectious Diseases Research Centre, University of Queensland, 
Brisbane, Australia.

The accumulation of genomic structural variation between closely related 
populations over time can lead to reproductive isolation and speciation. The 
fungal pathogen Cryptococcus is thought to have recently diversified, forming a 
species complex containing members with distinct morphologies, distributions, 
and pathologies of infection. We have investigated structural changes in genomic 
architecture such as inversions and translocations that distinguish the most 
pathogenic variety, Cryptococcus neoformans var. grubii, from the less 
clinically prevalent Cryptococcus neoformans var. neoformans and Cryptococcus 
gattii. Synteny analysis between the genomes of the three Cryptococcus 
species/varieties (strains H99, JEC21, and R265) reveals that C. neoformans var. 
grubii possesses surprisingly few unique genomic rearrangements. All but one are 
relatively small and are shared by all molecular subtypes of C. neoformans var. 
grubii. In contrast, the large translocation peculiar to the C. neoformans var. 
grubii type strain is found in all tested subcultures from multiple 
laboratories, suggesting that it has possessed this rearrangement since its 
isolation from a human clinical sample. Furthermore, we find that the 
translocation directly disrupts two genes. The first of these encodes a novel 
protein involved in metabolism of glucose at human body temperature and affects 
intracellular levels of trehalose. The second encodes a homeodomain-containing 
transcription factor that modulates melanin production. Both mutations would be 
predicted to increase pathogenicity; however, when recreated in an alternate 
genetic background, these mutations do not affect virulence in animal models. 
The type strain of C. neoformans var. grubii in which the majority of molecular 
studies have been performed is therefore atypical for carbon metabolism and key 
virulence attributes.
IMPORTANCE: The fungal pathogen Cryptococcus is a major cause of mortality among 
the immunocompromised population, primarily in AIDS patients of sub-Saharan 
Africa. Most research into the particular variety of Cryptococcus responsible 
for the vast majority of infections, Cryptococcus neoformans var. grubii, is 
performed using the type strain isolated in 1978 from a Hodgkin's disease 
patient from North Carolina. We have determined that this particular isolate 
contains a chromosomal translocation that directly interrupts two genes, which 
all descendants of this strain from various research laboratories appear to 
possess. Disruption of these two genes affects multiple virulence factors of 
Cryptococcus, particularly the ability to grow at human body temperature, which 
could have wide-ranging implications for molecular genetic studies and virulence 
assays using this important strain.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.00310-11
PMCID: PMC3302566
PMID: 22375073 [Indexed for MEDLINE]