1. Front Physiol. 2012 Feb 27;3:37. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2012.00037. eCollection 
2012.

The sarcomeric protein nebulin: another multifunctional giant in charge of 
muscle strength optimization.

Ottenheijm CA(1), Granzier H, Labeit S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Institute for Cardiovascular Research, VU 
University Medical Center Amsterdam, Netherlands.

The sliding filament model of the sarcomere was developed more than half a 
century ago. This model, consisting only of thin and thick filaments, has been 
successful in explaining many, but not all, features of skeletal muscle. Work 
during the 1980s revealed the existence of two additional filaments: the giant 
filamentous proteins titin and nebulin. Whereas the role of titin rapidly 
progressed, nebulin's role in muscle structure and function remained long 
nebulous. An important feature of muscle structure and function that has 
remained relatively obscure concerns the mechanisms that are involved in 
regulating thin filament length. Filament length is an important aspect of 
muscle function as force production is proportional to the amount of overlap 
between thick and thin filaments. Recent advances, due in part to the generation 
of nebulin KO models, reveal that nebulin plays an important role in the 
regulation of thin filament length, most likely by stabilizing F-actin 
assemblies. Another structural feature of skeletal muscle that has been 
incompletely understood concerns the mechanisms involved in maintaining Z-disk 
structure and the regular lateral alignment of adjacent sarcomeres during 
contraction. Recent studies indicate that nebulin is part of a protein complex 
that mechanically links adjacent myofibrils. In addition to these structural 
roles in support of myofibrillar force generation, nebulin has been also shown 
to regulate directly muscle contraction at the level of individual crossbridges: 
cycling kinetics and the calcium sensitivity of force producing crossbridges is 
enhanced in the presence of nebulin. Thus, these recent data all point to 
nebulin being important for muscle force optimization. Consequently, muscle 
weakness as the lead symptom develops in the case of patients with nemaline 
myopathy that have mutations in the nebulin gene. Here, we discuss these 
important novel insights into the role of nebulin in skeletal muscle function.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2012.00037
PMCID: PMC3286824
PMID: 22375125