1. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e29578. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029578. Epub 2012 Mar
5.

Unsupervised analysis of classical biomedical markers: robustness and medical 
relevance of patient clustering using bioinformatics tools.

Markovich Gordon M(1), Moser AM, Rubin E.

Author information:
(1)Sharaga Segal Dept of Microbiology and Immunology, Ben Gurion University of 
the Negev, Beersheba, Israel.

MOTIVATION: It has been proposed that clustering clinical markers, such as blood 
test results, can be used to stratify patients. However, the robustness of 
clusters formed with this approach to data pre-processing and clustering 
algorithm choices has not been evaluated, nor has clustering reproducibility. 
Here, we made use of the NHANES survey to compare clusters generated with 
various combinations of pre-processing and clustering algorithms, and tested 
their reproducibility in two separate samples.
METHOD: Values of 44 biomarkers and 19 health/life style traits were extracted 
from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES). The 
1999-2002 survey was used for training, while data from the 2003-2006 survey was 
tested as a validation set. Twelve combinations of pre-processing and clustering 
algorithms were applied to the training set. The quality of the resulting 
clusters was evaluated both by considering their properties and by comparative 
enrichment analysis. Cluster assignments were projected to the validation set 
(using an artificial neural network) and enrichment in health/life style traits 
in the resulting clusters was compared to the clusters generated from the 
original training set.
RESULTS: The clusters obtained with different pre-processing and clustering 
combinations differed both in terms of cluster quality measures and in terms of 
reproducibility of enrichment with health/life style properties. Z-score 
normalization, for example, dramatically improved cluster quality and 
enrichments, as compared to unprocessed data, regardless of the clustering 
algorithm used. Clustering diabetes patients revealed a group of patients 
enriched with retinopathies. This could indicate that routine laboratory tests 
can be used to detect patients suffering from complications of diabetes, 
although other explanations for this observation should also be considered.
CONCLUSIONS: Clustering according to classical clinical biomarkers is a robust 
process, which may help in patient stratification. However, optimization of the 
pre-processing and clustering process may be still required.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029578
PMCID: PMC3293863
PMID: 22403607 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.