1. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e33122. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0033122. Epub 2012 Mar
6.

Hospital cluster of HBV infection: molecular evidence of patient-to-patient 
transmission through lancing device.

Lanini S(1), Garbuglia AR, Puro V, Solmone M, Martini L, Arcese W, Nanni Costa 
A, Borgia P, Piselli P, Capobionchi MR, Ippolito G.

Author information:
(1)National Institute for Infectious Diseases Lazzaro Spallanzani, Rome, Italy. 
simone.lanini@inmi.it

INTRODUCTION: In western countries the transmission of hepatitis B virus (HBV) 
transmission through multi-patients lancing devices has been inferred since 
early '90s, however no study has ever provided biological evidence which 
directly link these device with HBV cross-infection. Here we present results of 
an outbreak investigation which could associate, by molecular techniques, the 
use of lancing device on multiple patients with HBV transmission in an Italian 
oncohematology unit.
METHODS: The outbreak investigation was designed as a retrospective cohort study 
to identify all potential cases. All cases identified were eventually confirmed 
through molecular epidemiology techniques. Audit of personnel including 
extensive review of infection control measures and reviewing personnel's tests 
for HBV was done identify transmission route.
RESULTS: Between 4 May 2006 and 21 February 2007, six incident cases of HBV 
infection were reported among 162 patients admitted in the oncohematology. The 
subsequent molecular instigation proved that 3 out 6 incident cases and one 
prevalent cases (already infected with HBV at the admission) represented a 
monophyletic cluster of infection. The eventual environmental investigation 
found that an identical HBV viral strain was present on a multi-patients lancing 
device in use in the unit and the inferential analysis showed a statistically 
significant association between undergoing lancing procedures and the infection.
DISCUSSION: This investigation provide molecular evidence to link a HBV 
infection cluster to multi-patients lancing device and highlights that patients 
undergoing capillary blood sampling by non-disposable lancing device may face an 
unacceptable increased risk of HBV infection. Therefore we believe that 
multi-patients lancing devices should be banned from healthcare settings and 
replace with disposable safety lancets that permanently retract to prevent the 
use of the same device on multiple patients. The use of non-disposable lancing 
devices should be restricted to individual use at patients' home.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0033122
PMCID: PMC3295785
PMID: 22412991 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.