1. Breast Cancer Res. 2012 Mar 14;14(2):R45. doi: 10.1186/bcr3144.

Proteomic analysis of acquired tamoxifen resistance in MCF-7 cells reveals 
expression signatures associated with enhanced migration.

Zhou C(1), Zhong Q, Rhodes LV, Townley I, Bratton MR, Zhang Q, Martin EC, 
Elliott S, Collins-Burow BM, Burow ME, Wang G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Xavier University of Louisiana, 1 Drexel Drive, New 
Orleans, LA 70125, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Acquired tamoxifen resistance involves complex signaling events 
that are not yet fully understood. Successful therapeutic intervention to delay 
the onset of hormone resistance depends critically on mechanistic elucidation of 
viable molecular targets associated with hormone resistance. This study was 
undertaken to investigate the global proteomic alterations in a tamoxifen 
resistant MCF-7 breast cancer cell line obtained by long term treatment of the 
wild type MCF-7 cell line with 4-hydroxytamoxifen (4-OH Tam).
METHODS: We cultured MCF-7 cells with 4-OH Tam over a period of 12 months to 
obtain the resistant cell line. A gel-free, quantitative proteomic method was 
used to identify and quantify the proteome of the resistant cell line. Nano-flow 
high-performance liquid chromatography coupled to high resolution Fourier 
transform mass spectrometry was used to analyze fractionated peptide mixtures 
that were isobarically labeled from the resistant and control cell lysates. Real 
time quantitative PCR and Western blots were used to verify selected proteomic 
changes. Lentiviral vector transduction was used to generate MCF-7 cells stably 
expressing S100P. Online pathway analysis was performed to assess proteomic 
signatures in tamoxifen resistance. Survival analysis was done to evaluate 
clinical relevance of altered proteomic expressions.
RESULTS: Quantitative proteomic analysis revealed a wide breadth of signaling 
events during transition to acquired tamoxifen resistance. A total of 629 
proteins were found significantly changed with 364 up-regulated and 265 
down-regulated. Collectively, these changes demonstrated the suppressed state of 
estrogen receptor (ER) and ER-regulated genes, activated survival signaling and 
increased migratory capacity of the resistant cell line. The protein S100P was 
found to play a critical role in conferring tamoxifen resistance and enhanced 
cell motility.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data demonstrate that the adaptive changes in the proteome of 
tamoxifen resistant breast cancer cells are characterized by down-regulated ER 
signaling, activation of alternative survival pathways, and enhanced cell 
motility through regulation of the actin cytoskeleton dynamics. Evidence also 
emerged that S100P mediates acquired tamoxifen resistance and migration 
capacity.

DOI: 10.1186/bcr3144
PMCID: PMC3446379
PMID: 22417809 [Indexed for MEDLINE]