1. BMC Genet. 2012 Mar 26;13:21. doi: 10.1186/1471-2156-13-21.

Genome-wide associations for milk production and somatic cell score in 
Holstein-Friesian cattle in Ireland.

Meredith BK(1), Kearney FJ, Finlay EK, Bradley DG, Fahey AG, Berry DP, Lynn DJ.

Author information:
(1)Animal and Bioscience Research Department, Teagasc, Animal & Grassland 
Research and Innovation Centre, Grange, Dunsany, Co, Meath, Ireland.

BACKGROUND: Contemporary dairy breeding goals have broadened to include, along 
with milk production traits, a number of non-production-related traits in an 
effort to improve the overall functionality of the dairy cow. Increased indirect 
selection for resistance to mastitis, one of the most important 
production-related diseases in the dairy sector, via selection for reduced 
somatic cell count has been part of these broadened goals. A number of 
genome-wide association studies have identified genetic variants associated with 
milk production traits and mastitis resistance, however the majority of these 
studies have been based on animals which were predominantly kept in confinement 
and fed a concentrate-based diet (i.e. high-input production systems). This 
genome-wide association study aims to detect associations using genotypic and 
phenotypic data from Irish Holstein-Friesian cattle fed predominantly grazed 
grass in a pasture-based production system (low-input).
RESULTS: Significant associations were detected for milk yield, fat yield, 
protein yield, fat percentage, protein percentage and somatic cell score using 
separate single-locus, frequentist and multi-locus, Bayesian approaches. These 
associations were detected using two separate populations of Holstein-Friesian 
sires and cows. In total, 1,529 and 37 associations were detected in the sires 
using a single SNP regression and a Bayesian method, respectively. There were 
103 associations in common between the sires and cows across all the traits. As 
well as detecting associations within known QTL regions, a number of novel 
associations were detected; the most notable of these was a region of chromosome 
13 associated with milk yield in the population of Holstein-Friesian sires.
CONCLUSIONS: A total of 276 of novel SNPs were detected in the sires using a 
single SNP regression approach. Although obvious candidate genes may not be 
initially forthcoming, this study provides a preliminary framework upon which to 
identify the causal mechanisms underlying the various milk production traits and 
somatic cell score. Consequently this will deepen our understanding of how these 
traits are expressed.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2156-13-21
PMCID: PMC3361482
PMID: 22449276 [Indexed for MEDLINE]