1. BMC Bioinformatics. 2012 Mar 29;13:52. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-13-52.

Detecting disease-associated genes with confounding variable adjustment and the 
impact on genomic meta-analysis: with application to major depressive disorder.

Wang X(1), Lin Y, Song C, Sibille E, Tseng GC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biostatistics, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, 
USA.

BACKGROUND: Detecting candidate markers in transcriptomic studies often 
encounters difficulties in complex diseases, particularly when overall signals 
are weak and sample size is small. Covariates including demographic, clinical 
and technical variables are often confounded with the underlying disease 
effects, which further hampers accurate biomarker detection. Our motivating 
example came from an analysis of five microarray studies in major depressive 
disorder (MDD), a heterogeneous psychiatric illness with mostly uncharacterized 
genetic mechanisms.
RESULTS: We applied a random intercept model to account for confounding 
variables and case-control paired design. A variable selection scheme was 
developed to determine the effective confounders in each gene. Meta-analysis 
methods were used to integrate information from five studies and post hoc 
analyses enhanced biological interpretations. Simulations and application 
results showed that the adjustment for confounding variables and meta-analysis 
improved detection of biomarkers and associated pathways.
CONCLUSIONS: The proposed framework simultaneously considers correction for 
confounding variables, selection of effective confounders, random effects from 
paired design and integration by meta-analysis. The approach improved 
disease-related biomarker and pathway detection, which greatly enhanced 
understanding of MDD neurobiology. The statistical framework can be applied to 
similar experimental design encountered in other complex and heterogeneous 
diseases.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-13-52
PMCID: PMC3342232
PMID: 22458711 [Indexed for MEDLINE]