1. Clin Sci (Lond). 2012 Jul;123(2):53-72. doi: 10.1042/CS20110627.

Pre-eclampsia and offspring cardiovascular health: mechanistic insights from 
experimental studies.

Davis EF(1), Newton L, Lewandowski AJ, Lazdam M, Kelly BA, Kyriakou T, Leeson P.

Author information:
(1)Oxford Cardiovascular Clinical Research Facility, Department of 
Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

Pre-eclampsia is increasingly recognized as more than an isolated disease of 
pregnancy. Women who have had a pregnancy complicated by pre-eclampsia have a 
4-fold increased risk of later cardiovascular disease. Intriguingly, the 
offspring of affected pregnancies also have an increased risk of higher blood 
pressure and almost double the risk of stroke in later life. Experimental 
approaches to identify the key features of pre-eclampsia responsible for this 
programming of offspring cardiovascular health, or the key biological pathways 
modified in the offspring, have the potential to highlight novel targets for 
early primary prevention strategies. As pre-eclampsia occurs in 2-5% of all 
pregnancies, the findings are relevant to the current healthcare of up to 3 
million people in the U.K. and 15 million people in the U.S.A. In the present 
paper, we review the current literature that concerns potential mechanisms for 
adverse cardiovascular programming in offspring exposed to pre-eclampsia, 
considering two major areas of investigation: first, experimental models that 
mimic features of the in utero environment characteristic of pre-eclampsia, and 
secondly, how, in humans, offspring cardiovascular phenotype is altered after 
exposure to pre-eclampsia. We compare and contrast the findings from these two 
bodies of work to develop insights into the likely key pathways of relevance. 
The present review and analysis highlights the pivotal role of long-term changes 
in vascular function and identifies areas of growing interest, specifically, 
response to hypoxia, immune modification, epigenetics and the anti-angiogenic in 
utero milieu.

DOI: 10.1042/CS20110627
PMCID: PMC3315178
PMID: 22455350 [Indexed for MEDLINE]