1. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e35114. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035114. Epub 2012 Apr
11.

Spontaneous eosinophilic nasal inflammation in a genetically-mutant mouse: 
comparative study with an allergic inflammation model.

Cho SH(1), Oh SY, Zhu Z, Lee J, Lane AP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Eosinophilic inflammation is a hallmark of chronic rhinosinusitis 
with nasal polyps. To model this disease process experimentally, nasal 
sensitization of mice with ovalbumin or aspergillus has been described. Here, we 
describe a genetically mutant mouse that develops robust spontaneous nasal 
eosinophilic inflammation. These mice lack the enzyme SHP-1 that down-regulates 
the IL-4Rα/stat6 signaling pathway. We compared nasal inflammation and 
inflammatory mediators in SHP-1 deficient mice (mev) and an ovalbumin-induced 
nasal allergy model.
METHODS: A novel technique of trans-pharyngeal nasal lavage was developed to 
obtain samples of inflammatory cells from the nasal passages of allergic and mev 
mice. Total and differential cell counts were performed on cytospin 
preparations. Expression of tissue mRNA for IL-4, IL-13, and mouse 
beta-defensin-1 (MBD-1) was determined by quantitative PCR. Eotaxin in the 
lavage fluid was assessed by ELISA.
RESULTS: Allergic and mev mice had increased total cells and eosinophils 
compared with controls. Expression of IL-4 was similarly increased in both 
allergic and mev mice, but expression of IL-13 and eotaxin was significantly 
greater in the allergic mice than mev mice. Eotaxin was significantly 
up-regulated in both allergic rhinitis and mev mice. In both models of 
eosinophilic inflammation, down-regulation of the innate immune marker MBD-1 was 
observed.
CONCLUSIONS: The mev mice display spontaneous chronic nasal eosinophilic 
inflammation with potential utility for chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps 
research. The eosinophilic infiltrate is more robust in the mev mice than 
allergic mice, but Th2 cytokine expression is not as pronounced. Decreased MBD-1 
expression in both models supports the concept that Th2-cytokines down-regulate 
sinonasal innate immunity in humans, and suggests a role for mouse models in 
investigating the interaction between adaptive and innate immunity in the 
sinonasal mucosa.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035114
PMCID: PMC3324406
PMID: 22509389 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.