1. BMC Genet. 2012 Apr 23;13:30. doi: 10.1186/1471-2156-13-30.

Ancient DNA reveals kinship burial patterns of a pre-Columbian Andean community.

Baca M(1), Doan K, Sobczyk M, Stankovic A, Węgleński P.

Author information:
(1)Center for Precolumbian Studies, University of Warsaw, Krakowskie 
Przedmieście 26/28, 00-927, Warsaw, Poland. bacamat@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: A detailed genetic study of the pre-Columbian population inhabiting 
the Tompullo 2 archaeological site (department Arequipa, Peru) was undertaken to 
resolve the kin relationships between individuals buried in six different 
chullpas. Kin relationships were an important factor shaping the social 
organization in the pre-Columbian Andean communities, centering on the ayllu, a 
group of relatives that shared a common land and responsibilities. The aim of 
this study was to evaluate whether this Andean model of a social organization 
had an influence on mortuary practices, in particular to determine whether 
chullpas served as family graves.
RESULTS: The remains of forty-one individuals were analyzed with both 
uniparental (mtDNA, Y-chromosome) and biparental (autosomal microsatellites) 
markers. Reproducible HVRI sequences, autosomal and Y chromosomal STR profiles 
were obtained for 24, 16 and 11 individuals, respectively. Mitochondrial DNA 
diversity was comparable to that of ancient and contemporary Andean populations. 
The Tompullo 2 population exhibited the closest relationship with the modern 
population from the same region. A kinship analysis revealed complex pattern of 
relations within and between the graves. However mean relatedness coefficients 
regarding the pairs of individuals buried in the same grave were significantly 
higher than those regarding pairs buried in different graves. The Y chromosome 
profiles of 11 males suggest that only members of one male line were buried in 
the same grave.
CONCLUSIONS: Genetic investigation of the population that inhabited Tompullo 2 
site shows continuity between pre-Columbian and modern Native Amerindian 
populations inhabiting the Arequipa region. This suggests that no major 
demographic processes have influenced the mitochondrial DNA diversity of these 
populations during the past five hundred years. The kinship analysis involving 
uni- and biparental markers suggests that the community that inhabited the 
Tompullo 2 site was organized into extended family groups that were buried in 
different graves. This finding is in congruence with known models of social 
organization of Andean communities.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2156-13-30
PMCID: PMC3470988
PMID: 22524324 [Indexed for MEDLINE]