1. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e35751. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035751. Epub 2012 Apr
25.

Electromagnetic treatment to old Alzheimer's mice reverses β-amyloid deposition, 
modifies cerebral blood flow, and provides selected cognitive benefit.

Arendash GW(1), Mori T, Dorsey M, Gonzalez R, Tajiri N, Borlongan C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Microbiology, and Molecular Biology, University 
of South Florida, Tampa, Florida, United States of America. arendash@cas.usf.edu

Few studies have investigated physiologic and cognitive effects of "long-term" 
electromagnetic field (EMF) exposure in humans or animals. Our recent studies 
have provided initial insight into the long-term impact of adulthood EMF 
exposure (GSM, pulsed/modulated, 918 MHz, 0.25-1.05 W/kg) by showing 6+ months 
of daily EMF treatment protects against or reverses cognitive impairment in 
Alzheimer's transgenic (Tg) mice, while even having cognitive benefit to normal 
mice. Mechanistically, EMF-induced cognitive benefits involve suppression of 
brain β-amyloid (Aβ) aggregation/deposition in Tg mice and brain mitochondrial 
enhancement in both Tg and normal mice. The present study extends this work by 
showing that daily EMF treatment given to very old (21-27 month) Tg mice over a 
2-month period reverses their very advanced brain Aβ aggregation/deposition. 
These very old Tg mice and their normal littermates together showed an increase 
in general memory function in the Y-maze task, although not in more complex 
tasks. Measurement of both body and brain temperature at intervals during the 
2-month EMF treatment, as well as in a separate group of Tg mice during a 12-day 
treatment period, revealed no appreciable increases in brain temperature (and 
no/slight increases in body temperature) during EMF "ON" periods. Thus, the 
neuropathologic/cognitive benefits of EMF treatment occur without brain 
hyperthermia. Finally, regional cerebral blood flow in cerebral cortex was 
determined to be reduced in both Tg and normal mice after 2 months of EMF 
treatment, most probably through cerebrovascular constriction induced by 
freed/disaggregated Aβ (Tg mice) and slight body hyperthermia during "ON" 
periods. These results demonstrate that long-term EMF treatment can provide 
general cognitive benefit to very old Alzheimer's Tg mice and normal mice, as 
well as reversal of advanced Aβ neuropathology in Tg mice without brain heating. 
Results further underscore the potential for EMF treatment against AD.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035751
PMCID: PMC3338462
PMID: 22558216 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Co-author Dr. Cesar 
Borlongan is a PLoS ONE Editorial Board member. Co-author Richard Gonzalez is 
founder and CEO of a small electronics company, SAI of Florida, Redington Beach, 
Florida 33708. This does not alter the authors' adherence to all the PLoS ONE 
policies on sharing data and materials.