1. Algorithms Mol Biol. 2012 May 2;7(1):10. doi: 10.1186/1748-7188-7-10.

Pattern matching through Chaos Game Representation: bridging numerical and 
discrete data structures for biological sequence analysis.

Vinga S(1), Carvalho AM, Francisco AP, Russo LM, Almeida JS.

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Engenharia de Sistemas e Computadores: Investigação e 
Desenvolvimento (INESC-ID), R, Alves Redol 9, 1000-029 Lisboa, Portugal. 
svinga@kdbio.inesc-id.pt.

BACKGROUND: Chaos Game Representation (CGR) is an iterated function that 
bijectively maps discrete sequences into a continuous domain. As a result, 
discrete sequences can be object of statistical and topological analyses 
otherwise reserved to numerical systems. Characteristically, CGR coordinates of 
substrings sharing an L-long suffix will be located within 2-L distance of each 
other. In the two decades since its original proposal, CGR has been generalized 
beyond its original focus on genomic sequences and has been successfully applied 
to a wide range of problems in bioinformatics. This report explores the 
possibility that it can be further extended to approach algorithms that rely on 
discrete, graph-based representations.
RESULTS: The exploratory analysis described here consisted of selecting 
foundational string problems and refactoring them using CGR-based algorithms. We 
found that CGR can take the role of suffix trees and emulate sophisticated 
string algorithms, efficiently solving exact and approximate string matching 
problems such as finding all palindromes and tandem repeats, and matching with 
mismatches. The common feature of these problems is that they use longest common 
extension (LCE) queries as subtasks of their procedures, which we show to have a 
constant time solution with CGR. Additionally, we show that CGR can be used as a 
rolling hash function within the Rabin-Karp algorithm.
CONCLUSIONS: The analysis of biological sequences relies on algorithmic 
foundations facing mounting challenges, both logistic (performance) and 
analytical (lack of unifying mathematical framework). CGR is found to provide 
the latter and to promise the former: graph-based data structures for sequence 
analysis operations are entailed by numerical-based data structures produced by 
CGR maps, providing a unifying analytical framework for a diversity of pattern 
matching problems.

DOI: 10.1186/1748-7188-7-10
PMCID: PMC3402988
PMID: 22551152