1. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e36193. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0036193. Epub 2012 Apr
27.

Linking yeast Gcn5p catalytic function and gene regulation using a quantitative, 
graded dominant mutant approach.

Lanza AM(1), Blazeck JJ, Crook NC, Alper HS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin, 
Austin, Texas, USA.

Establishing causative links between protein functional domains and global gene 
regulation is critical for advancements in genetics, biotechnology, disease 
treatment, and systems biology. This task is challenging for multifunctional 
proteins when relying on traditional approaches such as gene deletions since 
they remove all domains simultaneously. Here, we describe a novel approach to 
extract quantitative, causative links by modulating the expression of a dominant 
mutant allele to create a function-specific competitive inhibition. Using the 
yeast histone acetyltransferase Gcn5p as a case study, we demonstrate the 
utility of this approach and (1) find evidence that Gcn5p is more involved in 
cell-wide gene repression, instead of the accepted gene activation associated 
with HATs, (2) identify previously unknown gene targets and interactions for 
Gcn5p-based acetylation, (3) quantify the strength of some Gcn5p-DNA 
associations, (4) demonstrate that this approach can be used to correctly 
identify canonical chromatin modifications, (5) establish the role of 
acetyltransferase activity on synthetic lethal interactions, and (6) identify 
new functional classes of genes regulated by Gcn5p acetyltransferase 
activity--all six of these major conclusions were unattainable by using standard 
gene knockout studies alone. We recommend that a graded dominant mutant approach 
be utilized in conjunction with a traditional knockout to study multifunctional 
proteins and generate higher-resolution data that more accurately probes protein 
domain function and influence.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0036193
PMCID: PMC3338614
PMID: 22558379 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.