1. BMC Res Notes. 2012 May 8;5:222. doi: 10.1186/1756-0500-5-222.

Bone to pick: the importance of evaluating reference genes for RT-qPCR 
quantification of gene expression in craniosynostosis and bone-related tissues 
and cells.

Yang X(1), Hatfield JT, Hinze SJ, Mu X, Anderson PJ, Powell BC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Shanghai Ninth People’s 
Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: RT-qPCR is a common tool for quantification of gene expression, but 
its accuracy is dependent on the choice and stability (steady state expression 
levels) of the reference gene/s used for normalization. To date, in the bone 
field, there have been few studies to determine the most stable reference genes 
and, usually, RT-qPCR data is normalised to non-validated reference genes, most 
commonly GAPDH, ACTB and 18 S rRNA. Here we draw attention to the potential 
deleterious impact of using classical reference genes to normalise expression 
data for bone studies without prior validation of their stability.
RESULTS: Using the geNorm and Normfinder programs, panels of mouse and human 
genes were assessed for their stability under three different experimental 
conditions: 1) disease progression of Crouzon syndrome (craniosynostosis) in a 
mouse model, 2) proliferative culture of cranial suture cells isolated from 
craniosynostosis patients and 3) osteogenesis of a mouse bone marrow stromal 
cell line. We demonstrate that classical reference genes are not always the most 
'stable' genes and that gene 'stability' is highly dependent on experimental 
conditions. Selected stable genes, individually or in combination, were then 
used to normalise osteocalcin and alkaline phosphatase gene expression data 
during cranial suture fusion in the craniosynostosis mouse model and strategies 
compared. Strikingly, the expression trends of alkaline phosphatase and 
osteocalcin varied significantly when normalised to the least stable, the most 
stable or the three most stable genes.
CONCLUSION: To minimise errors in evaluating gene expression levels, analysis of 
a reference panel and subsequent normalization to several stable genes is 
strongly recommended over normalization to a single gene. In particular, we 
conclude that use of single, non-validated "housekeeping" genes such as GAPDH, 
ACTB and 18 S rRNA, currently a widespread practice by researchers in the bone 
field, is likely to produce data of questionable reliability when changes are 2 
fold or less, and such data should be interpreted with due caution.

DOI: 10.1186/1756-0500-5-222
PMCID: PMC3476976
PMID: 22564426 [Indexed for MEDLINE]