1. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e36546. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0036546. Epub 2012 May
8.

Integrated analysis of residue coevolution and protein structure in ABC 
transporters.

Gulyás-Kovács A(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Cardiac/Membrane Physiology, Rockefeller University, New York, 
New York, United States of America. agulyaskov@rockefeller.edu

Intraprotein side chain contacts can couple the evolutionary process of amino 
acid substitution at one position to that at another. This coupling, known as 
residue coevolution, may vary in strength. Conserved contacts thus not only 
define 3-dimensional protein structure, but also indicate which residue-residue 
interactions are crucial to a protein's function. Therefore, prediction of 
strongly coevolving residue-pairs helps clarify molecular mechanisms underlying 
function. Previously, various coevolution detectors have been employed 
separately to predict these pairs purely from multiple sequence alignments, 
while disregarding available structural information. This study introduces an 
integrative framework that improves the accuracy of such predictions, relative 
to previous approaches, by combining multiple coevolution detectors and 
incorporating structural contact information. This framework is applied to the 
ABC-B and ABC-C transporter families, which include the drug exporter 
P-glycoprotein involved in multidrug resistance of cancer cells, as well as the 
CFTR chloride channel linked to cystic fibrosis disease. The predicted 
coevolving pairs are further analyzed based on conformational changes inferred 
from outward- and inward-facing transporter structures. The analysis suggests 
that some pairs coevolved to directly regulate conformational changes of the 
alternating-access transport mechanism, while others to stabilize 
rigid-body-like components of the protein structure. Moreover, some identified 
pairs correspond to residues previously implicated in cystic fibrosis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0036546
PMCID: PMC3348156
PMID: 22590562 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.