1. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e36960. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0036960. Epub 2012 May
16.

Enzymatic activities and DNA substrate specificity of Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
DNA helicase XPB.

Balasingham SV(1), Zegeye ED, Homberset H, Rossi ML, Laerdahl JK, Bohr VA, 
Tønjum T.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Molecular Biology and Neuroscience and Department of Microbiology, 
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.

XPB, also known as ERCC3 and RAD25, is a 3' → 5' DNA repair helicase belonging 
to the superfamily 2 of helicases. XPB is an essential core subunit of the 
eukaryotic basal transcription factor complex TFIIH. It has two well-established 
functions: in the context of damaged DNA, XPB facilitates nucleotide excision 
repair by unwinding double stranded DNA (dsDNA) surrounding a DNA lesion; while 
in the context of actively transcribing genes, XPB facilitates initiation of RNA 
polymerase II transcription at gene promoters. Human and other eukaryotic XPB 
homologs are relatively well characterized compared to conserved homologs found 
in mycobacteria and archaea. However, more insight into the function of 
bacterial helicases is central to understanding the mechanism of DNA metabolism 
and pathogenesis in general. Here, we characterized Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
XPB (Mtb XPB), a 3'→5' DNA helicase with DNA-dependent ATPase activity. Mtb XPB 
efficiently catalyzed DNA unwinding in the presence of significant excess of 
enzyme. The unwinding activity was fueled by ATP or dATP in the presence of 
Mg(2+)/Mn(2+). Consistent with the 3'→5' polarity of this bacterial XPB 
helicase, the enzyme required a DNA substrate with a 3' overhang of 15 
nucleotides or more. Although Mtb XPB efficiently unwound DNA model substrates 
with a 3' DNA tail, it was not active on substrates containing a 3' RNA tail. We 
also found that Mtb XPB efficiently catalyzed ATP-independent annealing of 
complementary DNA strands. These observations significantly enhance our 
understanding of the biological roles of Mtb XPB.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0036960
PMCID: PMC3353954
PMID: 22615856 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors declare that 
author Marie Rossi, after the work on this manuscript was completed, took 
employment at Intrexon Corporation. This does not, however, alter the authors' 
adherence to all the PLoS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.