1. J Neuroinflammation. 2012 May 30;9:111. doi: 10.1186/1742-2094-9-111.

Heterotrimeric G protein-dependent WNT-5A signaling to ERK1/2 mediates distinct 
aspects of microglia proinflammatory transformation.

Halleskog C(1), Dijksterhuis JP, Kilander MB, Becerril-Ortega J, Villaescusa JC, 
Lindgren E, Arenas E, Schulte G.

Author information:
(1)Dept. Physiology & Pharmacology, Sec. Receptor Biology & Signaling, 
Karolinska Institutet, Nanna Svartz väg 2, Stockholm, S-17177, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: WNT-5A signaling in the central nervous system is important for 
morphogenesis, neurogenesis and establishment of functional connectivity; the 
source of WNT-5A and its importance for cellular communication in the adult 
brain, however, are mainly unknown. We have previously investigated the 
inflammatory effects of WNT/β-catenin signaling in microglia in Alzheimer's 
disease. WNT-5A, however, generally recruits β-catenin-independent signaling. 
Thus, we aim here to characterize the role of WNT-5A and downstream signaling 
pathways for the inflammatory transformation of the brain's macrophages, the 
microglia.
METHODS: Mouse brain sections were used for immunohistochemistry. Primary 
isolated microglia and astrocytes were employed to characterize the WNT-induced 
inflammatory transformation and underlying intracellular signaling pathways by 
immunoblotting, quantitative mRNA analysis, proliferation and invasion assays. 
Further, measurements of G protein activation by [γ-(35)S]GTP binding, 
examination of calcium fluxes and cyclic AMP production were used to define 
intracellular signaling pathways.
RESULTS: Astrocytes in the adult mouse brain express high levels of WNT-5A, 
which could serve as a novel astroglia-microglia communication pathway. The 
WNT-5A-induced proinflammatory microglia response is characterized by increased 
expression of inducible nitric oxide synthase, cyclooxygenase-2, cytokines, 
chemokines, enhanced invasive capacity and proliferation. Mapping of 
intracellular transduction pathways reveals that WNT-5A activates heterotrimeric 
G(i/o) proteins to reduce cyclic AMP levels and to activate a G(i/o) 
protein/phospholipase C/calcium-dependent protein kinase/extracellular 
signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2) axis. We show further that WNT-5A-induced 
ERK1/2 signaling is responsible for distinct aspects of the proinflammatory 
transformation, such as matrix metalloprotease 9/13 expression, invasion and 
proliferation.
CONCLUSIONS: Thus, WNT-5A-induced and G protein-dependent signaling to ERK1/2 is 
important for the regulation of proinflammatory responses in mouse primary 
microglia cells. We show for the first time that WNT-5A/G protein signaling 
mediates physiologically important processes in primary mammalian cells with 
natural receptor and G protein stochiometry. Consequently, WNT-5A emerges as an 
important means of astrocyte-microglia communication and we, therefore, suggest 
WNT-5A as a new player in neuroinflammatory conditions, such as 
neurodegenerative disease, hypoxia, stroke, injury and infection.

DOI: 10.1186/1742-2094-9-111
PMCID: PMC3458933
PMID: 22647544 [Indexed for MEDLINE]