1. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2012 Jul;94(7):553-6. doi: 
10.1002/bdra.23031. Epub 2012 Jun 8.

A novel mutation in PRG4 gene underlying camptodactyly-arthropathy-coxa 
vara-pericarditis syndrome with the possible expansion of the phenotype to 
include congenital cataract.

Akawi NA(1), Ali BR, Al-Gazali L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, United Arab 
Emirates University, Al-Ain, United Arab Emirates.

BACKGROUND: Camptodactyly-arthropathy-coxa vara-pericarditis syndrome (CACP) is 
a clinically heterogenous congenital disorder caused by mutations in 
proteoglycan 4 (PRG4), a chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan that acts as a 
lubricant for the cartilage surface. Although CACP is a rare genetic disorder, 
several cases were described in the literature from ethnically different 
populations including Caucasian, Egyptian, Saudi Arabian, Pakistani, and Korean. 
We report CACP for the first time in United Arab Emirates.
METHODS: Direct sequencing of all the coding exons and splice sites of the PRG4 
gene was performed for all the members of the affected family.
RESULTS: The studied family is consanguineous and has multiple affected members 
from different branches showing congenital camptodactyly with arthropathy, the 
hallmarks of CACP. All the affected family members lack pericarditis, but one of 
them was born with cataract, which has never been documented in any of the 
previously reported cases of CACP. Molecular analysis revealed a novel 
homozygous insertion of a cytosine nucleotide (c.1320dupC) in the highly 
repetitive portion of the coding sequence of the PRG4 gene. The detected 
mutation caused a frameshift in the cDNA sequence and created a premature 
termination codon (p.P440fsX197), which is likely to result in a nonfunctional 
protein.
CONCLUSION: We report a family from the United Arab Emirates with typical 
features of CACP in whom one of the children had in addition, a bilateral 
congenital cataract. We also report the identification of a novel null mutation 
in PRG4 confirming the genetic homogeneity of CACP.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/bdra.23031
PMID: 22678705 [Indexed for MEDLINE]