1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Sep;40(16):7705-17. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks533. Epub 2012
 Jun 7.

Identification of the regulatory elements controlling the transmission 
stage-specific gene expression of PAD1 in Trypanosoma brucei.

MacGregor P(1), Matthews KR.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Immunity, Infection and Evolution, Institute for Immunology and 
Infection Research, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, 
King's buildings, West Mains Road, Edinburgh, EH9 3JTU, UK.

Trypanosomatid parasites provide an extreme model for the posttranscriptional 
control of eukaryotic gene expression. However, most analysis of their 
differential gene regulation has focussed on comparisons between life-cycle 
stages that exist in the blood of mammalian hosts and tsetse flies, the 
parasite's vector. These environments differ acutely in their temperature, and 
nutritional, metabolic and molecular composition. In the bloodstream, however, a 
more exquisitely regulated developmental step occurs: the production of 
transmissible stumpy forms from proliferative slender forms. This transition 
occurs in the relatively homogenous bloodstream environment, with 
stumpy-specific gene expression being repressed until accumulation of a proposed 
parasite-derived signal, stumpy induction factor. Here, we have dissected the 
regulatory signals that repress the expression of the stumpy-specific surface 
transporter PAD1 in slender forms. Using transgenic parasites capable of stumpy 
formation we show that PAD1-repression is mediated by its 3'-untranslated 
region. Dissection of this region in monomorphic slender forms and pleomorphic 
slender and stumpy forms has revealed that two regulatory regions co-operate to 
repress PAD1 expression, this being alleviated on exposure to SIF in pleomorphs 
or cAMP analogues that act as stumpy induction factor mimics in monomorphs. 
These studies identify elements that regulate trypanosome gene expression during 
development in their mammalian host.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gks533
PMCID: PMC3439917
PMID: 22684509 [Indexed for MEDLINE]