1. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2012 Nov;18(9):1007-10. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2012.05.009. Epub 2012 Jun 8.

Motor activation in patients with Pantothenate-Kinase Associated 
Neurodegeneration: a functional magnetic resonance imaging study.

Stoeter P(1), Rodriguez-Raecke R, Vilchez C, Perez-Then E, Speckter H, Oviedo J, 
Roa-Sanchez P.

Author information:
(1)Dep. of Radiology, CEDIMAT, Plaza de la Salud, Santo Domingo, Dominican 
Republic. peter.stoeter@gmx.de

BACKGROUND: In a variety of dystonias, functional magnetic resonance imaging has 
shown deviations of cortical and basal ganglia activations within the motor 
network, which might cause the movement disturbances. Because these 
investigations have never been performed in secondary dystonia due to 
Pantothenate-Kinase Associated Neurodegeneration, we report our results in a 
small group of such patients from the Dominican Republic.
METHODS: Functional magnetic resonance imaging was carried out in 7 patients 
with a genetically confirmed mutation of the PANK2 gene and a non-affected 
control group (matched pairs) using an event-related motor activation paradigm 
(hand movements).
RESULTS: Compared to the control group (p ≤ 0.01), patients showed a larger 
amount of activated voxels starting in the contralateral cerebellum and 
contralateral premotor cortex 2 s before the actual hand movement. Whereas these 
"hyperactivations" gradually diminished over time, activations in the 
contralateral primary motor cortex and the supplementary motor area peaked 
during the next second and those of the contralateral putamen at the time of the 
actual hand movement. In a multiple regression analysis, all these areas 
correlated positively with the degree of dystonia of the contralateral arm as 
judged by the Burke-Fahn-Marsden-scale (p ≤ 0.001).
CONCLUSION: As in other forms of dystonia, the increased activations of the 
motor system found in our patients could be related to the origin of the 
dystonic movements. Because in this condition the primary lesion affects the 
pallidum, a defect of the feed-back control mechanism between basal ganglia and 
cortex might be the responsible factor.

© 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2012.05.009
PMID: 22682757 [Indexed for MEDLINE]