1. Front Hum Neurosci. 2012 Jun 12;6:167. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2012.00167. 
eCollection 2012.

The influence of executive capacity on selective attention and subsequent 
processing.

Daffner KR(1), Tarbi EC, Haring AE, Zhuravleva TY, Sun X, Rentz DM, Holcomb PJ.

Author information:
(1)Center for Brain/Mind Medicine, Division of Cognitive and Behavioral 
Neurology, Department of Neurology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston MA, USA.

Recent investigations that suggest selective attention (SA) is dependent on 
top-down control mechanisms lead to the expectation that individuals with high 
executive capacity (EC) would exhibit more robust neural indices of SA. This 
prediction was tested by using event-related potentials (ERPs) to examine 
differences in markers of information processing across 25 subjects divided into 
two groups based on high vs. average EC, as defined by neuropsychological test 
scores. Subjects performed an experimental task requiring SA to a specified 
color. In contrast to expectation, individuals with high and average EC did not 
differ in the size of ERP indices of SA: the anterior Selection Positivity (SP) 
and posterior Selection Negativity (SN). However, there were substantial 
differences between groups in markers of subsequent processing, including the 
anterior N2 (a measure of attentional control) and the P3a (an index of the 
orienting of attention). EC predicted speed of processing at both early and late 
attentional stages. Individuals with lower EC exhibited prolonged SN, P3a, and 
P3b latencies. However, the delays in carrying out SA operations did not account 
for subsequent delays in decision making, or explain excessive orienting and 
reduced attentional control mechanisms in response to stimuli that should have 
been ignored. SN latency, P3 latency, and the size of the anterior N2 made 
independent contributions to the variance of EC. In summary, our findings 
suggest that current views regarding the relationship between top-down control 
mechanisms and SA may need refinement.

DOI: 10.3389/fnhum.2012.00167
PMCID: PMC3373205
PMID: 22701415