1. PLoS Genet. 2012;8(6):e1002759. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002759. Epub 2012
Jun  14.

A SEL1L mutation links a canine progressive early-onset cerebellar ataxia to the 
endoplasmic reticulum-associated protein degradation (ERAD) machinery.

Kyöstilä K(1), Cizinauskas S, Seppälä EH, Suhonen E, Jeserevics J, Sukura A, 
Syrjä P, Lohi H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

Inherited ataxias are characterized by degeneration of the cerebellar 
structures, which results in progressive motor incoordination. Hereditary 
ataxias occur in many species, including humans and dogs. Several mutations have 
been found in humans, but the genetic background has remained elusive in dogs. 
The Finnish Hound suffers from an early-onset progressive cerebellar ataxia. We 
have performed clinical, pathological, and genetic studies to describe the 
disease phenotype and to identify its genetic cause. Neurological examinations 
on ten affected dogs revealed rapidly progressing generalized cerebellar ataxia, 
tremors, and failure to thrive. Clinical signs were present by the age of 3 
months, and cerebellar shrinkage was detectable through MRI. Pathological and 
histological examinations indicated cerebellum-restricted neurodegeneration. 
Marked loss of Purkinje cells was detected in the cerebellar cortex with 
secondary changes in other cortical layers. A genome-wide association study in a 
cohort of 31 dogs mapped the ataxia gene to a 1.5 Mb locus on canine chromosome 
8 (p(raw) = 1.1x10(-7), p(genome) = 7.5x10(-4)). Sequencing of a functional 
candidate gene, sel-1 suppressor of lin-12-like (SEL1L), revealed a homozygous 
missense mutation, c.1972T>C; p.Ser658Pro, in a highly conserved protein domain. 
The mutation segregated fully in the recessive pedigree, and a 10% carrier 
frequency was indicated in a population cohort. SEL1L is a component of the 
endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-associated protein degradation (ERAD) machinery and 
has not been previously associated to inherited ataxias. Dysfunctional protein 
degradation is known to cause ER stress, and we found a significant increase in 
expression of nine ER stress responsive genes in the cerebellar cortex of 
affected dogs, supporting the pathogenicity of the mutation. Our study describes 
the first early-onset neurodegenerative ataxia mutation in dogs, establishes an 
ERAD-mediated neurodegenerative disease model, and proposes SEL1L as a new 
candidate gene in progressive childhood ataxias. Furthermore, our results have 
enabled the development of a genetic test for breeders.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002759
PMCID: PMC3375262
PMID: 22719266 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors KK and HL have filed a patent for 
development of a genetic test. A DNA test for the Finnish Hound breed is 
commercially available through Genoscoper Oy, which is partly owned by HL.