1. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e39110. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039110. Epub 2012 Jun
18.

Apolipoprotein A-II influences apolipoprotein E-linked cardiovascular disease 
risk in women with high levels of HDL cholesterol and C-reactive protein.

Corsetti JP(1), Bakker SJ, Sparks CE, Dullaart RP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Rochester 
School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, New York, USA. 
James_Corsetti@urmc.rochester.edu

BACKGROUND: In a previous report by our group, high levels of apolipoprotein E 
(apoE) were demonstrated to be associated with risk of incident cardiovascular 
disease in women with high levels of C-reactive protein (CRP) in the setting of 
both low (designated as HR1 subjects) and high (designated as HR2 subjects) 
levels of high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C). To assess whether 
apolipoprotein A-II (apoA-II) plays a role in apoE-associated risk in the two 
female groups.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL: Outcome event mapping, a graphical data exploratory tool; 
Cox proportional hazards multivariable regression; and curve-fitting modeling 
were used to examine apoA-II influence on apoE-associated risk focusing on HDL 
particles with apolipoprotein A-I (apoA-I) without apoA-II (LpA-I) and HDL 
particles with both apoA-I and apoA-II (LpA-I:A-II). Results of outcome mappings 
as a function of apoE levels and the ratio of apoA-II to apoA-I revealed within 
each of the two populations, a high-risk subgroup characterized in each 
situation by high levels of apoE and additionally: in HR1, by a low value of the 
apoA-II/apoA-I ratio; and in HR2, by a moderate value of the apoA-II/apoA-I 
ratio. Furthermore, derived estimates of LpA-I and LpA-I:A-II levels revealed 
for high-risk versus remaining subjects: in HR1, higher levels of LpA-I and 
lower levels of LpA-I:A-II; and in HR2 the reverse, lower levels of LpA-I and 
higher levels of LpA-I:A-II. Results of multivariable risk modeling as a 
function of LpA-I and LpA-I:A-II (dichotomized as highest quartile versus 
combined three lower quartiles) revealed association of risk only for high 
levels of LpA-I:A-II in the HR2 subgroup (hazard ratio 5.31, 95% CI 1.12-25.17, 
p = 0.036). Furthermore, high LpA-I:A-II levels interacted with high apoE levels 
in establishing subgroup risk.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We conclude that apoA-II plays a significant role in 
apoE-associated risk of incident CVD in women with high levels of HDL-C and CRP.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039110
PMCID: PMC3377620
PMID: 22723940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.