1. Int J Oncol. 2012 Sep;41(3):798-804. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2012.1523. Epub 2012 Jun
 20.

Therapeutic potential of stem cells expressing suicide genes that selectively 
target human breast cancer cells: evidence that they exert tumoricidal effects 
via tumor tropism (review).

Yi BR(1), Choi KJ, Kim SU, Choi KC.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Veterinary Biochemistry and Immunology, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, Chungbuk National University, Cheongju, Chungbuk, Republic of Korea.

Breast cancer is the most prevalent cancer in women worldwide and is classified 
into ductal and lobular carcinoma. Breast cancer as well as lobular carcinoma is 
associated with various risk factors such as gender, age, female hormone 
exposure, ethnicity, family history and genetic risk factor-associated genes. 
Genes associated with a high risk of developing breast cancer include BRCA1, 
BRCA2, p53, PTEN, CHEK2 and ATM. Surgery, chemotherapy, radiotherapy and hormone 
therapy are used to treat breast cancer but these therapies, except for surgery, 
have many side-effects such as alopecia, anesthesia, diarrhea and arthralgia. 
Gene-directed enzyme/prodrug therapy (GEPT) or suicide gene therapy, may improve 
the therapeutic efficacy of conventional cancer radiotherapy and chemotherapy 
without side-effects. GEPT most often involves the use of a viral vector to 
deliver a gene not found in mammalian cells and that produces enzymes which can 
convert a relatively non-toxic prodrug into a toxic agent. Examples of these 
systems include cytosine deaminase/5-fluorocytosine (CD/5-FC), carboxyl 
esterase/irinotecan (CE/CPT-11), and thymidine kinase/ganciclovir (TK/GCV). 
Recently, therapies based on genetically engineered stem cells (GESTECs) using a 
GEPT system have received a great deal of attention for their clinical and 
therapeutic potential to treat breast cancer. In this review, we discuss the 
potential of GESTECs via tumor tropism effects and therapeutic efficacy against 
several different types of cancer cells. GESTECs represent a useful tool for 
treating breast cancer without inducing injuries associated with conventional 
therapeutic modalities.

DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2012.1523
PMCID: PMC3582792
PMID: 22736197 [Indexed for MEDLINE]