1. Plant Methods. 2012 Jun 28;8(1):22. doi: 10.1186/1746-4811-8-22.

Use of ex vitro composite plants to study the interaction of cowpea (Vigna 
unguiculata L.) with the root parasitic angiosperm Striga gesnerioides.

Mellor KE(1), Hoffman AM, Timko MP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Virginia, Gilmer Hall 044, 
Charlottesville, VA 22903, USA. mpt9g@virginia.edu.

BACKGROUND: Cowpea (Vigna unguiculata L.) is an important grain and forage 
legume grown throughout sub-Saharan Africa primarily by subsistence farmers on 
poor, drought prone soils. Genetic improvement of the crop is being actively 
pursued and numerous functional genomics studies are underway aimed at 
characterizing gene controlling key agronomic characteristics for disease and 
pest resistances. Unfortunately, similar to other legumes, efficient plant 
transformation technology is a rate-limiting step in analysis of gene function 
in cowpea.
RESULTS: Here we describe an optimized protocol for the rapid generation of 
transformed hairy roots on ex vitro composite plants of cowpea using 
Agrobacterium rhizogenes. We further demonstrate the applicability of cowpea 
composite plants to study gene expression involved in the resistance response of 
the plant roots to attack by the root parasitic weed, Striga gesnerioides. The 
utility of the new system and critical parameters of the method are described 
and discussed herein.
CONCLUSIONS: Cowpea composite plants offer a rapid alternative to methods 
requiring stable transformation and whole plant regeneration for studying gene 
expression in resistance or susceptibility responses to parasitic weeds. Their 
use can likely be readily adapted to look at the effects of both ectopic gene 
overexpression as well as gene knockdown of root associated defense responses 
and to the study of a broader range of root associated physiological and 
aphysiological processes including root growth and differentiation as well as 
interactions with other root pests, parasites, and symbionts.

DOI: 10.1186/1746-4811-8-22
PMCID: PMC3441300
PMID: 22741546