1. Arthritis Res Ther. 2012 Jul 4;14(4):R159. doi: 10.1186/ar3899.

Transglutaminase 2 cross-linking activity is linked to invadopodia formation and 
cartilage breakdown in arthritis.

Lauzier A, Charbonneau M, Paquette M, Harper K, Dubois CM.

INTRODUCTION: The microenvironment surrounding inflamed synovium leads to the 
activation of fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLSs), which are important 
contributors to cartilage destruction in rheumatoid arthritic (RA) joints. 
Transglutaminase 2 (TG2), an enzyme involved in extracellular matrix (ECM) 
cross-linking and remodeling, is activated by inflammatory signals. This study 
was undertaken to assess the potential contribution of TG2 to FLS-induced 
cartilage degradation.
METHODS: Transglutaminase (TGase) activity and collagen degradation were 
assessed with the immunohistochemistry of control, collagen-induced arthritic 
(CIA) or TG2 knockdown (shRNA)-treated joint tissues. TGase activity in control 
(C-FLS) and arthritic (A-FLS) rat FLSs was measured by in situ 
5-(biotinamido)-pentylamine incorporation. Invadopodia formation and functions 
were measured in rat FLSs and cells from normal (control; C-FLS) and RA patients 
(RA-FLS) by in situ ECM degradation. Immunoblotting, enzyme-linked immunosorbent 
assay (ELISA), and p3TP-Lux reporter assays were used to assess transforming 
growth factor-β (TGF-β) production and activation.
RESULTS: TG2 and TGase activity were associated with cartilage degradation in 
CIA joints. In contrast, TGase activity and cartilage degradation were reduced 
in joints by TG2 knockdown. A-FLSs displayed higher TGase activity and TG2 
expression in ECM than did C-FLSs. TG2 knockdown or TGase inhibition resulted in 
reduced invadopodia formation in rat and human arthritic FLSs. In contrast, 
increased invadopodia formation was noted in response to TGase activity induced 
by TGF-β, dithiothreitol (DTT), or TG2 overexpression. TG2-induced increases in 
invadopodia formation were blocked by TGF-β neutralization or inhibition of 
TGF-βR1.
CONCLUSIONS: TG2, through its TGase activity, is required for ECM degradation in 
arthritic FLS and CIA joints. Our findings provide a potential target to prevent 
cartilage degradation in RA.

DOI: 10.1186/ar3899
PMCID: PMC3580551
PMID: 22762273 [Indexed for MEDLINE]