1. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e40160. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040160. Epub 2012 Jul
2.

Amelioration of experimental acute pancreatitis with Dachengqi Decoction via 
regulation of necrosis-apoptosis switch in the pancreatic acinar cell.

Wang J(1), Chen G, Gong H, Huang W, Long D, Tang W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Integrated Traditional Chinese and Western Medicine, West China 
Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, PR China.

Severity of acute pancreatitis contributes to the modality of cell death. 
Pervious studies have demonstrated that the herb medicine formula "Dachengqi 
Decoction" (DCQD) could ameliorate the severity of acute pancreatitis. However, 
the biological mechanisms governing its action of most remain unclear. The role 
of apoptosis/necrosis switch within acute pancreatitis has attracted much 
interest, because the induction of apoptosis within injured cells might suppress 
inflammation and ameliorate the disease. In this study, we used cerulein (10(-8) 
M)-stimulated AR42J cells as an in vitro model of acute pancreatitis and 
retrograde perfusion into the biliopancreatic duct of 3.5% sodium taurocholate 
as an in vivo rat model. After the treatment of DCQD, cell viability, levels of 
apoptosis and necrosis, reactive oxygen species positive cells, serum amylase, 
concentration of nitric oxide and inducible nitric oxide syntheses, pancreatic 
tissue pathological score and inflammatory cell infiltration were tested. 
Pretreatment with DCQD increased cell viability, induced apoptosis, decreased 
necrosis and reduced the severity of pancreatitis tissue. Moreover, treatment 
with DCQD reduced the generation of reactive oxygen species in AR42J cells but 
increased the concentration of nitric oxide of pancreatitis tissues. Therefore, 
the regulation of apoptosis/necrosis switch by DCQD might contribute to 
ameliorating the pancreatic inflammation and pathological damage. Further, the 
different effect on reactive oxygen species and nitric oxide may play an 
important role in DCQD-regulated apoptosis/necrosis switch in acute 
pancreatitis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040160
PMCID: PMC3388070
PMID: 22768339 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.