1. Biopolymers. 2012;98(3):212-23. doi: 10.1002/bip.22047.

Dissecting a role of evolutionary-conserved but noncritical disulfide bridges in 
cysteine-rich peptides using ω-conotoxin GVIA and its selenocysteine analogs.

Gowd KH(1), Blais KD, Elmslie KS, Steiner AM, Olivera BM, Bulaj G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

Conotoxins comprise a large group of peptidic neurotoxins that use diverse 
disulfide-rich scaffolds. Each scaffold is determined by an evolutionarily 
conserved pattern of cysteine residues. Although many structure-activity 
relationship studies confirm the functional and structural importance of 
disulfide crosslinks, there is growing evidence that not all disulfide bridges 
are critical in maintaining activities of conotoxins. To answer the fundamental 
biological question of what the role of noncritical disulfide bridges is, we 
investigated function and folding of disulfide-depleted analogs of ω-conotoxin 
GVIA (GVIA) that belongs to an inhibitory cystine knot motif family and blocks 
N-type calcium channels. Removal of a noncritical Cys1-Cys16 disulfide bridge in 
GVIA or its selenopeptide analog had, as predicted, rather minimal effects on 
the inhibitory activity on calcium channels, as well as on in vivo activity 
following intracranial administration. However, the disulfide-depleted GVIA 
exhibited significantly lower folding yields for forming the remaining two 
native disulfide bridges. The disulfide-depleted selenoconotoxin GVIA analog 
also folded with significantly lower yields, suggesting that the functionally 
noncritical disulfide pair plays an important cooperative role in forming the 
native disulfide scaffold. Taken together, our results suggest that distinct 
disulfide bridges may be evolutionarily preserved by the oxidative folding 
or/and stabilization of the bioactive conformation of a disulfide-rich scaffold.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/bip.22047
PMCID: PMC3395435
PMID: 22782563 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest disclosure: B.M.O. is a 
cofounder of Cognetix, Inc.; G.B. is a cofounder of NeuroAdjuvants, Inc.