1. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e39236. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039236. Epub 2012 Jun
29.

Performance of an adipokine pathway-based multilocus genetic risk score for 
prostate cancer risk prediction.

Ribeiro RJ(1), Monteiro CP, Azevedo AS, Cunha VF, Ramanakumar AV, Fraga AM, Pina 
FM, Lopes CM, Medeiros RM, Franco EL.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Oncology Group-CI, Portuguese Institute of Oncology, Porto, 
Portugal. oriebir.r@gmail.com

Few biomarkers are available to predict prostate cancer risk. Single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) tend to have weak individual effects but, in combination, 
they have stronger predictive value. Adipokine pathways have been implicated in 
the pathogenesis. We used a candidate pathway approach to investigate 29 
functional SNPs in key genes from relevant adipokine pathways in a sample of 
1006 men eligible for prostate biopsy. We used stepwise multivariate logistic 
regression and bootstrapping to develop a multilocus genetic risk score by 
weighting each risk SNP empirically based on its association with disease. Seven 
common functional polymorphisms were associated with overall and high-grade 
prostate cancer (Gleason≥7), whereas three variants were associated with high 
metastatic-risk prostate cancer (PSA≥20 ng/mL and/or Gleason≥8). The addition of 
genetic variants to age and PSA improved the predictive accuracy for overall and 
high-grade prostate cancer, using either the area under the receiver-operating 
characteristics curves (P<0.02), the net reclassification improvement (P<0.001) 
and integrated discrimination improvement (P<0.001) measures. These results 
suggest that functional polymorphisms in adipokine pathways may act individually 
and cumulatively to affect risk and severity of prostate cancer, supporting the 
influence of adipokine pathways in the pathogenesis of prostate cancer. Use of 
such adipokine multilocus genetic risk score can enhance the predictive value of 
PSA and age in estimating absolute risk, which supports further evaluation of 
its clinical significance.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039236
PMCID: PMC3387135
PMID: 22792137 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have read the 
journal's policy and have the following conflicts: Co-author Rui Medeiros is a 
PLoS ONE Editorial Board member. The authors received funding from Novartis 
Oncology Portugal. This does not alter the authors' adherence to all the PLoS 
ONE policies on sharing data and materials.