1. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e42249. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0042249. Epub 2012 Jul
27.

Characterization of Danio rerio Mn2+-dependent ADP-ribose/CDP-alcohol 
diphosphatase, the structural prototype of the ADPRibase-Mn-like protein family.

Rodrigues JR(1), Fernández A, Canales J, Cabezas A, Ribeiro JM, Costas MJ, 
Cameselle JC.

Author information:
(1)Grupo de Enzimología, Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular y 
Genética, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Extremadura, Badajoz, Spain.

The ADPRibase-Mn-like protein family, that belongs to the metallo-dependent 
phosphatase superfamily, has different functional and structural prototypes. The 
functional one is the Mn(2+)-dependent ADP-ribose/CDP-alcohol diphosphatase from 
Rattus norvegicus, which is essentially inactive with Mg(2+) and active with low 
micromolar Mn(2+) in the hydrolysis of the phosphoanhydride linkages of 
ADP-ribose, CDP-alcohols and cyclic ADP-ribose (cADPR) in order of decreasing 
efficiency. The structural prototype of the family is a Danio rerio protein with 
a known crystallographic structure but functionally uncharacterized. To estimate 
the structure-function correlation with the same protein, the activities of 
zebrafish ADPRibase-Mn were studied. Differences between zebrafish and rat 
enzymes are highlighted. The former showed a complex activity dependence on 
Mn(2+), significant (≈25%) Mg(2+)-dependent activity, but was almost inactive on 
cADPR (150-fold less efficient than the rat counterpart). The low cADPR 
hydrolase activity agreed with the zebrafish genome lacking genes coding for 
proteins with significant homology with cADPR-forming enzymes. Substrate-docking 
to zebrafish wild-type protein, and characterization of the ADPRibase-Mn H97A 
mutant pointed to a role of His-97 in catalysis by orientation, and to a 
bidentate water bridging the dinuclear metal center as the potential 
nucleophile. Finally, three structural elements that delimit the active site 
entrance in the zebrafish protein were identified as unique to the 
ADPRibase-Mn-like family within the metallo-dependent phosphatase superfamily.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0042249
PMCID: PMC3407115
PMID: 22848751 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.