1. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2012 Nov;53(5):609-16. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2012.07.012. 
Epub 2012 Jul 28.

Myosin binding protein-C phosphorylation is the principal mediator of protein 
kinase A effects on thick filament structure in myocardium.

Colson BA(1), Patel JR, Chen PP, Bekyarova T, Abdalla MI, Tong CW, Fitzsimons 
DP, Irving TC, Moss RL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology, University of Wisconsin School 
of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI 53711, USA. bacolson@umn.edu

Phosphorylation of cardiac myosin binding protein-C (cMyBP-C) is a regulator of 
pump function in healthy hearts. However, the mechanisms of regulation by 
cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA)-mediated cMyBP-C phosphorylation have not 
been completely dissociated from other myofilament substrates for PKA, 
especially cardiac troponin I (cTnI). We have used synchrotron X-ray diffraction 
in skinned trabeculae to elucidate the roles of cMyBP-C and cTnI phosphorylation 
in myocardial inotropy and lusitropy. Myocardium in this study was isolated from 
four transgenic mouse lines in which the phosphorylation state of either cMyBP-C 
or cTnI was constitutively altered by site-specific mutagenesis. Analysis of 
peak intensities in X-ray diffraction patterns from trabeculae showed that 
cross-bridges are displaced similarly from the thick filament and toward actin 
(1) when both cMyBP-C and cTnI are phosphorylated, (2) when only cMyBP-C is 
phosphorylated, and (3) when cMyBP-C phosphorylation is mimicked by replacement 
with negative charge in its PKA sites. These findings suggest that 
phosphorylation of cMyBP-C relieves a constraint on cross-bridges, thereby 
increasing the proximity of myosin to binding sites on actin. Measurements of 
Ca(2+)-activated force in myocardium defined distinct molecular effects due to 
phosphorylation of cMyBP-C or co-phosphorylation with cTnI. Echocardiography 
revealed that mimicking the charge of cMyBP-C phosphorylation protects hearts 
from hypertrophy and systolic dysfunction that develops with constitutive 
dephosphorylation or genetic ablation, underscoring the importance of cMyBP-C 
phosphorylation for proper pump function.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2012.07.012
PMCID: PMC3472100
PMID: 22850286 [Indexed for MEDLINE]