1. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e40949. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040949. Epub 2012 Jul
31.

Warburg effect's manifestation in aggressive pheochromocytomas and 
paragangliomas: insights from a mouse cell model applied to human tumor tissue.

Fliedner SM(1), Kaludercic N, Jiang XS, Hansikova H, Hajkova Z, Sladkova J, 
Limpuangthip A, Backlund PS, Wesley R, Martiniova L, Jochmanova I, Lendvai NK, 
Breza J, Yergey AL, Paolocci N, Tischler AS, Zeman J, Porter FD, Lehnert H, 
Pacak K.

Author information:
(1)Program in Reproductive and Adult Endocrinology, Eunice Kennedy Shriver 
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.

A glycolytic profile unifies a group of pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas 
(PHEOs/PGLs) with distinct underlying gene defects, including von Hippel-Lindau 
(VHL) and succinate dehydrogenase B (SDHB) mutations. Nevertheless, their tumor 
aggressiveness is distinct: PHEOs/PGLs metastasize rarely in VHL-, but 
frequently in SDHB-patients. To date, the molecular mechanisms causing the more 
aggressive phenotype in SDHB-PHEOs/PGLs remain largely unknown. Recently, 
however, an excellent model to study aggressive PHEOs (mouse tumor tissue (MTT) 
cells) has been developed from mouse PHEO cells (MPC). We employed this model 
for a proteomics based approach to identify changes characteristic for tumor 
aggressiveness, which we then explored in a homogeneous set of human SDHB- and 
VHL-PHEOs/PGLs. The increase of glucose transporter 1 in VHL, and of hexokinase 
2 in VHL and SDHB, confirmed their glycolytic profile. In agreement with the 
cell model and in support of decoupling of glycolysis, the Krebs cycle and 
oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS), SDHB tumors showed increased lactate 
dehydrogenase levels. In SDHB-PGLs OXPHOS complex activity was increased at 
complex III and, as expected, decreased at complex II. Moreover, protein and 
mRNA expression of all tested OXPHOS-related genes were higher in SDHB- than in 
VHL-derived tumors. Although there was no direct evidence for increased reactive 
oxygen species production, elevated superoxide dismutase 2 expression may 
reflect elevated oxidative stress in SDHB-derived PHEOs/PGLs. For the first 
time, we show that despite dysfunction in complex II and evidence for a 
glycolytic phenotype, the Warburg effect does not seem to fully apply to 
SDHB-PHEOs/PGLs with respect to decreased OXPHOS. In addition, we present 
evidence for increased LDHA and SOD2 expression in SDHB-PHEOs/PGLs, proteins 
that have been proposed as promising therapeutic targets in other cancers. This 
study provides new insight into pathogenic mechanisms in aggressive human 
PHEOs/PGLs, which may lead to identifying new diagnostic and prognostic markers 
in the near future.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040949
PMCID: PMC3409208
PMID: 22859959 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.