1. BMC Med Genet. 2012 Aug 3;13:67. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-13-67.

Molecular diagnosis of putative Stargardt Disease probands by exome sequencing.

Strom SP(1), Gao YQ, Martinez A, Ortube C, Chen Z, Nelson SF, Nusinowitz S, 
Farber DB, Gorin MB.

Author information:
(1)Jules Stein Eye Institute, University of California Los Angeles, 200 Stein 
Plaza, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. strom@jsei.ucla.edu

BACKGROUND: The commonest genetic form of juvenile or early adult onset macular 
degeneration is Stargardt Disease (STGD) caused by recessive mutations in the 
gene ABCA4. However, high phenotypic and allelic heterogeneity and a small but 
non-trivial amount of locus heterogeneity currently impede conclusive molecular 
diagnosis in a significant proportion of cases.
METHODS: We performed whole exome sequencing (WES) of nine putative Stargardt 
Disease probands and searched for potentially disease-causing genetic variants 
in previously identified retinal or macular dystrophy genes. Follow-up dideoxy 
sequencing was performed for confirmation and to screen for mutations in an 
additional set of affected individuals lacking a definitive molecular diagnosis.
RESULTS: Whole exome sequencing revealed seven likely disease-causing variants 
across four genes, providing a confident genetic diagnosis in six previously 
uncharacterized participants. We identified four previously missed mutations in 
ABCA4 across three individuals. Likely disease-causing mutations in RDS/PRPH2, 
ELOVL, and CRB1 were also identified.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings highlight the enormous potential of whole exome 
sequencing in Stargardt Disease molecular diagnosis and research. WES adequately 
assayed all coding sequences and canonical splice sites of ABCA4 in this study. 
Additionally, WES enables the identification of disease-related alleles in other 
genes. This work highlights the importance of collecting parental genetic 
material for WES testing as the current knowledge of human genome variation 
limits the determination of causality between identified variants and disease. 
While larger sample sizes are required to establish the precision and accuracy 
of this type of testing, this study supports WES for inherited early onset 
macular degeneration disorders as an alternative to standard mutation screening 
techniques.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2350-13-67
PMCID: PMC3459799
PMID: 22863181 [Indexed for MEDLINE]