1. Cancer Cytopathol. 2013 Apr;121(4):197-205. doi: 10.1002/cncy.21229. Epub 2012
 Aug 7.

BRAF mutation detection in indeterminate thyroid cytology specimens: underlying 
cytologic, molecular, and pathologic characteristics of papillary thyroid 
carcinoma.

Ohori NP(1), Singhal R, Nikiforova MN, Yip L, Schoedel KE, Coyne C, McCoy KL, 
LeBeau SO, Hodak SP, Carty SE, Nikiforov YE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh Medical 
Center-Presbyterian, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, USA. ohorinp@upmc.edu

BACKGROUND: BRAF mutations are highly specific for papillary thyroid carcinoma 
(PTC) and many cytology specimens with BRAF mutations are expected to 
demonstrate cytologic features typical of PTC. However, indeterminate thyroid 
cytology cases are inevitable and understanding the significance of the BRAF 
mutation within the context of the Bethesda System for Reporting Thyroid 
Cytopathology would be valuable.
METHODS: Thyroid cytology cases submitted for conventional cytomorphologic 
evaluation and BRAF mutational analyses were selected from the authors' 
cytopathology files from April 2007 to October 2011. From this group, the 
diagnostic usefulness of BRAF mutations in indeterminate and malignant cases was 
assessed and analyses of cytologic and histopathologic features associated with 
the mutations in this gene were performed.
RESULTS: A total of 131 cases with a BRAF mutation were identified. Of these, 
119 underwent surgical pathology resection follow-up and demonstrated PTC. 
Approximately 75% of the cases were cytologically diagnosed as being positive 
for malignancy and these cases were associated with both the classic and tall 
cell variants of PTC at the time of resection, a greater likelihood of 
extrathyroidal extension, and the V600E type of BRAF mutation. In contrast, 
BRAF-mutated cases with diagnoses of atypia of undetermined 
significance/follicular lesion of undetermined significance (AUS/FLUS) and 
follicular neoplasm/suspicious for follicular neoplasm were found to be more 
strongly associated with the follicular variant of PTC, a K601E BRAF mutation, 
and a lower likelihood of extrathyroidal extension. However, a subset of 
AUS/FLUS cases with the V600E BRAF mutation appeared to represent sampling 
variability of the classic or tall cell variants of PTC.
CONCLUSIONS: Bethesda thyroid diagnoses in the setting of a BRAF mutation 
reflect differences in PTC subtypes, the nature of cytology specimens, and 
molecular characteristics.

Copyright © 2012 American Cancer Society.

DOI: 10.1002/cncy.21229
PMID: 22887810 [Indexed for MEDLINE]