1. Neuroimage. 2012 Dec;63(4):1854-63. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.08.028.
Epub  2012 Aug 21.

Evidence for alterations in central noradrenergic signaling in irritable bowel 
syndrome.

Berman S(1), Suyenobu B, Naliboff BD, Bueller J, Stains J, Wong H, Mandelkern M, 
Fitzgerald L, Ohning G, Gupta A, Labus JS, Tillisch K, Mayer EA.

Author information:
(1)Oppenheimer Family Center for Neurobiology of Stress, David Geffen School of 
Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Alterations in noradrenergic (NE) signaling have been 
implicated in the pathophysiology of irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), and 
adrenergic receptors are potential treatment targets.
METHODS: To characterize central NE signaling in IBS, 11 patients and 11 healthy 
controls (HCs) were studied 3 times during an auditory oddball vigilance task 
after double-blind ingestion of the α2-adrenoreceptor (α2AR) antagonist 
yohimbine (YOH), the α2AR agonist clonidine (CLO), or placebo (PLA). Regional 
cerebral glucose metabolism was measured with [¹⁸F] fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) 
positron emission tomography (PET). Measures of anxiety, early-life trauma, 
plasma NE and blood pressure were acquired.
RESULTS: Patients had higher plasma NE levels than HCs before and after 
ingestion of all drugs (all p<0.05). YOH increased plasma NE and more anxiety in 
patients than in HCs. After YOH, NE levels directly correlated with drug-induced 
increases in anxiety in IBS patients (r=0.61), but not in HCs. IBS patients 
showed less YOH-mediated reduction of activity in a central arousal circuit, 
consistent with fewer functional presynaptic α2AR. In HCs, but not in patients, 
activation of amygdala and subgenual anterior cingulate cortex (sgACC) was 
inversely correlated with activation of anterior mid cingulate cortex (aMCC), 
and state anxiety covaried directly with activity in limbic and right 
frontotemporal cortices, but indirectly with activity in the left frontotemporal 
cortex. YOH-mediated reduction of activity in brainstem and amygdala inversely 
correlated with early life trauma.
CONCLUSIONS: IBS patients showed evidence for increased noradrenergic activity 
consistent with downregulation of presynaptic inhibitory α2ARs. Activity within 
central arousal circuits was biased toward greater excitability and reduced 
corticolimbic inhibition in IBS. Early life trauma may be one mediator of these 
abnormalities.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.08.028
PMCID: PMC4130741
PMID: 22917679 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures: No conflicts of interest exist.