1. Bull Math Biol. 2012 Nov;74(11):2570-99. doi: 10.1007/s11538-012-9766-5. Epub 
2012 Sep 7.

Deterministic versus stochastic cell polarisation through wave-pinning.

Walther GR(1), Marée AF, Edelstein-Keshet L, Grieneisen VA.

Author information:
(1)Computational & Systems Biology, John Innes Centre, Norwich Research Park, 
Norwich, UK.

Cell polarization is an important part of the response of eukaryotic cells to 
stimuli, and forms a primary step in cell motility, differentiation, and many 
cellular functions. Among the important biochemical players implicated in the 
onset of intracellular asymmetries that constitute the early phases of 
polarization are the Rho GTPases, such as Cdc42, Rac, and Rho, which present 
high active concentration levels in a spatially localized manner. Rho GTPases 
exhibit positive feedback-driven interconversion between distinct active and 
inactive forms, the former residing on the cell membrane, and the latter 
predominantly in the cytosol. A deterministic model of the dynamics of a single 
Rho GTPase described earlier by Mori et al. exhibits sustained polarization by a 
wave-pinning mechanism. It remained, however, unclear how such polarization 
behaves at typically low cellular concentrations, as stochasticity could 
significantly affect the dynamics. We therefore study the low copy number 
dynamics of this model, using a stochastic kinetics framework based on the 
Gillespie algorithm, and propose statistical and analytic techniques which help 
us analyse the equilibrium behaviour of our stochastic system. We use local 
perturbation analysis to predict parameter regimes for initiation of polarity 
and wave-pinning in our deterministic system, and compare these predictions with 
deterministic and stochastic spatial simulations. Comparing the behaviour of the 
stochastic with the deterministic system, we determine the threshold number of 
molecules required for robust polarization in a given effective reaction volume. 
We show that when the molecule number is lowered wave-pinning behaviour is lost 
due to an increasingly large transition zone as well as increasing fluctuations 
in the pinning position, due to which a broadness can be reached that is 
unsustainable, causing the collapse of the wave, while the variations in the 
high and low equilibrium levels are much less affected.

DOI: 10.1007/s11538-012-9766-5
PMCID: PMC3480592
PMID: 22956290 [Indexed for MEDLINE]