1. Bioinformatics. 2012 Sep 15;28(18):i423-i430. doi: 
10.1093/bioinformatics/bts395.

Side-chain rotamer changes upon ligand binding: common, crucial, correlate with 
entropy and rearrange hydrogen bonding.

Gaudreault F(1), Chartier M, Najmanovich R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Université de Sherbrooke, 3001, Québec, Canada 
J1H 5N4.

MOTIVATION: Protein movements form a continuum from large domain rearrangements 
(including folding and restructuring) to side-chain rotamer changes and small 
rearrangements. Understanding side-chain flexibility upon binding is important 
to understand molecular recognition events and predict ligand binding.
METHODS: In the present work, we developed a well-curated non-redundant dataset 
of 188 proteins in pairs of structures in the Apo (unbound) and Holo (bound) 
forms to study the extent and the factors that guide side-chain rotamer changes 
upon binding.
RESULTS: Our analysis shows that side-chain rotamer changes are widespread with 
only 10% of binding sites displaying no conformational changes. Overall, at most 
five rotamer changes account for the observed movements in 90% of the cases. 
Furthermore, rotamer changes are essential in 32% of flexible binding sites. The 
different amino acids have a 11-fold difference in their probability to undergo 
changes. Side-chain flexibility represents an intrinsic property of amino acids 
as it correlates well with configurational entropy differences. Furthermore, on 
average b-factors and solvent accessible surface areas can discriminate flexible 
side-chains in the Apo form. Finally, there is a rearrangement of the 
hydrogen-bonding network upon binding primarily with a loss of H-bonds with 
water molecules and a gain of H-bonds with protein residues for flexible 
residues. Interestingly, only 25% of side chains capable of forming H-bonds do 
so with the ligand upon binding. In terms of drug design, this last result shows 
that there is a large number of potential interactions that may be exploited to 
modulate the specificity and sensitivity of inhibitors.
CONTACT: rafael.najmanovich@usherbrooke.ca.

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bts395
PMCID: PMC3436822
PMID: 22962462 [Indexed for MEDLINE]