1. PLoS Pathog. 2012 Sep;8(9):e1002911. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002911. Epub 
2012 Sep 6.

The Cyclase-associated protein Cap1 is important for proper regulation of 
infection-related morphogenesis in Magnaporthe oryzae.

Zhou X(1), Zhang H, Li G, Shaw B, Xu JR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Botany and Plant Pathology, Purdue University, West Lafayette, 
Indiana, United States of America.

Surface recognition and penetration are critical steps in the infection cycle of 
many plant pathogenic fungi. In Magnaporthe oryzae, cAMP signaling is involved 
in surface recognition and pathogenesis. Deletion of the MAC1 adenylate cyclase 
gene affected appressorium formation and plant infection. In this study, we used 
the affinity purification approach to identify proteins that are associated with 
Mac1 in vivo. One of the Mac1-interacting proteins is the adenylate 
cyclase-associated protein named Cap1. CAP genes are well-conserved in 
phytopathogenic fungi but none of them have been functionally characterized. 
Deletion of CAP1 blocked the effects of a dominant RAS2 allele and resulted in 
defects in invasive growth and a reduced intracellular cAMP level. The Δcap1 
mutant was defective in germ tube growth, appressorium formation, and formation 
of typical blast lesions. Cap1-GFP had an actin-like localization pattern, 
localizing to the apical regions in vegetative hyphae, at the periphery of 
developing appressoria, and in circular structures at the base of mature 
appressoria. Interestingly, Cap1, similar to LifeAct, did not localize to the 
apical regions in invasive hyphae, suggesting that the apical actin cytoskeleton 
differs between vegetative and invasive hyphae. Domain deletion analysis 
indicated that the proline-rich region P2 but not the actin-binding domain (AB) 
of Cap1 was responsible for its subcellular localization. Nevertheless, the AB 
domain of Cap1 must be important for its function because CAP1(ΔAB) only 
partially rescued the Δcap1 mutant. Furthermore, exogenous cAMP induced the 
formation of appressorium-like structures in non-germinated conidia in CAP1(ΔAB) 
transformants. This novel observation suggested that AB domain deletion may 
result in overstimulation of appressorium formation by cAMP treatment. Overall, 
our results indicated that CAP1 is important for the activation of adenylate 
cyclase, appressorium morphogenesis, and plant infection in M. oryzae. CAP1 may 
also play a role in feedback inhibition of Ras2 signaling when Pmk1 is 
activated.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002911
PMCID: PMC3435248
PMID: 22969430 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.