1. BMC Plant Biol. 2012 Sep 12;12:164. doi: 10.1186/1471-2229-12-164.

Ubiquitin initiates sorting of Golgi and plasma membrane proteins into the 
vacuolar degradation pathway.

Scheuring D(1), Künzl F, Viotti C, Yan MS, Jiang L, Schellmann S, Robinson DG, 
Pimpl P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental Genetics, Center for Plant Molecular Biology, 
University of Tübingen, Tübingen 72076, Germany. 
peter.pimpl@zmbp.uni-tuebingen.de

BACKGROUND: In yeast and mammals, many plasma membrane (PM) proteins destined 
for degradation are tagged with ubiquitin. These ubiquitinated proteins are 
internalized into clathrin-coated vesicles and are transported to early 
endosomal compartments. There, ubiquitinated proteins are sorted by the 
endosomal sorting complex required for transport (ESCRT) machinery into the 
intraluminal vesicles of multivesicular endosomes. Degradation of these proteins 
occurs after endosomes fuse with lysosomes/lytic vacuoles to release their 
content into the lumen. In plants, some PM proteins, which cycle between the PM 
and endosomal compartments, have been found to be ubiquitinated, but it is 
unclear whether ubiquitin is sufficient to mediate internalization and thus acts 
as a primary sorting signal for the endocytic pathway. To test whether plants 
use ubiquitin as a signal for the degradation of membrane proteins, we have 
translationally fused ubiquitin to different fluorescent reporters for the 
plasma membrane and analyzed their transport.
RESULTS: Ubiquitin-tagged PM reporters localized to endosomes and to the lumen 
of the lytic vacuole in tobacco mesophyll protoplasts and in tobacco epidermal 
cells. The internalization of these reporters was significantly reduced if 
clathrin-mediated endocytosis was inhibited by the coexpression of a mutant of 
the clathrin heavy chain, the clathrin hub. Surprisingly, a ubiquitin-tagged 
reporter for the Golgi was also transported into the lumen of the vacuole. 
Vacuolar delivery of the reporters was abolished upon inhibition of the ESCRT 
machinery, indicating that the vacuolar delivery of these reporters occurs via 
the endocytic transport route.
CONCLUSIONS: Ubiquitin acts as a sorting signal at different compartments in the 
endomembrane system to target membrane proteins into the vacuolar degradation 
pathway: If displayed at the PM, ubiquitin triggers internalization of PM 
reporters into the endocytic transport route, but it also mediates vacuolar 
delivery if displayed at the Golgi. In both cases, ubiquitin-tagged proteins 
travel via early endosomes and multivesicular bodies to the lytic vacuole. This 
suggests that vacuolar degradation of ubiquitinated proteins is not restricted 
to PM proteins but might also facilitate the turnover of membrane proteins in 
the early secretory pathway.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2229-12-164
PMCID: PMC3534617
PMID: 22970698 [Indexed for MEDLINE]