1. BMC Biotechnol. 2012 Sep 21;12:65. doi: 10.1186/1472-6750-12-65.

Short-chain fluorescent tryptophan tags for on-line detection of functional 
recombinant proteins.

Siepert EM(1), Gartz E, Tur MK, Delbrück H, Barth S, Büchs J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine and Immunotherapy, Institute of Applied 
Medical Engineering, Helmholtz Institute of RWTH Aachen University & Hospital, 
Pauwelsstr 20, 52074 Aachen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Conventional fluorescent proteins, such as GFP, its derivatives and 
flavin mononucleotide based fluorescent proteins (FbFPs) are often used as 
fusion tags for detecting recombinant proteins during cultivation. These 
reporter tags are state-of-the-art; however, they have some drawbacks, which can 
make on-line monitoring challenging. It is discussed in the literature that the 
large molecular size of proteins of the GFP family may stress the host cell 
metabolism during production. In addition, fluorophore formation of GFP 
derivatives is oxygen-dependent resulting in a lag-time between expression and 
fluorescence detection and the maturation of the protein is suppressed under 
oxygen-limited conditions. On the contrary, FbFPs are also applicable in an 
oxygen-limited or even anaerobic environment but are still quite large (58% of 
the size of GFP).
RESULTS: As an alternative to common fluorescent tags we developed five novel 
tags based on clustered tryptophan residues, called W-tags. They are only 5-11% 
of the size of GFP. Based on the property of tryptophan to fluoresce in absence 
of oxygen it is reasonable to assume that the functionality of our W-tags is 
also given under anaerobic conditions. We fused these W-tags to a recombinant 
protein model, the anti-CD30 receptor single-chain fragment variable antibody 
(scFv) Ki-4(scFv) and the anti-MucI single-chain fragment variable M12(scFv). 
During cultivation in Microtiter plates, the overall tryptophan fluorescence 
intensity of all cultures was measured on-line for monitoring product formation 
via the different W-tags. After correlation of the scattered light signal 
representing biomass concentration and tryptophan fluorescence for the uninduced 
cultures, the fluorescence originating from the biomass was subtracted from the 
overall tryptophan signal. The resulting signal, thus, represents the product 
fluorescence of the tagged and untagged antibody fragments. The product 
fluorescence signal was increased. Antibodies with W-tags generated stronger 
signals than the untagged construct.
CONCLUSIONS: Our low-molecular-weight W-tags can be used to monitor the 
production of antibody fragments on-line. The binding specificity of the 
recombinant fusion protein is not affected, even though the binding activity 
decreases slightly with increasing number of tryptophan residues in the W-tags. 
Thus, the newly designed W-tags offer a versatile and generally applicable 
alternative to current fluorescent fusion tags.

DOI: 10.1186/1472-6750-12-65
PMCID: PMC3544578
PMID: 22999206 [Indexed for MEDLINE]