1. J Inorg Biochem. 2012 Nov;116:37-44. doi: 10.1016/j.jinorgbio.2012.07.005.
Epub  2012 Jul 11.

Biochemical and structural characterization of recombinant human serum 
transferrin from rice (Oryza sativa L.).

Steere AN(1), Bobst CE, Zhang D, Pettit SC, Kaltashov IA, Huang N, Mason AB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Vermont, College of Medicine, 89 
Beaumont Avenue, Burlington, VT 05405, USA.

The Fe(3+) binding protein human serum transferrin (hTF) is well known for its 
role in cellular iron delivery via the transferrin receptor (TFR). A new 
application is the use of hTF as a therapy and targeted drug delivery system for 
a number of diseases. Recently, production of hTF in plants has been reported; 
such systems provide a relatively inexpensive, animal-free (eliminating 
potential contamination by animal pathogens) method to produce large amounts of 
recombinant proteins for such biopharmaceutical applications. Specifically, the 
production of Optiferrin (hTF produced in rice, Oryza sativa, from InVitria) has 
been shown to yield large amounts of functional protein for use in culture 
medium for cellular iron delivery to promote growth. In the present work we 
describe further purification (by gel filtration) and characterization of hTF 
produced in rice (purified Optiferrin) to determine its suitability in 
biopharmaceutical applications. The spectral, mass spectrometric, urea gel and 
kinetic analysis shows that purified Optiferrin is similar to recombinant 
nonglycosylated N-His tagged hTF expressed by baby hamster kidney cells and/or 
serum derived glycosylated hTF. Additionally, in a competitive immunoassay, 
iron-loaded Optiferrin is equivalent to iron-loaded N-His hTF in its ability to 
bind to the soluble portion of the TFR immobilized in an assay plate. As an 
essential requirement for any functional hTF, both lobes of purified Optiferrin 
bind Fe(3+) tightly yet reversibly. Although previously shown to be capable of 
delivering Fe(3+) to cells, the kinetics of iron release from iron-loaded 
Optiferrin™/sTFR and iron-loaded N-His hTF/sTFR complexes differ somewhat. We 
conclude that the purified Optiferrin might be suitable for consideration in 
biopharmaceutical applications.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jinorgbio.2012.07.005
PMCID: PMC3483368
PMID: 23010327 [Indexed for MEDLINE]