1. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e45217. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0045217. Epub 2012 Sep
14.

A mouse model of early-onset renal failure due to a xanthine dehydrogenase 
nonsense mutation.

Piret SE(1), Esapa CT, Gorvin CM, Head R, Loh NY, Devuyst O, Thomas G, Brown SD, 
Brown M, Croucher P, Cox R, Thakker RV.

Author information:
(1)Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine, Oxford Centre for Diabetes, 
Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.

Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is characterized by renal fibrosis that can lead to 
end-stage renal failure, and studies have supported a strong genetic influence 
on the risk of developing CKD. However, investigations of the underlying 
molecular mechanisms are hampered by the lack of suitable hereditary models in 
animals. We therefore sought to establish hereditary mouse models for CKD and 
renal fibrosis by investigating mice treated with the chemical mutagen 
N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea, and identified a mouse with autosomal recessive renal 
failure, designated RENF. Three-week old RENF mice were smaller than their 
littermates, whereas at birth they had been of similar size. RENF mice, at 
4-weeks of age, had elevated concentrations of plasma urea and creatinine, 
indicating renal failure, which was associated with small and irregularly shaped 
kidneys. Genetic studies using DNA from 10 affected mice and 91 single 
nucleotide polymorphisms mapped the Renf locus to a 5.8 Mbp region on chromosome 
17E1.3. DNA sequencing of the xanthine dehydrogenase (Xdh) gene revealed a 
nonsense mutation at codon 26 that co-segregated with affected RENF mice. The 
Xdh mutation resulted in loss of hepatic XDH and renal Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) 
expression. XDH mutations in man cause xanthinuria with undetectable plasma uric 
acid levels and three RENF mice had plasma uric acid levels below the limit of 
detection. Histological analysis of RENF kidney sections revealed abnormal 
arrangement of glomeruli, intratubular casts, cellular infiltration in the 
interstitial space, and interstitial fibrosis. TUNEL analysis of RENF kidney 
sections showed extensive apoptosis predominantly affecting the tubules. Thus, 
we have established a mouse model for autosomal recessive early-onset renal 
failure due to a nonsense mutation in Xdh that is a model for xanthinuria in 
man. This mouse model could help to increase our understanding of the molecular 
mechanisms associated with renal fibrosis and the specific roles of XDH and uric 
acid.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0045217
PMCID: PMC3443222
PMID: 23024809 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.