1. PLoS Biol. 2012;10(10):e1001403. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001403. Epub 2012 
Oct 9.

Chemokine GPCR signaling inhibits β-catenin during zebrafish axis formation.

Wu SY(1), Shin J, Sepich DS, Solnica-Krezel L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, 
Tennessee, United States of America.

Embryonic axis formation in vertebrates is initiated by the establishment of the 
dorsal Nieuwkoop blastula organizer, marked by the nuclear accumulation of 
maternal β-catenin, a transcriptional effector of canonical Wnt signaling. Known 
regulators of axis specification include the canonical Wnt pathway components 
that positively or negatively affect β-catenin. An involvement of G-protein 
coupled receptors (GPCRs) was hypothesized from experiments implicating G 
proteins and intracellular calcium in axis formation, but such GPCRs have not 
been identified. Mobilization of intracellular Ca(2+) stores generates Ca(2+) 
transients in the superficial blastomeres of zebrafish blastulae when the 
nuclear accumulation of maternal β-catenin marks the formation of the Nieuwkoop 
organizer. Moreover, intracellular Ca(2+) downstream of non-canonical Wnt 
ligands was proposed to inhibit β-catenin and axis formation, but mechanisms 
remain unclear. Here we report a novel function of Ccr7 GPCR and its chemokine 
ligand Ccl19.1, previously implicated in chemotaxis and other responses of 
dendritic cells in mammals, as negative regulators of β-catenin and axis 
formation in zebrafish. We show that interference with the maternally and 
ubiquitously expressed zebrafish Ccr7 or Ccl19.1 expands the blastula organizer 
and the dorsoanterior tissues at the expense of the ventroposterior ones. 
Conversely, Ccr7 or Ccl19.1 overexpression limits axis formation. Epistatic 
analyses demonstrate that Ccr7 acts downstream of Ccl19.1 ligand and upstream of 
β-catenin transcriptional targets. Moreover, Ccl19/Ccr7 signaling reduces the 
level and nuclear accumulation of maternal β-catenin and its axis-inducing 
activity and can also inhibit the Gsk3β -insensitive form of β-catenin. 
Mutational and pharmacologic experiments reveal that Ccr7 functions during axis 
formation as a GPCR to inhibit β-catenin, likely by promoting Ca(2+) transients 
throughout the blastula. Our study delineates a novel negative, 
Gsk3β-independent control mechanism of β-catenin and implicates Ccr7 as a 
long-hypothesized GPCR regulating vertebrate axis formation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001403
PMCID: PMC3467228
PMID: 23055828 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.