1. Adv Appl Bioinform Chem. 2012;5:23-59. doi: 10.2147/AABC.S32622. Epub 2012 Sep
 7.

A novel biclustering approach with iterative optimization to analyze gene 
expression data.

Sutheeworapong S(1), Ota M, Ohta H, Kinoshita K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Biosciences and 
Biotechnology, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Tokyo, Japan ; Graduate School of 
Information Sciences, Tohoku University, Miyagi, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: With the dramatic increase in microarray data, biclustering has 
become a promising tool for gene expression analysis. Biclustering has been 
proven to be superior over clustering in identifying multifunctional genes and 
searching for co-expressed genes under a few specific conditions; that is, a 
subgroup of all conditions. Biclustering based on a genetic algorithm (GA) has 
shown better performance than greedy algorithms, but the overlap state for 
biclusters must be treated more systematically.
RESULTS: We developed a new biclustering algorithm (binary-iterative genetic 
algorithm [BIGA]), based on an iterative GA, by introducing a novel, 
ternary-digit chromosome encoding function. BIGA searches for a set of 
biclusters by iterative binary divisions that allow the overlap state to be 
explicitly considered. In addition, the average of the Pearson's correlation 
coefficient was employed to measure the relationship of genes within a 
bicluster, instead of the mean square residual, the popular classical index. As 
compared to the six existing algorithms, BIGA found highly correlated 
biclusters, with large gene coverage and reasonable gene overlap. The gene 
ontology (GO) enrichment showed that most of the biclusters are significant, 
with at least one GO term over represented.
CONCLUSION: BIGA is a powerful tool to analyze large amounts of gene expression 
data, and will facilitate the elucidation of the underlying functional 
mechanisms in living organisms.

DOI: 10.2147/AABC.S32622
PMCID: PMC3459542
PMID: 23055751