1. BMC Neurol. 2012 Oct 27;12:125. doi: 10.1186/1471-2377-12-125.

A novel syndrome of lethal familial hyperekplexia associated with brain 
malformation.

Seidahmed MZ(1), Salih MA, Abdulbasit OB, Shaheed M, Al Hussein K, Miqdad AM, Al 
Rasheed AK, Alazami AM, Alorainy IA, Alkuraya FS.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics (39), College of 
Medicine, King Saud University, P. O. Box 2925, Riyadh, 11461, Saudi Arabia.

BACKGROUND: Hyperekplexia (HPX) is a rare non-epileptic disorder manifesting 
immediately after birth with exaggerated persistent startle reaction to 
unexpected auditory, somatosensory and visual stimuli, and non-habituating 
generalized flexor spasm in response to tapping of the nasal bridge (glabellar 
tap) which forms its clinical hallmark. The course of the disease is usually 
benign with spontaneous amelioration with age. The disorder results from 
aberrant glycinergic neurotransmission, and several mutations were reported in 
the genes encoding glycine receptor (GlyR) α1 and β subunits, glycine 
transporter GlyT2 as well as two other proteins involved in glycinergic 
neurotransmission gephyrin and collybistin.
METHODS: The phenotype of six newborns, belonging to Saudi Arabian kindred with 
close consanguineous marriages, who presented with hyperekplexia associated with 
severe brain malformation, is described. DNA samples were available from two 
patients, and homozygosity scan to determine overlap with known hyperkplexia 
genes was performed.
RESULTS: The kindred consisted of two brothers married to their cousin sisters, 
each with three affected children who presented antenatally with excessive fetal 
movements. Postnatally, they were found to have microcephaly, severe 
hyperekplexia and gross brain malformation characterized by severe simplified 
gyral pattern and cerebellar underdevelopment. The EEG was normal and they 
responded to clonazepam. All of the six patients died within six weeks. 
Laboratory investigations, including metabolic screen, were unremarkable. None 
of the known hyperkplexia genes were present within the overlapping regions of 
homozygosity between the two patients for whom DNA samples were available.
CONCLUSIONS: We present these cases as a novel syndrome of lethal familial 
autosomal recessive hyperekplexia associated with microcephaly and severe brain 
malformation.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2377-12-125
PMCID: PMC3488335
PMID: 23101555 [Indexed for MEDLINE]