1. Iran J Public Health. 2012;41(5):73-84. Epub 2012 May 31.

Recombinant outer capsid glycoprotein (VP7) of rotavirus expressed in insect 
cells induces neutralizing antibodies in rabbits.

Khodabandehloo M(1), Shahrabadi MS, Keyvani H, Bambai B, Sadigh Z.

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Kurdistan University of Medical 
Sciences, Sanandaj, Iran ; Cellular and Molecular Research Center, Kurdistan 
University of Medical Sciences, Sanandaj, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Rotaviruses cause diarrhea in infants and young children worldwide. 
Rotavirus outer capsid protein, VP7 is major neutralizing antigen that is 
important component of subunit vaccine to prevent rotavirus infection. Many 
efforts have been done to produce recombinant VP7 that maintain native 
characteristics. We used baculovirus expression system to produce rotavirus VP7 
protein and to study its immunogenicity.
METHODS: Simian rotavirus SA11 full-length VP7 ORF was cloned into a cloning 
plasmid and then the cloned gene was inserted into the linear DNA of baculovirus 
Autographa californica Nuclear Polyhedrosis Virus (AcNPV) downstream of the 
polyhedrin promoter by in vitro recombination reactions. The expressed VP7 in 
the insect cells was recognized by rabbit hyperimmune serum raised against SA11 
rotavirus by Immunofluorescence and western blotting assays. Rabbits were 
immunized subcutaneously by cell extracts expressing VP7 protein.
RESULTS: Reactivity with anti-rotavirus antibody suggested that expressed VP7 
protein had native antigenic determinants. Injection of recombinant VP7 in 
rabbits elicited the production of serum antibodies, which were able to 
recognize VP7 protein from SA11 rotavirus by Western blotting test and 
neutralized SA11 rotavirus in cell culture.
CONCLUSION: Recombinant outer capsid glycoprotein (VP7) of rotavirus expressed 
in insect cells induces neutralizing antibodies in rabbits and may be a 
candidate of rotavirus vaccine.

PMCID: PMC3468985
PMID: 23113180