1. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e48849. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048849. Epub 2012 Nov
7.

An Endogenous Electron Spin Resonance (ESR) signal discriminates nevi from 
melanomas in human specimens: a step forward in its diagnostic application.

Cesareo E(1), Korkina L, D'Errico G, Vitiello G, Aguzzi MS, Passarelli F, 
Pedersen JZ, Facchiano A.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Tissue Engineering & Skin Pathophysiology, Istituto Dermopatico 
dell'Immacolata IDI-IRCCS, Rome, Italy.

Given the specific melanin-associated paramagnetic features, the Electron Spin 
Resonance (ESR, called also Electron Paramagnetic Resonance, EPR) analysis has 
been proposed as a potential tool for non-invasive melanoma diagnosis. However, 
studies comparing human melanoma tissues to the most appropriate physiological 
counterpart (nevi) have not been performed, and ESR direct correlation with 
melanoma clinical features has never been investigated. ESR spectrum was 
obtained from melanoma and non-melanoma cell-cultures as well as mouse melanoma 
and non-melanoma tissues and an endogenous ESR signal (g = 2.005) was found in 
human melanoma cells and in primary melanoma tissues explanted from mice, while 
it was always absent in non-melanoma samples. These characteristics of the 
measured ESR signal strongly suggested its connection with melanin. Quantitative 
analyses were then performed on paraffin-embedded human melanoma and nevus 
sections, and validated on an independent larger validation set, for a total of 
112 sections (52 melanomas, 60 nevi). The ESR signal was significantly higher in 
melanomas (p = 0.0002) and was significantly different between "Low Breslow's 
and "High Breslow's" depth melanomas (p<0.0001). A direct correlation between 
ESR signal and Breslow's depth, expressed in millimetres, was found (R = 0.57; 
p<0.0001). The eu/pheomelanin ratio was found to be significantly different in 
melanomas "Low Breslow's" vs melanomas "High Breslow's" depth and in nevi vs 
melanomas "High Breslow's depth". Finally, ROC analysis using ESR data 
discriminated melanomas sections from nevi sections with up to 90% accuracy and 
p<0.0002. In the present study we report for the first time that ESR signal in 
human paraffin-embedded nevi is significantly lower than signal in human 
melanomas suggesting that spectrum variations may be related to qualitative 
melanin differences specifically occurring in melanoma cells. We therefore 
conclude that this ESR signal may represent a reliable marker for melanoma 
diagnosis in human histological sections.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048849
PMCID: PMC3492252
PMID: 23144997 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Co-author Antonio Facchiano 
is a PLOS ONE Editorial Board member. This does not alter the authors' adherence 
to all the PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.