1. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e48803. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048803. Epub 2012 Nov
8.

Bio-imaging of colorectal cancer models using near infrared labeled epidermal 
growth factor.

Cohen G(1), Lecht S, Arien-Zakay H, Ettinger K, Amsalem O, Oron-Herman M, Yavin 
E, Prus D, Benita S, Nissan A, Lazarovici P.

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmacy Institute for Drug Research, Faculty of Medicine, The 
Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel.

Novel strategies that target the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) have 
led to the clinical development of monoclonal antibodies, which treat metastatic 
colorectal cancer (mCRC) but only subgroups of patients with increased wild type 
KRAS and EGFR gene copy, respond to these agents. Furthermore, resistance to 
EGFR blockade inevitably occurred, making future therapy difficult. Novel 
bio-imaging (BOI) methods may assist in quantization of EGFR in mCRC tissue thus 
complementing the immunohistochemistry methodology, in guiding the future 
treatment of these patients. The aim of the present study was to explore the 
usefulness of near infrared-labeled EGF (EGF-NIR) for bio-imaging of CRC using 
in vitro and in vivo orthotopic tumor CRC models and ex vivo human CRC tissues. 
We describe the preparation and characterization of EGF-NIR and investigate 
binding, using BOI of a panel of CRC cell culture models resembling 
heterogeneity of human CRC tissues. EGF-NIR was specifically and selectively 
bound by EGFR expressing CRC cells, the intensity of EGF-NIR signal to 
background ratio (SBR) reflected EGFR levels, dose-response and time course 
imaging experiments provided optimal conditions for quantization of EGFR levels 
by BOI. EGF-NIR imaging of mice with HT-29 orthotopic CRC tumor indicated that 
EGF-NIR is more slowly cleared from the tumor and the highest SBR between tumor 
and normal adjacent tissue was achieved two days post-injection. Furthermore, 
images of dissected tissues demonstrated accumulation of EGF-NIR in the tumor 
and liver. EGF-NIR specifically and strongly labeled EGFR positive human CRC 
tissues while adjacent CRC tissue and EGFR negative tissues expressed weak NIR 
signals. This study emphasizes the use of EGF-NIR for preclinical studies. 
Combined with other methods, EGF-NIR could provide an additional bio-imaging 
specific tool in the standardization of measurements of EGFR expression in CRC 
tissues.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048803
PMCID: PMC3493605
PMID: 23144978 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.