1. Chromosome Res. 2012 Dec;20(8):925-42. doi: 10.1007/s10577-012-9324-x.

Association of modified cytosines and the methylated DNA-binding protein MeCP2 
with distinctive structural domains of lampbrush chromatin.

Morgan GT(1), Jones P, Bellini M.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Genetics and Genomics, School of Biology, University of 
Nottingham, Queens Medical Centre, Nottingham, NG7 2UH, UK. 
garry.morgan@nottingham.ac.uk

We have investigated the association of DNA methylation and proteins 
interpreting methylation state with the distinctive closed and open chromatin 
structural domains that are directly observable in the lampbrush chromosomes 
(LBCs) of amphibian oocytes. To establish the distribution in LBCs of MeCP2, one 
of the key proteins binding 5-methylcytosine-modified DNA (5mC), we expressed 
HA-tagged MeCP2 constructs in Xenopus laevis oocytes. Full-length MeCP2 was 
predominantly targeted to the closed, transcriptionally inactive chromomere 
domains in a pattern proportional to chromomeric DNA density and consistent with 
a global role in determining chromatin state. A minor fraction of HA-MeCP2 was 
also found to associate with a distinctive structural domain, namely a short 
region at the bases of some of the extended lateral loops. Expression in oocytes 
of deleted constructs and of point mutants derived from Rett syndrome patients 
demonstrated that the association of MeCP2 with LBCs was determined by its 
5mC-binding domain. We also examined more directly the distribution of 5mC by 
immunostaining Xenopus and axolotl LBCs and confirmed the pattern suggested by 
MeCP2 targeting of intense staining of the chromomeres and of some loop bases. 
In addition, we found in the longer loops of axolotl LBCs that short 
interstitial regions could also be clearly stained for 5mC. These 5mC regions 
corresponded precisely to unusual segments of active transcription units from 
which RNA polymerase II (pol II) and nascent transcripts were simultaneously 
absent. We also examined by immunostaining the distribution in lampbrush 
chromatin of the oxidized 5mC derivative, 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC). 
Although in general, the pattern resembled that obtained for 5mC, one antibody 
against 5hmC produced intense staining of restricted chromosomal foci. These 
foci corresponded to a third type of lampbrush chromatin domain, the 
transcriptionally active but less extended structures formed by clusters of 
genes transcribed by pol III. This raises the possibility that 5hmC may play a 
role in establishing the distinctive patterns of gene repression and activation 
that characterize specific pol III-transcribed gene families in amphibian 
genomes.

DOI: 10.1007/s10577-012-9324-x
PMCID: PMC3565088
PMID: 23149574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]