1. Diabetes Care. 2013 Mar;36(3):505-12. doi: 10.2337/dc12-0700. Epub 2012 Nov
12.

Transient neonatal diabetes, ZFP57, and hypomethylation of multiple imprinted 
loci: a detailed follow-up.

Boonen SE(1), Mackay DJ, Hahnemann JM, Docherty L, Grønskov K, Lehmann A, Larsen 
LG, Haemers AP, Kockaerts Y, Dooms L, Vu DC, Ngoc CT, Nguyen PB, Kordonouri O, 
Sundberg F, Dayanikli P, Puthi V, Acerini C, Massoud AF, Tümer Z, Temple IK.

Author information:
(1)Center for Applied Human Molecular Genetics, The Kennedy Center, Glostrup, 
Denmark. susaboon@rm.dk

OBJECTIVE: Transient neonatal diabetes mellitus 1 (TNDM1) is the most common 
cause of diabetes presenting at birth. Approximately 5% of the cases are due to 
recessive ZFP57 mutations, causing hypomethylation at the TNDM locus and other 
imprinted loci (HIL). This has consequences for patient care because it has 
impact on the phenotype and recurrence risk for families. We have determined the 
genotype, phenotype, and epigenotype of the first 10 families to alert health 
professionals to this newly described genetic subgroup of diabetes.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: The 10 families (14 homozygous/compound 
heterozygous individuals) with ZFP57 mutations were ascertained through TNDM1 
diagnostic testing. ZFP57 was sequenced in probands and their relatives, and the 
methylation levels at multiple maternally and paternally imprinted loci were 
determined. Medical and family histories were obtained, and clinical examination 
was performed.
RESULTS: The key clinical features in probands were transient neonatal diabetes, 
intrauterine growth retardation, macroglossia, heart defects, and developmental 
delay. However, the finding of two homozygous relatives without diabetes and 
normal intelligence showed that the phenotype could be very variable. The 
epigenotype always included total loss of methylation at the TNDM1 locus and 
reproducible combinations of differential hypomethylation at other maternally 
imprinted loci, including tissue mosaicism.
CONCLUSIONS: There is yet no clear genotype-epigenotype-phenotype correlation to 
explain the variable clinical presentation, and this results in difficulties 
predicting the prognosis of affected individuals. However, many cases have a 
more severe phenotype than seen in other causes of TNDM1. Further cases and 
global epigenetic testing are needed to clarify this.

DOI: 10.2337/dc12-0700
PMCID: PMC3579357
PMID: 23150280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]