1. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e48895. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048895. Epub 2012 Nov
9.

Reduced hippocampal volume in healthy young ApoE4 carriers: an MRI study.

O'Dwyer L(1), Lamberton F, Matura S, Tanner C, Scheibe M, Miller J, Rujescu D, 
Prvulovic D, Hampel H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Psychosomatic Medicine and Psychotherapy, Goethe 
University, Frankfurt, Germany. larodwyer@gmail.com

The E4 allele of the ApoE gene has consistently been shown to be related to an 
increased risk of Alzheimer's disease (AD). The E4 allele is also associated 
with functional and structural grey matter (GM) changes in healthy young, 
middle-aged and older subjects. Here, we assess volumes of deep grey matter 
structures of 22 healthy younger ApoE4 carriers and 22 non-carriers (20-38 
years). Volumes of the nucleus accumbens, amygdala, caudate nucleus, 
hippocampus, pallidum, putamen, thalamus and brain stem were calculated by 
FMRIB's Integrated Registration and Segmentation Tool (FIRST) algorithm. A 
significant drop in volume was found in the right hippocampus of ApoE4 carriers 
(ApoE4+) relative to non-carriers (ApoE4-), while there was a borderline 
significant decrease in the volume of the left hippocampus of ApoE4 carriers. 
The volumes of no other structures were found to be significantly affected by 
genotype. Atrophy has been found to be a sensitive marker of neurodegenerative 
changes, and our results show that within a healthy young population, the 
presence of the ApoE4+ carrier gene leads to volume reduction in a structure 
that is vitally important for memory formation. Our results suggest that the 
hippocampus may be particularly vulnerable to further degeneration in ApoE4 
carriers as they enter middle and old age. Although volume reductions were noted 
bilaterally in the hippocampus, atrophy was more pronounced in the right 
hippocampus. This finding relates to previous work which has noted a 
compensatory increase in right hemisphere activity in ApoE4 carriers in response 
to preclinical declines in memory function. Possession of the ApoE4 allele may 
lead to greater predilection for right hemisphere atrophy even in healthy young 
subjects in their twenties.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048895
PMCID: PMC3494711
PMID: 23152815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.