1. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e51150. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0051150. Epub 2012 Dec
5.

Acute manipulation of diacylglycerol reveals roles in nuclear envelope assembly 
& endoplasmic reticulum morphology.

Domart MC(1), Hobday TM, Peddie CJ, Chung GH, Wang A, Yeh K, Jethwa N, Zhang Q, 
Wakelam MJ, Woscholski R, Byrne RD, Collinson LM, Poccia DL, Larijani B.

Author information:
(1)Cell Biophysics Laboratory, London Research Institute, Cancer Research United 
Kingdom, London, United Kingdom.

The functions and morphology of cellular membranes are intimately related and 
depend not only on their protein content but also on the repertoire of lipids 
that comprise them. In the absence of in vivo data on lipid asymmetry in 
endomembranes, it has been argued that motors, scaffolding proteins or integral 
membrane proteins rather than non-lamellar bilayer lipids such as diacylglycerol 
(DAG), are responsible for shaping of organelles, local membrane curvature and 
fusion. The effects of direct alteration of levels of such lipids remain 
predominantly uninvestigated. Diacylglycerol (DAG) is a well documented second 
messenger. Here we demonstrate two additional conserved functions of DAG: a 
structural role in organelle morphology, and a role in localised extreme 
membrane curvature required for fusion for which proteins alone are 
insufficient. Acute and inducible DAG depletion results in failure of the 
nuclear envelope (NE) to reform at mitosis and reorganisation of the ER into 
multi-lamellar sheets as revealed by correlative light and electron microscopy 
and 3D reconstructions. Remarkably, depleted cells divide without a complete NE, 
and unless rescued by 1,2 or 1,3 DAG soon die. Attenuation of DAG levels by 
enzyme microinjection into echinoderm eggs and embryos also results in 
alterations of ER morphology and nuclear membrane fusion. Our findings 
demonstrate that DAG is an in vivo modulator of organelle morphology in 
mammalian and echinoderm cells, indicating a fundamental role conserved across 
the deuterostome superphylum.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0051150
PMCID: PMC3515572
PMID: 23227247 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.