1. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e50663. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0050663. Epub 2012 Nov 
30.

Identifying conserved and novel microRNAs in developing seeds of Brassica napus 
using deep sequencing.

Körbes AP(1), Machado RD, Guzman F, Almerão MP, de Oliveira LF, Loss-Morais G, 
Turchetto-Zolet AC, Cagliari A, dos Santos Maraschin F, Margis-Pinheiro M, 
Margis R.

Author information:
(1)PPGGBM, Departamento de Genética, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do 
Sul-UFRGS, Porto Alegre, Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are important post-transcriptional regulators of plant 
development and seed formation. In Brassica napus, an important edible oil crop, 
valuable lipids are synthesized and stored in specific seed tissues during 
embryogenesis. The miRNA transcriptome of B. napus is currently poorly 
characterized, especially at different seed developmental stages. This work aims 
to describe the miRNAome of developing seeds of B. napus by identifying 
plant-conserved and novel miRNAs and comparing miRNA abundance in mature versus 
developing seeds. Members of 59 miRNA families were detected through a 
computational analysis of a large number of reads obtained from deep sequencing 
two small RNA and two RNA-seq libraries of (i) pooled immature developing stages 
and (ii) mature B. napus seeds. Among these miRNA families, 17 families are 
currently known to exist in B. napus; additionally 29 families not reported in 
B. napus but conserved in other plant species were identified by alignment with 
known plant mature miRNAs. Assembled mRNA-seq contigs allowed for a search of 
putative new precursors and led to the identification of 13 novel miRNA 
families. Analysis of miRNA population between libraries reveals that several 
miRNAs and isomiRNAs have different abundance in developing stages compared to 
mature seeds. The predicted miRNA target genes encode a broad range of proteins 
related to seed development and energy storage. This work presents a comparative 
study of the miRNA transcriptome of mature and developing B. napus seeds and 
provides a basis for future research on individual miRNAs and their functions in 
embryogenesis, seed maturation and lipid accumulation in B. napus.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0050663
PMCID: PMC3511302
PMID: 23226347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.