1. Environ Health Perspect. 2013 Feb;121(2):170-80. doi: 10.1289/ehp.1205404.
Epub  2012 Dec 11.

Evaluation of the association between maternal smoking, childhood obesity, and 
metabolic disorders: a national toxicology program workshop review.

Behl M(1), Rao D, Aagaard K, Davidson TL, Levin ED, Slotkin TA, Srinivasan S, 
Wallinga D, White MF, Walker VR, Thayer KA, Holloway AC.

Author information:
(1)Kelly Government Solutions, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, USA.

BACKGROUND: An emerging literature suggests that environmental chemicals may 
play a role in the development of childhood obesity and metabolic disorders, 
especially when exposure occurs early in life.
OBJECTIVE: Here we assess the association between these health outcomes and 
exposure to maternal smoking during pregnancy as part of a broader effort to 
develop a research agenda to better understand the role of environmental 
chemicals as potential risk factors for obesity and metabolic disorders.
METHODS: PubMed was searched up to 8 March 2012 for epidemiological and 
experimental animal studies related to maternal smoking or nicotine exposure 
during pregnancy and childhood obesity or metabolic disorders at any age. A 
total of 101 studies-83 in humans and 18 in animals-were identified as the 
primary literature.
DISCUSSION: Current epidemiological data support a positive association between 
maternal smoking and increased risk of obesity or overweight in offspring. The 
data strongly suggest a causal relation, although the possibility that the 
association is attributable to unmeasured residual confounding cannot be 
completely ruled out. This conclusion is supported by findings from laboratory 
animals exposed to nicotine during development. The existing literature on human 
exposures does not support an association between maternal smoking during 
pregnancy and type 1 diabetes in offspring. Too few human studies have assessed 
outcomes related to type 2 diabetes or metabolic syndrome to reach conclusions 
based on patterns of findings. There may be a number of mechanistic pathways 
important for the development of aberrant metabolic outcomes following perinatal 
exposure to cigarette smoke, which remain largely unexplored.
CONCLUSIONS: From a toxicological perspective, the linkages between maternal 
smoking during pregnancy and childhood overweight/obesity provide 
proof-of-concept of how early-life exposure to an environmental toxicant can be 
a risk factor for childhood obesity.

DOI: 10.1289/ehp.1205404
PMCID: PMC3569686
PMID: 23232494 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: This article is the work product of a group of 
employees of the NIEHS, NIH; however, the statements, opinions, or conclusions 
contained therein do not necessarily represent the statements, opinions or 
conclusions of NIEHS, NIH, or the U.S. government. M. Behl is employed by Kelly 
Government Solutions; D. Rao is employed by Integrated Laboratory Systems Inc.; 
D. Wallinga is employed by Food and Health Program, Institute for Agriculture 
and Trade Policy. The authors declare they have no actual or potential competing 
financial interests.