1. Front Physiol. 2012 Dec 10;3:446. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2012.00446. eCollection 
2012.

Boolean model of yeast apoptosis as a tool to study yeast and human apoptotic 
regulations.

Kazemzadeh L(1), Cvijovic M, Petranovic D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Chalmers University of 
Technology Gothenburg, Sweden ; Digital Enterprise Research Institute, National 
University of Ireland Galway, Ireland.

Programmed cell death (PCD) is an essential cellular mechanism that is 
evolutionary conserved, mediated through various pathways and acts by 
integrating different stimuli. Many diseases such as neurodegenerative diseases 
and cancers are found to be caused by, or associated with, regulations in the 
cell death pathways. Yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, is a unicellular eukaryotic 
organism that shares with human cells components and pathways of the PCD and is 
therefore used as a model organism. Boolean modeling is becoming promising 
approach to capture qualitative behavior and describe essential properties of 
such complex networks. Here we present large literature-based and to our 
knowledge first Boolean model that combines pathways leading to apoptosis (a 
type of PCD) in yeast. Analysis of the yeast model confirmed experimental 
findings of anti-apoptotic role of Bir1p and pro-apoptotic role of Stm1p and 
revealed activation of the stress protein kinase Hog proposing the maximal level 
of activation upon heat stress. In addition we extended the yeast model and 
created an in silico humanized yeast in which human pro- and anti-apoptotic 
regulators Bcl-2 family and Valosin-contain protein (VCP) are included in the 
model. We showed that accumulation of Bax in silico humanized yeast shows 
apoptotic markers and that VCP is essential target of Akt Signaling. The 
presented Boolean model provides comprehensive description of yeast apoptosis 
network behavior. Extended model of humanized yeast gives new insights of how 
complex human disease like neurodegeneration can initially be tested.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2012.00446
PMCID: PMC3518040
PMID: 23233838