1. Biochemistry. 2013 Jan 15;52(2):378-91. doi: 10.1021/bi3015373. Epub 2013 Jan
3.

Light-induced subunit dissociation by a light-oxygen-voltage domain 
photoreceptor from Rhodobacter sphaeroides.

Conrad KS(1), Bilwes AM, Crane BR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Cornell University, Ithaca, New 
York 14853, USA.

Light-oxygen-voltage (LOV) domains bind a flavin chromophore to serve as blue 
light sensors in a wide range of eukaryotic and prokaryotic proteins. LOV 
domains are associated with a variable effector domain or a separate protein 
signaling partner to execute a wide variety of functions that include regulation 
of kinases, generation of anti-sigma factor antagonists, and regulation of 
circadian clocks. Here we present the crystal structure, photocycle kinetics, 
association properties, and spectroscopic features of a full-length LOV domain 
protein from Rhodobacter sphaeroides (RsLOV). RsLOV exhibits N- and C-terminal 
helical extensions that form an unusual helical bundle at its dimer interface 
with some resemblance to the helical transducer of sensory rhodopsin II. The 
blue light-induced conformational changes of RsLOV revealed from a comparison of 
light- and dark-state crystal structures support a shared signaling mechanism of 
LOV domain proteins that originates with the light-induced formation of a 
flavin-cysteinyl photoadduct. Adduct formation disrupts hydrogen bonding in the 
active site and propagates structural changes through the LOV domain core to the 
N- and C-terminal extensions. Single-residue variants in the active site and 
dimer interface of RsLOV alter photoadduct lifetimes and induce structural 
changes that perturb the oligomeric state. Size exclusion chromatography, 
multiangle light scattering, small-angle X-ray scattering, and cross-linking 
studies indicate that RsLOV dimerizes in the dark but, upon light excitation, 
dissociates into monomers. This light-induced switch in oligomeric state may 
prove to be useful for engineering molecular associations in controlled cellular 
settings.

DOI: 10.1021/bi3015373
PMCID: PMC3582384
PMID: 23252338 [Indexed for MEDLINE]