1. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e52473. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052473. Epub 2012 Dec 
21.

Enhancing endosomal escape of transduced proteins by photochemical 
internalisation.

Mellert K(1), Lamla M, Scheffzek K, Wittig R, Kaufmann D.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany. 
kevin.mellert@uni-ulm.de

Induced internalisation of functional proteins into cultured cells has become an 
important aspect in a rising number of in vitro and in vivo assays. The 
endo-lysosomal entrapment of the transduced proteins remains the major problem 
in all transduction protocols. In this study we compared the efficiency, 
cytotoxicity and protein targeting of different commercially available 
transduction reagents by transducing a well-studied fluorescently labelled 
protein (Atto488-bovine serum albumin) into cultured human sarcoma cells. The 
amount of internalised protein and toxicity differed between the different 
reagents, but the percentage of transduced cells was consistently high. 
Furthermore, in all protocols the signals of the transduced Atto488-BSA were 
predominantly punctual consistent with an endosomal localisation. To overcome 
the endosomal entrapment, the transduction protocols were combined with a 
photochemical internalisation (PCI) treatment. Using this combination revealed 
that an endosomal disruption is highly effective in cell penetrating peptide 
(CPP) mediated transduction, whereas lipid-mediated transductions lead to a 
lower signal spreading throughout the cytosol. No change in the signal 
distribution could be achieved in treatments using non-lipid polymers as a 
transduction reagent. Therefore, the combination of protein transduction 
protocols based on CPPs with the endosomolytic treatment PCI can facilitate 
protein transduction experiments in vitro.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052473
PMCID: PMC3528648
PMID: 23285056 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.