1. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e52847. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052847. Epub 2012 Dec 
27.

The role of insulin C-peptide in the coevolution analyses of the insulin 
signaling pathway: a hint for its functions.

Wang S(1), Wei W, Zheng Y, Hou J, Dou Y, Zhang S, Luo X, Cai X.

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, Key Laboratory of 
Zoonoses of CAAS, Key Laboratory of Veterinary Parasitology of Gansu Province, 
Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, 
Lanzhou, Gansu, China.

As the linker between the A chain and B chain of proinsulin, C-peptide displays 
high variability in length and amino acid composition, and has been considered 
as an inert byproduct of insulin synthesis and processing for many years. Recent 
studies have suggested that C-peptide can act as a bioactive hormone, exerting 
various biological effects on the pathophysiology and treatment of diabetes. In 
this study, we analyzed the coevolution of insulin molecules among vertebrates, 
aiming at exploring the evolutionary characteristics of insulin molecule, 
especially the C-peptide. We also calculated the correlations of evolutionary 
rates between the insulin and the insulin receptor (IR) sequences as well as the 
domain-domain pairs of the ligand and receptor by the mirrortree method. The 
results revealed distinctive features of C-peptide in insulin intramolecular 
coevolution and correlated residue substitutions, which partly supported the 
idea that C-peptide can act as a bioactive hormone, with significant sequence 
features, as well as a linker assisting the formation of mature insulin during 
synthesis. Interestingly, the evolution of C-peptide exerted the highest 
correlation with that of the insulin receptor and its ligand binding domain 
(LBD), implying a potential relationship with the insulin signaling pathway.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052847
PMCID: PMC3531361
PMID: 23300796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.