1. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e53453. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053453. Epub 2013 Jan
7.

M89V Sialic acid Acetyl Esterase (SIAE) and all other non-synonymous common 
variants of this gene are catalytically normal.

Chellappa V(1), Taylor KN, Pedrick K, Donado C, Netravali IA, Haider K, Cariappa 
A, Dalomba NF, Pillai S.

Author information:
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts, United States of America.

Catalytically defective rare variants of Sialic acid Acetyl Esterase (SIAE) have 
previously been linked to autoimmunity. Studies presented here confirm that the 
M89V SIAE protein and all other products of common variant alleles of SIAE are 
catalytically normal. Although overexpressing transfected non-lymphoid cells 
secrete small amounts of SIAE that can associate with the cell surface, normal 
human lymphocytes do not exhibit cell surface SIAE, supporting genetic evidence 
in mice that indicates that this protein functions in a lymphocyte intrinsic 
manner. Analyses of the plasma proteome also indicate that SIAE is not secreted 
in vivo. A re-analysis exclusively of catalytically defective rare variant 
alleles of SIAE in subjects in which this gene was completely sequenced 
confirmed an association of SIAE with autoimmunity. A subset of catalytically 
defective rare variant SIAE alleles has previously been typed in a large 
genotyping study comparing a diverse group of disease subjects and controls; our 
re-analysis of this data shows that catalytically defective alleles are enriched 
in disease subjects. These data suggest that SIAE may be associated with 
autoimmunity and that further study of catalytically defective rare variant SIAE 
alleles in terms of autoimmune disease susceptibility is strongly warranted.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053453
PMCID: PMC3538537
PMID: 23308225 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.