1. BMC Genomics. 2013 Jan 16;14:33. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-33.

Comparative gene expression between two yeast species.

Guan Y(1), Dunham MJ, Troyanskaya OG, Caudy AA.

Author information:
(1)Lewis-Sigler Institute for Integrative Genomics, Princeton University, 
Princeton, NJ 08544, USA.

BACKGROUND: Comparative genomics brings insight into sequence evolution, but 
even more may be learned by coupling sequence analyses with experimental tests 
of gene function and regulation. However, the reliability of such comparisons is 
often limited by biased sampling of expression conditions and incomplete 
knowledge of gene functions across species. To address these challenges, we 
previously systematically generated expression profiles in Saccharomyces bayanus 
to maximize functional coverage as compared to an existing Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae data repository.
RESULTS: In this paper, we take advantage of these two data repositories to 
compare patterns of ortholog expression in a wide variety of conditions. First, 
we developed a scalable metric for expression divergence that enabled us to 
detect a significant correlation between sequence and expression conservation on 
the global level, which previous smaller-scale expression studies failed to 
detect. Despite this global conservation trend, between-species gene expression 
neighborhoods were less well-conserved than within-species comparisons across 
different environmental perturbations, and approximately 4% of orthologs 
exhibited a significant change in co-expression partners. Furthermore, our 
analysis of matched perturbations collected in both species (such as diauxic 
shift and cell cycle synchrony) demonstrated that approximately a quarter of 
orthologs exhibit condition-specific expression pattern differences.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, these analyses provide a global view of gene 
expression patterns between two species, both in terms of the conditions and 
timing of a gene's expression as well as co-expression partners. Our results 
provide testable hypotheses that will direct future experiments to determine how 
these changes may be specified in the genome.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-33
PMCID: PMC3556494
PMID: 23324262 [Indexed for MEDLINE]