1. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e52876. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052876. Epub 2013 Jan
14.

Distortions in development of intestinal microbiota associated with late onset 
sepsis in preterm infants.

Mai V(1), Torrazza RM, Ukhanova M, Wang X, Sun Y, Li N, Shuster J, Sharma R, 
Hudak ML, Neu J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, College of Public Health and Health Professions 
and College of Medicine and Emerging Pathogens Institute, University of Florida, 
Gainesville, FL, USA. vmai@ufl.edu

Late onset sepsis (LOS) is a major contributor to neonatal morbidity and 
mortality, especially in premature infants. Distortions in the establishment of 
normal gut microbiota, commensal microbes that colonize the digestive tract, 
might increase the risk of LOS via disruption of the mucosal barrier with 
resultant translocation of luminal contents. Correlation of distortions of the 
intestinal microbiota with LOS is a necessary first step to design novel 
microbiota-based screening approaches that might lead to early interventions to 
prevent LOS in high risk infants. Using a case/control design nested in a cohort 
study of preterm infants, we analyzed stool samples that had been prospectively 
collected from ten preterm infants with LOS and from 18 matched controls. A 16S 
rRNA based approach was utilized to compare microbiota diversity and identify 
specific bacterial signatures that differed in their prevalence between cases 
and controls. Overall α-diversity (Chao1) was lower in cases two weeks before 
(p<0.05) but not one week before or at the time of diagnosis of LOS. Overall 
microbiota structure (Unifrac) appeared distinct in cases 2 weeks and 1 week 
before but not at diagnosis (p<0.05). Although we detected few operational 
taxonomic units (OTUs) unique or enriched in cases, we found many OTUs common in 
controls that were lacking in cases (p<0.01). Bifidobacteria counts were lower 
in cases at all time points. Our results support the hypothesis that a 
distortion in normal microbiota composition, and not an enrichment of potential 
pathogens, is associated with LOS in preterm infants.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052876
PMCID: PMC3544792
PMID: 23341915 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have read the 
journal’s policy and have the following conflict: Dr. Joe Neu is a PLOS ONE 
Editorial Board member. This does not alter the authors' adherence to all the 
PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.