1. Mol Ther Nucleic Acids. 2012 Apr 3;1(4):e17. doi: 10.1038/mtna.2012.6.

Deep Sequencing Analyses of DsiRNAs Reveal the Influence of 3' Terminal 
Overhangs on Dicing Polarity, Strand Selectivity, and RNA Editing of siRNAs.

Zhou J(1), Song MS, Jacobi AM, Behlke MA, Wu X, Rossi JJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Beckman Research Institute of 
City of Hope, Duarte, California, USA.

25/27 Base duplex RNAs that are substrates for Dicer have been demonstrated to 
enhance RNA interference (RNAi) potency and efficacy. Since the target sites are 
not always equally susceptible to suppression by small interfering RNA (siRNA), 
not all 27-mer duplexes that are processed into the corresponding conventional 
siRNAs show increased potency. Thus random designing of Dicer-substrate siRNAs 
(DsiRNAs) may generate siRNAs with poor RNAi due to unpredictable Dicer 
processing. Previous studies have demonstrated that the 3'-overhang affects 
dicing cleavage site and the orientation of Dicer entry. Moreover, an asymmetric 
27-mer duplex having a 3' two-nucleotide overhang and 3'-DNA residues on the 
blunt end has been rationally designed to obtain greater efficacy. This 
asymmetric structure directs dicing to predictably yield a single primary 
cleavage product. In the present study, we analyzed the in vitro and 
intracellular dicing patterns of chemically synthesized duplex RNAs with 
different 3'-overhangs. Consistent with previous studies, we observed that Dicer 
preferentially processes these RNAs at a site 21-22 nucleotide (nt) from the 
two-base 3'-overhangs. We also observed that the direction and ability of human 
Dicer to generate siRNAs can be partially or completely blocked by DNA residues 
at the 3'-termimi. To examine the effects of various 3'-end modifications on 
Dicer processing in cells, we employed Illumina Deep sequencing analyses to 
unravel the fates of the asymmetric 27-mer duplexes. To validate the strand 
selection process and knockdown capabilities we also conducted dual-luciferase 
psiCHECK reporter assays to monitor the RNAi potencies of both the "sense" (S) 
and "antisense" (AS) strands derived from these DsiRNAs. Consistent with our in 
vitro Dicer assays, the asymmetric duplexes were predictably processed into 
desired primary cleavage products of 21-22-mers in cells. We also observed the 
trimming of the 3' end, especially when DNA residues were incorporated into the 
overhangs and this trimming ultimately influenced the Dicer-cleavage site and 
RNAi potency. Moreover, the observation that the most efficacious strand was the 
most abundant revealed that the relative frequencies of each "S" or "AS" strand 
are highly correlated with the silencing activity and strand selectivity. 
Collectively, our data demonstrate that even though the only differences between 
a family of DsiRNAs was the 3' two-nuclotide overhang, dicing polarity and 
strand selectivity are distinct depending upon the sequence and chemical nature 
of this overhang. Thus, it is possible to predictably control dicing polarity 
and strand selectivity via simply changing the 3'-end overhangs without altering 
the original duplex sequence. These optimal design features of 3'-overhangs 
might provide a facile approach for rationally designing highly potent 25/27-mer 
DsiRNAs.

DOI: 10.1038/mtna.2012.6
PMCID: PMC3384246
PMID: 23343928