1. Top Antivir Med. 2012 Dec;20(5):154-61.

Management of hepatitis C virus infection: the basics.

Naggie S(1).

Author information:
(1)Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC, USA.

Chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection affects some 170 million people 
worldwide, including 3 to 4 million in the United States who are largely unaware 
of their infection status. HCV has 6 genotypes; genotype 1 is the most common in 
the United States and genotypes 1 and 4 are less responsive to interferon 
alfa-based therapy than the other genotypes. Treatment with available 
direct-acting antiviral (DAA) drugs has increased sustained virologic response 
(SVR) rates in genotype 1 infection and shortened duration of therapy in many 
patients, but at this time these agents must still be administered with 
peginterferon alfa and ribavirin to prevent rapid emergence of resistance. 
Baseline predictors of response to therapy continue to play a role with 
triple-drug combination therapy including the pharmacogenetic IL28B genotype, 
which differs in prevalence throughout the world. The stopping/futility rules 
are different for triple-drug combination therapy, allowing for earlier 
decision-making. Ultimately, SVR is the goal of HCV treatment because it 
dramatically reduces likelihood of poor long-term outcome, even among patients 
with histologically advanced disease. This article summarizes a basic review 
presented by Susanna Naggie, MD, at the IAS-USA live management of HCV 
continuing medical education program held in Atlanta in October 2012. This 
article is intended for practitioners who are new to HCV management or who are 
interested in reviewing the basics of HCV treatments.

PMCID: PMC3690573
PMID: 23363693 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Financial Affiliations: Dr Naggie has received 
research support from Anadys Pharmaceuticals, Inc, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Gilead 
Sciences, Inc, Medtronic, Synexis, and Vertex Pharmaceuticals, Inc. She has 
served as a scientific advisor to Abbott Laboratories, Boehringer-Ingelheim, 
Janssen, and Vertex Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (Updated 12/20/12)