1. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2013 Apr;37(4):558-65. doi: 10.1111/acer.12003. Epub
2013  Jan 29.

Circadian misalignment, reward-related brain function, and adolescent alcohol 
involvement.

Hasler BP(1), Clark DB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 3811 
O’Hara Street, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA. haslerbp@upmc.edu

BACKGROUND: Developmental changes in sleep and circadian rhythms that occur 
during adolescence may contribute to reward-related brain dysfunction, and 
consequently increase the risk of alcohol use disorders (AUDs).
METHODS: This review (i) describes marked changes in circadian rhythms, 
reward-related behavior and brain function, and alcohol involvement that occur 
during adolescence, (ii) offers evidence that these parallel developmental 
changes are associated, and (iii) posits a conceptual model by which 
misalignment between sleep-wake timing and endogenous circadian timing may 
increase the risk of adolescent AUDs by altering reward-related brain function.
RESULTS: The timing of sleep shifts later throughout adolescence, in part due to 
developmental changes in endogenous circadian rhythms, which tend to become more 
delayed. This tendency for delayed sleep and circadian rhythms is at odds with 
early school start times during secondary education, leading to misalignment 
between many adolescents' sleep-wake schedules and their internal circadian 
timing. Circadian misalignment is associated with increased alcohol use and 
other risk-taking behaviors, as well as sleep loss and sleep disturbance. 
Growing evidence indicates that circadian rhythms modulate the reward system, 
suggesting that circadian misalignment may impact adolescent alcohol involvement 
by altering reward-related brain function. Neurocognitive function is also 
subject to sleep and circadian influence, and thus circadian misalignment may 
also impair inhibitory control and other cognitive processes relevant to alcohol 
use. Specifically, circadian misalignment may further exacerbate the 
cortical-subcortical imbalance within the reward circuit, an imbalance thought 
to explain increased risk-taking and sensation-seeking during adolescence. 
Adolescent alcohol use is highly contextualized, however, and thus studies 
testing this model will also need to consider factors that may influence both 
circadian misalignment and alcohol use.
CONCLUSIONS: This review highlights growing evidence supporting a path by which 
circadian misalignment may disrupt reward mechanisms, which may in turn 
accelerate the transition from alcohol use to AUDs in vulnerable adolescents.

Copyright © 2013 by the Research Society on Alcoholism.

DOI: 10.1111/acer.12003
PMCID: PMC3843484
PMID: 23360461 [Indexed for MEDLINE]