1. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e54605. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054605. Epub 2013 Jan
29.

Alterations in gene expression in mutant amyloid precursor protein transgenic 
mice lacking Niemann-Pick type C1 protein.

Maulik M(1), Thinakaran G, Kar S.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Prions and Protein Folding Diseases, University of Alberta, 
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.

Niemann-Pick type C (NPC) disease, a rare autosomal recessive disorder caused 
mostly by mutation in NPC1 gene, is pathologically characterized by the 
accumulation of free cholesterol in brain and other tissues. This is accompanied 
by gliosis and loss of neurons in selected brain regions, including the 
cerebellum. Recent studies have shown that NPC disease exhibits intriguing 
parallels with Alzheimer's disease, including the presence of neurofibrillary 
tangles and increased levels of amyloid precursor protein (APP)-derived 
β-amyloid (Aβ) peptides in vulnerable brain neurons. To evaluate the role of Aβ 
in NPC disease, we determined the gene expression profile in selected brain 
regions of our recently developed bigenic ANPC mice, generated by crossing APP 
transgenic (Tg) mice with heterozygous Npc1-deficient mice. The ANPC mice 
exhibited exacerbated neuronal and glial pathology compared to other genotypes 
[i.e., APP-Tg, double heterozygous (Dhet), Npc1-null and wild-type mice]. 
Analysis of expression profiles of 86 selected genes using real-time RT-PCR 
arrays showed a wide-spectrum of alterations in the four genotypes compared to 
wild-type controls. The changes observed in APP-Tg and Dhet mice are limited to 
only few genes involved mostly in the regulation of cholesterol metabolism, 
whereas Npc1-null and ANPC mice showed alterations in the expression profiles of 
a number of genes regulating cholesterol homeostasis, APP metabolism, vesicular 
trafficking and cell death mechanism in both hippocampus and cerebellum compared 
to wild-type mice. Intriguingly, ANPC and Npc1-null mice, with some exceptions, 
exhibited similar changes, although more genes were differentially expressed in 
the affected cerebellum than the relatively spared hippocampus. The altered gene 
profiles were found to match with the corresponding protein levels. These 
results suggest that lack of Npc1 protein can alter the expression profile of 
selected transcripts as well as proteins, and APP overexpression influences 
cerebral pathology by enhancing changes triggered by Npc1 deficiency in the 
bigenic line.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054605
PMCID: PMC3558508
PMID: 23382922 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.