1. BMC Evol Biol. 2013 Feb 13;13:39. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-13-39.

Congruence of chloroplast- and nuclear-encoded DNA sequence variations used to 
assess species boundaries in the soil microalga Heterococcus (Stramenopiles, 
Xanthophyceae).

Rybalka N(1), Wolf M, Andersen RA, Friedl T.

Author information:
(1)Experimental Phycology and Culture Collection of Algae (SAG), Georg August 
University Göttingen, Untere Karspüle 2a, Göttingen, 37073, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Heterococcus is a microalgal genus of Xanthophyceae (Stramenopiles) 
that is common and widespread in soils, especially from cold regions. Species 
are characterized by extensively branched filaments produced when grown on 
agarized culture medium. Despite the large number of species described 
exclusively using light microscopic morphology, the assessment of species 
diversity is hampered by extensive morphological plasticity.
RESULTS: Two independent types of molecular data, the chloroplast-encoded 
psbA/rbcL spacer complemented by rbcL gene and the internal transcribed spacer 2 
of the nuclear rDNA cistron (ITS2), congruently recovered a robust phylogenetic 
structure. With ITS2 considerable sequence and secondary structure divergence 
existed among the eight species, but a combined sequence and secondary structure 
phylogenetic analysis confined to helix II of ITS2 corroborated relationships as 
inferred from the rbcL gene phylogeny. Intra-genomic divergence of ITS2 
sequences was revealed in many strains. The 'monophyletic species concept', 
appropriate for microalgae without known sexual reproduction, revealed eight 
different species. Species boundaries established using the molecular-based 
monophyletic species concept were more conservative than the traditional 
morphological species concept. Within a species, almost identical chloroplast 
marker sequences (genotypes) were repeatedly recovered from strains of different 
origins. At least two species had widespread geographical distributions; 
however, within a given species, genotypes recovered from Antarctic strains were 
distinct from those in temperate habitats. Furthermore, the sequence diversity 
may correspond to adaptation to different types of habitats or climates.
CONCLUSIONS: We established a method and a reference data base for the 
unambiguous identification of species of the common soil microalgal genus 
Heterococcus which uses DNA sequence variation in markers from plastid and 
nuclear genomes. The molecular data were more reliable and more conservative 
than morphological data.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2148-13-39
PMCID: PMC3598724
PMID: 23402662 [Indexed for MEDLINE]