1. BioData Min. 2013 Feb 14;6(1):3. doi: 10.1186/1756-0381-6-3.

Identification of SNPs associated with variola virus virulence.

Hoen AG(1), Gardner SN, Moore JH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Community and Family Medicine, The Geisel School of Medicine at 
Dartmouth, Dartmouth College, One Medical Center Drive, Lebanon, NH 03756, USA. 
jason.h.moore@dartmouth.edu.

BACKGROUND: Decades after the eradication of smallpox, its etiological agent, 
variola virus (VARV), remains a threat as a potential bioweapon. Outbreaks of 
smallpox around the time of the global eradication effort exhibited variable 
case fatality rates (CFRs), likely attributable in part to complex viral genetic 
determinants of smallpox virulence. We aimed to identify genome-wide single 
nucleotide polymorphisms associated with CFR. We evaluated unadjusted and 
outbreak geographic location-adjusted models of single SNPs and two- and 
three-way interactions between SNPs.
FINDINGS: Using the data mining approach multifactor dimensionality reduction 
(MDR), we identified five VARV SNPs in models significantly associated with CFR. 
The top performing unadjusted model and adjusted models both revealed the same 
two-way gene-gene interaction. We discuss the biological plausibility of the 
influence of the SNPs identified these and other significant models on the 
strain-specific virulence of VARV.
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified genetic loci in the VARV genome that are 
statistically associated with VARV virulence as measured by CFR. While our 
ability to infer a causal relationship between the specific SNPs identified in 
our analysis and VARV virulence is limited, our results suggest that smallpox 
severity is in part associated with VARV strain variation and that VARV 
virulence may be determined by multiple genetic loci. This study represents the 
first application of MDR to the identification of pathogen gene-gene 
interactions for predicting infectious disease outbreak severity.

DOI: 10.1186/1756-0381-6-3
PMCID: PMC3599518
PMID: 23410064