1. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e56529. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056529. Epub 2013 Feb
20.

Staphylococcus aureus FepA and FepB proteins drive heme iron utilization in 
Escherichia coli.

Turlin E(1), Débarbouillé M, Augustyniak K, Gilles AM, Wandersman C.

Author information:
(1)Unité des Membranes Bactériennes, Département de Microbiologie, Institut 
Pasteur, CNRS ERL3526, Paris, France.

EfeUOB-like tripartite systems are widespread in bacteria and in many cases they 
are encoded by genes organized into iron-regulated operons. They consist of: 
EfeU, a protein similar to the yeast iron permease Ftrp1; EfeO, an 
extracytoplasmic protein of unknown function and EfeB, also an extracytoplasmic 
protein with heme peroxidase activity, belonging to the DyP family. Many 
bacterial EfeUOB systems have been implicated in iron uptake, but a prefential 
iron source remains undetermined. Nevertheless, in the case of Escherichia coli, 
the EfeUOB system has been shown to recognize heme and to allow extracytoplasmic 
heme iron extraction via a deferrochelation reaction. Given the high level of 
sequence conservations between EfeUOB orthologs, we hypothesized that heme might 
be the physiological iron substrate for the other orthologous systems. To test 
this hypothesis, we undertook characterization of the Staphylococcus aureus 
FepABC system. Results presented here indicate: i) that the S. aureus FepB 
protein binds both heme and PPIX with high affinity, like EfeB, the E. coli 
ortholog; ii) that it has low peroxidase activity, comparable to that of EfeB; 
iii) that both FepA and FepB drive heme iron utilization, and both are required 
for this activity and iv) that the E. coli FepA ortholog (EfeO) cannot replace 
FepA in FepB-driven iron release from heme indicating protein specificity in 
these activities. Our results show that the function in heme iron extraction is 
conserved in the two orthologous systems.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056529
PMCID: PMC3577903
PMID: 23437157 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Cécile Wandersman is a PLOS 
ONE Editorial Board member. This does not alter the authors’ adherence to all 
the PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.