1. Genome Biol. 2013 Feb 25;14(2):R18. doi: 10.1186/gb-2013-14-2-r18.

The BET protein FSH functionally interacts with ASH1 to orchestrate global gene 
activity in Drosophila.

Kockmann T, Gerstung M, Schlumpf T, Xhinzhou Z, Hess D, Beerenwinkel N, Beisel 
C, Paro R.

BACKGROUND: The question of how cells re-establish gene expression states after 
cell division is still poorly understood. Genetic and molecular analyses have 
indicated that Trithorax group (TrxG) proteins are critical for the long-term 
maintenance of active gene expression states in many organisms. A generally 
accepted model suggests that TrxG proteins contribute to maintenance of 
transcription by protecting genes from inappropriate Polycomb group 
(PcG)-mediated silencing, instead of directly promoting transcription.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: Here we report a physical and functional interaction in 
Drosophila between two members of the TrxG, the histone methyltransferase ASH1 
and the bromodomain and extraterminal family protein FSH. We investigated this 
interface at the genome level, uncovering a widespread co-localization of both 
proteins at promoters and PcG-bound intergenic elements. Our integrative 
analysis of chromatin maps and gene expression profiles revealed that the 
observed ASH1-FSH binding pattern at promoters is a hallmark of active genes. 
Inhibition of FSH-binding to chromatin resulted in global down-regulation of 
transcription. In addition, we found that genes displaying marks of robust 
PcG-mediated repression also have ASH1 and FSH bound to their promoters.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data strongly favor a global coactivator function of ASH1 and 
FSH during transcription, as opposed to the notion that TrxG proteins impede 
inappropriate PcG-mediated silencing, but are dispensable elsewhere. Instead, 
our results suggest that PcG repression needs to overcome the 
transcription-promoting function of ASH1 and FSH in order to silence genes.

DOI: 10.1186/gb-2013-14-2-r18
PMCID: PMC4053998
PMID: 23442797 [Indexed for MEDLINE]