1. Curr Neuropharmacol. 2012 Sep;10(3):272-85. doi: 10.2174/157015912803217288.

NMDA Neurotransmission Dysfunction in Behavioral and Psychological Symptoms of 
Alzheimer's Disease.

Huang YJ(1), Lin CH, Lane HY, Tsai GE.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Clinical Medical Science, China Medical University, Taichung, 
Taiwan ; Department of Psychiatry, China Medical University Hospital, Taichung, 
Taiwan.

Dementia has become an all-important disease because the population is aging 
rapidly and the cost of health care associated with dementia is ever increasing. 
In addition to cognitive function impairment, associated behavioral and 
psychological symptoms of dementia (BPSD) worsen patient's quality of life and 
increase caregiver's burden. Alzheimer's disease is the most common type of 
dementia and both behavioral disturbance and cognitive impairment of Alzheimer's 
disease are thought to be associated with the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) 
dysfunction as increasing evidence of dysfunctional glutamatergic 
neurotransmission had been reported in behavioral changes and cognitive decline 
in Alzheimer's disease. We review the literature regarding dementia (especially 
Alzheimer's disease), BPSD and relevant findings on glutamatergic and NMDA 
neurotransmission, including the effects of memantine, a NMDA receptor 
antagonist, and NMDA-enhancing agents, such as D-serine and D-cycloserine. 
Literatures suggest that behavioral disturbance and cognitive impairment of 
Alzheimer's disease may be associated with excitatory neurotoxic effects which 
result in impairment of neuronal plasticity and degenerative processes. 
Memantine shows benefits in improving cognition, function, agitation/aggression 
and delusion in Alzheimer's disease. On the other hand, some NMDA modulators 
which enhance NMDA function through the co-agonist binding site can also improve 
cognitive function and psychotic symptoms. We propose that modulating NMDA 
neurotransmission is effective in treating behavioral and psychological symptoms 
of Alzheimer's disease. Prospective study using NMDA enhancers in patients with 
Alzheimer's disease and associated behavioral disturbance is needed to verify 
this hypothesis.

DOI: 10.2174/157015912803217288
PMCID: PMC3468881
PMID: 23450042