1. Clinics (Sao Paulo). 2013;68 Suppl 1(Suppl 1):15-26. doi: 
10.6061/clinics/2013(sup01)03.

The epidemiology and etiology of azoospermia.

Cocuzza M(1), Alvarenga C, Pagani R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de São Paulo, São 
Paulo, SP, Brazil. mcocuzza@uol.com.br

The misconception that infertility is typically associated with the female is 
commonly faced in the management of infertile men. It is uncommon for a patient 
to present for an infertility evaluation with an abnormal semen analysis report 
before an extensive female partner workup has been performed. Additionally, a 
man is usually considered fertile based only on seminal parameters without a 
physical exam. This behavior may lead to a delay in both the exact diagnosis and 
in possible specific infertility treatment. Moreover, male factor infertility 
can result from an underlying medical condition that is often treatable but 
could possibly be life-threatening. The responsibility of male factor in 
couple's infertility has been exponentially rising in recent years due to a 
comprehensive evaluation of reproductive male function and improved diagnostic 
tools. Despite this improvement in diagnosis, azoospermia is always the most 
challenging topic associated with infertility treatment. Several conditions that 
interfere with spermatogenesis and reduce sperm production and quality can lead 
to azoospermia. Azoospermia may also occur because of a reproductive tract 
obstruction. Optimal management of patients with azoospermia requires a full 
understanding of the disease etiology. This review will discuss in detail the 
epidemiology and etiology of azoospermia. A thorough literature survey was 
performed using the Medline, EMBASE, BIOSIS, and Cochrane databases. We 
restricted the survey to clinical publications that were relevant to male 
infertility and azoospermia. Many of the recommendations included are not based 
on controlled studies.

DOI: 10.6061/clinics/2013(sup01)03
PMCID: PMC3583160
PMID: 23503951 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported.