1. Geo Spat Inf Sci. 2012;15(2):117-133. doi: 10.1080/10095020.2012.714663. Epub 
2012 Sep 24.

Quasi-Likelihood Techniques in a Logistic Regression Equation for Identifying 
Simulium damnosum s.l. Larval Habitats Intra-cluster Covariates in Togo.

Jacob BG(1), Novak RJ, Toe L, Sanfo MS, Afriyie AN, Ibrahim MA, Griffith DA, 
Unnasch TR.

Author information:
(1)Global Infectious Disease Research Program, Department of Public Health, 
College of Public Health, University of South Florida, 3720 Spectrum Blvd, Suite 
304, Tampa, Florida 33612, USA.

The standard methods for regression analyses of clustered riverine larval 
habitat data of Simulium damnosum s.l. a major black-fly vector of 
Onchoceriasis, postulate models relating observational ecological-sampled 
parameter estimators to prolific habitats without accounting for residual 
intra-cluster error correlation effects. Generally, this correlation comes from 
two sources: (1) the design of the random effects and their assumed covariance 
from the multiple levels within the regression model; and, (2) the correlation 
structure of the residuals. Unfortunately, inconspicuous errors in residual 
intra-cluster correlation estimates can overstate precision in forecasted 
S.damnosum s.l. riverine larval habitat explanatory attributes regardless how 
they are treated (e.g., independent, autoregressive, Toeplitz, etc). In this 
research, the geographical locations for multiple riverine-based S. damnosum 
s.l. larval ecosystem habitats sampled from 2 pre-established epidemiological 
sites in Togo were identified and recorded from July 2009 to June 2010. 
Initially the data was aggregated into proc genmod. An agglomerative 
hierarchical residual cluster-based analysis was then performed. The sampled 
clustered study site data was then analyzed for statistical correlations using 
Monthly Biting Rates (MBR). Euclidean distance measurements and terrain-related 
geomorphological statistics were then generated in ArcGIS. A digital overlay was 
then performed also in ArcGIS using the georeferenced ground coordinates of high 
and low density clusters stratified by Annual Biting Rates (ABR). This data was 
overlain onto multitemporal sub-meter pixel resolution satellite data (i.e., 
QuickBird 0.61m wavbands ). Orthogonal spatial filter eigenvectors were then 
generated in SAS/GIS. Univariate and non-linear regression-based models (i.e., 
Logistic, Poisson and Negative Binomial) were also employed to determine 
probability distributions and to identify statistically significant parameter 
estimators from the sampled data. Thereafter, Durbin-Watson test statistics were 
used to test the null hypothesis that the regression residuals were not 
autocorrelated against the alternative that the residuals followed an 
autoregressive process in AUTOREG. Bayesian uncertainty matrices were also 
constructed employing normal priors for each of the sampled estimators in PROC 
MCMC. The residuals revealed both spatially structured and unstructured error 
effects in the high and low ABR-stratified clusters. The analyses also revealed 
that the estimators, levels of turbidity and presence of rocks were 
statistically significant for the high-ABR-stratified clusters, while the 
estimators distance between habitats and floating vegetation were important for 
the low-ABR-stratified cluster. Varying and constant coefficient regression 
models, ABR- stratified GIS-generated clusters, sub-meter resolution satellite 
imagery, a robust residual intra-cluster diagnostic test, MBR-based histograms, 
eigendecomposition spatial filter algorithms and Bayesian matrices can enable 
accurate autoregressive estimation of latent uncertainity affects and other 
residual error probabilities (i.e., heteroskedasticity) for testing correlations 
between georeferenced S. damnosum s.l. riverine larval habitat estimators. The 
asymptotic distribution of the resulting residual adjusted intra-cluster 
predictor error autocovariate coefficients can thereafter be established while 
estimates of the asymptotic variance can lead to the construction of approximate 
confidence intervals for accurately targeting productive S. damnosum s.l 
habitats based on spatiotemporal field-sampled count data.

DOI: 10.1080/10095020.2012.714663
PMCID: PMC3595116
PMID: 23504576