1. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e58722. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0058722. Epub 2013 Mar
8.

Molecular and photosynthetic responses to prolonged darkness and subsequent 
acclimation to re-illumination in the diatom Phaeodactylum tricornutum.

Nymark M(1), Valle KC, Hancke K, Winge P, Andresen K, Johnsen G, Bones AM, 
Brembu T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, 
Trondheim, Norway.

Photosynthetic diatoms that live suspended throughout the water column will 
constantly be swept up and down by vertical mixing. When returned to the photic 
zone after experiencing longer periods in darkness, mechanisms exist that enable 
the diatoms both to survive sudden light exposure and immediately utilize the 
available energy in photosynthesis and growth. We have investigated both the 
response to prolonged darkness and the re-acclimation to moderate intensity 
white irradiance (E = 100 µmol m(-2) s(-1)) in the diatom Phaeodactylum 
tricornutum, using an integrated approach involving global transcriptional 
profiling, pigment analyses, imaging and photo-physiological measurements. The 
responses were studied during continuous white light, after 48 h of dark 
treatment and after 0.5 h, 6 h, and 24 h of re-exposure to the initial 
irradiance. The analyses resulted in several intriguing findings. Dark treatment 
of the cells led to 1) significantly decreased nuclear transcriptional activity, 
2) distinct intracellular changes, 3) fixed ratios of the light-harvesting 
pigments despite a decrease in the total cell pigment pool, and 4) only a minor 
drop in photosynthetic efficiency (Φ(PSII_max)). Re-introduction of the cells to 
the initial light conditions revealed 5) distinct expression profiles for 
nuclear genes involved in photosynthesis and those involved in photoprotection, 
6) rapid rise in photosynthetic parameters (α and rETR(max)) within 0.5 h of 
re-exposure to light despite a very modest de novo synthesis of photosynthetic 
compounds, and 7) increasingly efficient resonance energy transfer from 
fucoxanthin chlorophyll a/c-binding protein complexes to photosystem II reaction 
centers during the first 0.5 h, supporting the observations stated in 6). In 
summary, the results show that despite extensive transcriptional, metabolic and 
intracellular changes, the ability of cells to perform photosynthesis was kept 
intact during the length of the experiment. We conclude that P. tricornutum 
maintains a functional photosynthetic apparatus during dark periods that enables 
prompt recovery upon re-illumination.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0058722
PMCID: PMC3592843
PMID: 23520530 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.