1. Cell Death Dis. 2013 Mar 28;4(3):e564. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2013.70.

Identification of non-canonical NF-κB signaling as a critical mediator of Smac 
mimetic-stimulated migration and invasion of glioblastoma cells.

Tchoghandjian A(1), Jennewein C, Eckhardt I, Rajalingam K, Fulda S.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Experimental Cancer Research in Pediatrics, Goethe University, 
Frankfurt, Germany.

As inhibitor of apoptosis (IAP) proteins can regulate additional signaling 
pathways beyond apoptosis, we investigated the effect of the second 
mitochondrial activator of caspases (Smac) mimetic BV6, which antagonizes IAP 
proteins, on non-apoptotic functions in glioblastoma (GBM). Here, we identify 
non-canonical nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) signaling and a tumor necrosis factor-α 
(TNFα)/TNF receptor 1 (TNFR1) autocrine/paracrine loop as critical mediators of 
BV6-stimulated migration and invasion of GBM cells. In addition to GBM cell 
lines, BV6 triggers cell elongation, migration and invasion in primary, 
patient-derived GBM cells at non-toxic concentrations, which do not affect cell 
viability or proliferation, and also increases infiltrative tumor growth in vivo 
underscoring the relevance of these findings. Molecular studies reveal that BV6 
causes rapid degradation of cellular IAP proteins, accumulation of NIK, 
processing of p100 to p52, translocation of p52 into the nucleus, increased 
NF-κB DNA binding and enhanced NF-κB transcriptional activity. Electrophoretic 
mobility shift assay supershift shows that the NF-κB DNA-binding subunits 
consist of p50, p52 and RelB further confirming the activation of the 
non-canonical NF-κB pathway. BV6-stimulated NF-κB activation leads to elevated 
mRNA levels of TNFα and additional NF-κB target genes involved in migration 
(i.e., interleukin 8, monocyte chemoattractant protein 1, CXC chemokine receptor 
4) and invasion (i.e., matrix metalloproteinase-9). Importantly, inhibition of 
NF-κB by overexpression of dominant-negative IκBα superrepressor prevents the 
BV6-stimulated cell elongation, migration and invasion. Similarly, specific 
inhibition of non-canonical NF-κB signaling by RNA interference-mediated 
silencing of NIK suppresses the BV6-induced cell elongation, migration and 
invasion as well as upregulation of NF-κB target genes. Intriguingly, 
pharmacological or genetic inhibition of the BV6-stimulated TNFα 
autocrine/paracrine loop by the TNFα-blocking antibody Enbrel or by knockdown of 
TNFR1 abrogates BV6-induced cell elongation, migration and invasion. By 
demonstrating that the Smac mimetic BV6 at non-toxic concentrations promotes 
migration and invasion of GBM cells via non-canonical NF-κB signaling, our 
findings have important implications for the use of Smac mimetics as cancer 
therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1038/cddis.2013.70
PMCID: PMC3615728
PMID: 23538445 [Indexed for MEDLINE]