1. JAMA Psychiatry. 2013 May;70(5):534-42. doi: 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2013.736.

Polygenic risk and the developmental progression to heavy, persistent smoking 
and nicotine dependence: evidence from a 4-decade longitudinal study.

Belsky DW(1), Moffitt TE, Baker TB, Biddle AK, Evans JP, Harrington H, Houts R, 
Meier M, Sugden K, Williams B, Poulton R, Caspi A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Policy and Management, Gillings School of Public Health, 
University of North Carolina–Chapel Hill, NC, USA.

IMPORTANCE: Genome-wide hypothesis-free discovery methods have identified loci 
that are associated with heavy smoking in adulthood. Research is needed to 
understand developmental processes that link newly discovered genetic risks with 
adult heavy smoking.
OBJECTIVE: To test how genetic risks discovered in genome-wide association 
studies of adult smoking influence the developmental progression of smoking 
behavior from initiation through conversion to daily smoking, progression to 
heavy smoking, nicotine dependence, and struggles with cessation.
DESIGN: A 38-year, prospective, longitudinal study of a representative birth 
cohort.
SETTING: The Dunedin Multidisciplinary Health and Development Study of New 
Zealand.
PARTICIPANTS: The study included 1037 male and female participants.
EXPOSURE: We assessed genetic risk with a multilocus genetic risk score. The 
genetic risk score was composed of single-nucleotide polymorphisms identified in 
3 meta-analyses of genome-wide association studies of smoking quantity 
phenotypes.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Smoking initiation, conversion to daily smoking, 
progression to heavy smoking, nicotine dependence (Fagerström Test of Nicotine 
Dependence), and cessation difficulties were evaluated at 8 assessments spanning 
the ages of 11 to 38 years.
RESULTS: Genetic risk score was unrelated to smoking initiation. However, 
individuals at higher genetic risk were more likely to convert to daily smoking 
as teenagers, progressed more rapidly from smoking initiation to heavy smoking, 
persisted longer in smoking heavily, developed nicotine dependence more 
frequently, were more reliant on smoking to cope with stress, and were more 
likely to fail in their cessation attempts. Further analysis revealed that 2 
adolescent developmental phenotypes-early conversion to daily smoking and rapid 
progression to heavy smoking-mediated associations between the genetic risk 
score and mature phenotypes of persistent heavy smoking, nicotine dependence, 
and cessation failure. The genetic risk score predicted smoking risk over and 
above family history.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Initiatives that disrupt the developmental 
progression of smoking behavior among adolescents may mitigate genetic risks for 
developing adult smoking problems. Future genetic research may maximize 
discovery potential by focusing on smoking behavior soon after smoking 
initiation and by studying young smokers.

DOI: 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2013.736
PMCID: PMC3644004
PMID: 23536134 [Indexed for MEDLINE]