1. Mol Psychiatry. 2014 Apr;19(4):471-7. doi: 10.1038/mp.2013.31. Epub 2013 Apr
2.

Systematic meta-analyses and field synopsis of genetic association studies of 
violence and aggression.

Vassos E(1), Collier DA(2), Fazel S(3).

Author information:
(1)1] King's College London, Institute of Psychiatry, MRC SGDP Centre, London, 
UK [2] Oxford Health NHS Foundation Trust, Oxford, UK.
(2)King's College London, Institute of Psychiatry, MRC SGDP Centre, London, UK.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

A large number of candidate gene studies for aggression and violence have been 
conducted. Successful identification of associations between genetic markers and 
aggression would contribute to understanding the neurobiology of antisocial 
behavior and potentially provide useful tools for risk prediction and 
therapeutic targets for high-risk groups of patients and offenders. We 
systematically reviewed the literature and assessed the evidence on genetic 
association studies of aggression and related outcomes in order to provide a 
field synopsis. We searched PubMed and Huge Navigator databases and sought 
additional data through reviewing reference lists and correspondence with 
investigators. Genetic association studies were included if outcome data on 
aggression or violent behavior either as a binary outcome or as a quantitative 
trait were provided. From 1331 potentially relevant investigations, 185 studies 
constituting 277 independent associations on 31 genes fulfilled the 
predetermined selection criteria. Data from variants investigated in three or 
more samples were combined in meta-analyses and potential sources of 
heterogeneity were investigated using subgroup analyses. In the primary 
analyses, which used relaxed inclusion criteria, we found no association between 
any polymorphism analyzed and aggression at the 5% level of significance. 
Subgroup analyses, including by severity of outcome, age group, characteristics 
of the sample and ethnicity, did not demonstrate any consistent findings. 
Current evidence does not support the use of such genes to predict dangerousness 
or as markers for therapeutic interventions.

DOI: 10.1038/mp.2013.31
PMCID: PMC3965568
PMID: 23546171 [Indexed for MEDLINE]