1. PLoS Pathog. 2013 Mar;9(3):e1003255. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003255. Epub 
2013 Mar 27.

Rational engineering of recombinant picornavirus capsids to produce safe, 
protective vaccine antigen.

Porta C(1), Kotecha A, Burman A, Jackson T, Ren J, Loureiro S, Jones IM, Fry EE, 
Stuart DI, Charleston B.

Author information:
(1)The Pirbright Insitute, Pirbright, Woking, United Kingdom.

Foot-and-mouth disease remains a major plague of livestock and outbreaks are 
often economically catastrophic. Current inactivated virus vaccines require 
expensive high containment facilities for their production and maintenance of a 
cold-chain for their activity. We have addressed both of these major drawbacks. 
Firstly we have developed methods to efficiently express recombinant empty 
capsids. Expression constructs aimed at lowering the levels and activity of the 
viral protease required for the cleavage of the capsid protein precursor were 
used; this enabled the synthesis of empty A-serotype capsids in eukaryotic cells 
at levels potentially attractive to industry using both vaccinia virus and 
baculovirus driven expression. Secondly we have enhanced capsid stability by 
incorporating a rationally designed mutation, and shown by X-ray crystallography 
that stabilised and wild-type empty capsids have essentially the same structure 
as intact virus. Cattle vaccinated with recombinant capsids showed sustained 
virus neutralisation titres and protection from challenge 34 weeks after 
immunization. This approach to vaccine antigen production has several potential 
advantages over current technologies by reducing production costs, eliminating 
the risk of infectivity and enhancing the temperature stability of the product. 
Similar strategies that will optimize host cell viability during expression of a 
foreign toxic gene and/or improve capsid stability could allow the production of 
safe vaccines for other pathogenic picornaviruses of humans and animals.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003255
PMCID: PMC3609824
PMID: 23544011 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.