1. BMC Bioinformatics. 2013 Apr 5;14:119. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-14-119.

An AUC-based permutation variable importance measure for random forests.

Janitza S(1), Strobl C, Boulesteix AL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Informatics, Biometry and Epidemiology, University of 
Munich, Marchioninistr. 15, D-81377, Munich, Germany. 
janitza@ibe.med.uni-muenchen.de

BACKGROUND: The random forest (RF) method is a commonly used tool for 
classification with high dimensional data as well as for ranking candidate 
predictors based on the so-called random forest variable importance measures 
(VIMs). However the classification performance of RF is known to be suboptimal 
in case of strongly unbalanced data, i.e. data where response class sizes differ 
considerably. Suggestions were made to obtain better classification performance 
based either on sampling procedures or on cost sensitivity analyses. However to 
our knowledge the performance of the VIMs has not yet been examined in the case 
of unbalanced response classes. In this paper we explore the performance of the 
permutation VIM for unbalanced data settings and introduce an alternative 
permutation VIM based on the area under the curve (AUC) that is expected to be 
more robust towards class imbalance.
RESULTS: We investigated the performance of the standard permutation VIM and of 
our novel AUC-based permutation VIM for different class imbalance levels using 
simulated data and real data. The results suggest that the new AUC-based 
permutation VIM outperforms the standard permutation VIM for unbalanced data 
settings while both permutation VIMs have equal performance for balanced data 
settings.
CONCLUSIONS: The standard permutation VIM loses its ability to discriminate 
between associated predictors and predictors not associated with the response 
for increasing class imbalance. It is outperformed by our new AUC-based 
permutation VIM for unbalanced data settings, while the performance of both VIMs 
is very similar in the case of balanced classes. The new AUC-based VIM is 
implemented in the R package party for the unbiased RF variant based on 
conditional inference trees. The codes implementing our study are available from 
the companion website: 
http://www.ibe.med.uni-muenchen.de/organisation/mitarbeiter/070_drittmittel/janitza/index.html.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-14-119
PMCID: PMC3626572
PMID: 23560875 [Indexed for MEDLINE]