1. Mol Cancer. 2013 Apr 8;12:27. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-12-27.

Targeting the Vav3 oncogene enhances docetaxel-induced apoptosis through the 
inhibition of androgen receptor phosphorylation in LNCaP prostate cancer cells 
under chronic hypoxia.

Nomura T(1), Yamasaki M, Hirai K, Inoue T, Sato R, Matsuura K, Moriyama M, Sato 
F, Mimata H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Oita University Faculty of Medicine, 1-1 Idaigaoka, 
Hasama-machi, Yufu, Oita 879-5593, Japan. TAKE@oita-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: The Vav family of Rho/Rac guanosine nucleotide exchange factors 
comprises three members in mammalian cells. Vav3 enhances androgen receptor (AR) 
activity during progression to androgen independence in prostate cancer. We 
examined Vav3 small interfering RNA (siRNA) effects on cell proliferation and 
apoptosis in docetaxel-treated LNCaP cells under chronic hypoxia (LNCaPH).
METHODS: We examined individual and combined effects of Vav3 siRNA (si-Vav3) and 
docetaxel on cell growth and apoptosis under chronic hypoxia by cell 
proliferation, flow cytometric, DNA fragmentation, and immunoblot analyses. To 
clarify the molecular basis of si-Vav3- and docetaxel-induced apoptosis, we 
analyzed alterations in phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt, extracellular 
signal-regulate kinase (ERK), c-jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), and AR pathways 
using kinase inhibitors in LNCaPH cells. The effects of si-Vav3/atelocollagen 
complex alone or in combination with docetaxel were assessed on xenografts in 
nude mice by tumor growth delay.
RESULTS: Vav3 overexpression was observed in LNCaPH compared with the expression 
under normoxia. Interrupting Vav3 signaling using siRNA enhanced 
docetaxel-induced cell growth suppression compared with that induced by 
docetaxel alone by inhibition of Akt and ERK phosphorylation, resulting in AR 
phosphorylation inhibition. In addition to increased B-cell lymphoma 2 (Bcl-2) 
phosphorylation through JNK signaling in response to docetaxel, si-Vav3 enhanced 
docetaxel-induced apoptosis, as characterized by the accumulation of sub-G1 
phase cells and DNA fragmentation, through Bcl-xL/Bcl-2-associated death 
promoter (Bad) dephosphorylation, resulting in increased caspase-9, caspase-3, 
and cleaved poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase activation. Xenograft tumor growth was 
slightly inhibited by si-Vav3/atelocollagen complex injection and combined use 
of si-Vav3/atelocollagen complex and docetaxel produced a greater effect than 
docetaxel alone.
CONCLUSIONS: Interrupting Vav3 signaling enhances docetaxel-induced apoptosis in 
LNCaP cells under chronic hypoxia by inhibiting the PI3K/Akt, ERK, and AR 
signaling pathways. Therapy targeting Vav3 in combination with docetaxel may 
have practical implications for managing castration-resistant prostate cancer.

DOI: 10.1186/1476-4598-12-27
PMCID: PMC3640915
PMID: 23566222 [Indexed for MEDLINE]