1. Cardiovasc Diabetol. 2013 Apr 10;12:62. doi: 10.1186/1475-2840-12-62.

The role of co-morbidity in the selection of antidiabetic pharmacotherapy in 
type-2 diabetes.

Tschöpe D(1), Hanefeld M, Meier JJ, Gitt AK, Halle M, Bramlage P, Schumm-Draeger 
PM.

Author information:
(1)Herz- und Diabeteszentrum Nordrhein-Westfalen in Bad Oeynhausen, 
Universitätsklinik der Ruhr Universität, Bochum, Germany. 
diethelm.tschoepe@ruhr-uni-bochum.de

Metformin is, if not contraindicated and if tolerated, usually preferred over 
other antidiabetic drugs for the first line treatment of type-2 diabetes. The 
particular decision on which antidiabetic agent to use is based on variables 
such as efficacy, cost, potential side effects, effects on weight, 
comorbidities, hypoglycemia, risk, and patient preferences. However, there is no 
guidance how to consider these in the selection of antidiabetic drug treatment. 
In this work, we aimed to summarize available evidence and tried to give 
pragmatic treatment recommendations from a clinical practice perspective.There 
are clear contraindications for some drugs in those with impaired renal and 
liver function and precautions in those with heart failure for the use of 
metformin (NYHA III-IV) and glitazones. On the other hand, GLP-1 analogs, DPP-4 
inhibitors and acarbose are generally less critical and can be used in the 
majority of patients. We identified the following gaps with respect to the 
selection of antidiabetic drug treatment in patients with co-morbid disease 
conditions: 1) Guidelines fail to give advice on the use of specific 
antidiabetic drugs in patients with co-morbidity. 2) The literature is deficient 
in studies documenting antidiabetic drug use in patients with severely impaired 
renal function, diabetic retinopathy, cerebrovascular disease and systolic heart 
failure. 3) Further there are no specific data on patients with multiple of 
these co-morbid disease conditions. We postulate that differential use of 
antidiabetic drugs in patients with co-morbid disease constellations will help 
to reduce treatment related complications and might improve prognosis.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2840-12-62
PMCID: PMC3664601
PMID: 23574917 [Indexed for MEDLINE]