1. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 9;8(4):e61163. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061163. Print
2013.

Molecular characterization of branchial aquaporin 1aa and effects of seawater 
acclimation, emersion or ammonia exposure on its mRNA expression in the gills, 
gut, kidney and skin of the freshwater climbing perch, Anabas testudineus.

Ip YK(1), Soh MM, Chen XL, Ong JL, Chng YR, Ching B, Wong WP, Lam SH, Chew SF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Science, National University of Singapore, Kent 
Ridge, Singapore, Republic of Singapore. dbsipyk@nus.edu.sg

We obtained a full cDNA coding sequence of aquaporin 1aa (aqp1aa) from the gills 
of the freshwater climbing perch, Anabas testudineus, which had the highest 
expression in the gills and skin, suggesting an important role of Aqp1aa in 
these organs. Since seawater acclimation had no significant effects on the 
branchial and intestinal aqp1aa mRNA expression, and since the mRNA expression 
of aqp1aa in the gut was extremely low, it can be deduced that Aqp1aa, despite 
being a water channel, did not play a significant osmoregulatory role in A. 
testudineus. However, terrestrial exposure led to significant increases in the 
mRNA expression of aqp1aa in the gills and skin of A. testudineus. Since 
terrestrial exposure would lead to evaporative water loss, these results further 
support the proposition that Aqp1aa did not function predominantly for the 
permeation of water through the gills and skin. Rather, increased aqp1aa mRNA 
expression might be necessary to facilitate increased ammonia excretion during 
emersion, because A. testudineus is known to utilize amino acids as energy 
sources for locomotor activity with increased ammonia production on land. 
Furthermore, ammonia exposure resulted in significant decreases in mRNA 
expression of aqp1aa in the gills and skin of A. testudineus, presumably to 
reduce ammonia influx during ammonia loading. This corroborates previous reports 
on AQP1 being able to facilitate ammonia permeation. However, a molecular 
characterization of Aqp1aa from A. testudineus revealed that its intrinsic 
aquapore might not facilitate NH3 transport. Hence, ammonia probably permeated 
the central fifth pore of the Aqp1aa tetramer as suggested previously. Taken 
together, our results indicate that Aqp1aa might have a greater physiological 
role in ammonia excretion than in osmoregulation in A. testudineus.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061163
PMCID: PMC3621907
PMID: 23593418 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.