1. mBio. 2013 Apr 16;4(2):e000193. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00193-13.

In-depth analysis of the interaction of HIV-1 with cellular microRNA biogenesis 
and effector mechanisms.

Whisnant AW(1), Bogerd HP, Flores O, Ho P, Powers JG, Sharova N, Stevenson M, 
Chen CH, Cullen BR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics & Microbiology and the Center for Virology, 
Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA.

The question of how HIV-1 interfaces with cellular microRNA (miRNA) biogenesis 
and effector mechanisms has been highly controversial. Here, we first used deep 
sequencing of small RNAs present in two different infected cell lines (TZM-bl 
and C8166) and two types of primary human cells (CD4(+) peripheral blood 
mononuclear cells [PBMCs] and macrophages) to unequivocally demonstrate that 
HIV-1 does not encode any viral miRNAs. Perhaps surprisingly, we also observed 
that infection of T cells by HIV-1 has only a modest effect on the expression of 
cellular miRNAs at early times after infection. Comprehensive analysis of miRNA 
binding to the HIV-1 genome using the photoactivatable ribonucleoside-induced 
cross-linking and immunoprecipitation (PAR-CLIP) technique revealed several 
binding sites for cellular miRNAs, a subset of which were shown to be capable of 
mediating miRNA-mediated repression of gene expression. However, the main 
finding from this analysis is that HIV-1 transcripts are largely refractory to 
miRNA binding, most probably due to extensive viral RNA secondary structure. 
Together, these data demonstrate that HIV-1 neither encodes viral miRNAs nor 
strongly influences cellular miRNA expression, at least early after infection, 
and imply that HIV-1 transcripts have evolved to avoid inhibition by preexisting 
cellular miRNAs by adopting extensive RNA secondary structures that occlude most 
potential miRNA binding sites.
IMPORTANCE: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a ubiquitous class of small regulatory RNAs 
that serve as posttranscriptional regulators of gene expression. Previous work 
has suggested that HIV-1 might subvert the function of the cellular miRNA 
machinery by expressing viral miRNAs or by dramatically altering the level of 
cellular miRNA expression. Using very sensitive approaches, we now demonstrate 
that neither of these ideas is in fact correct. Moreover, HIV-1 transcripts 
appear to largely avoid regulation by cellular miRNAs by adopting an extensive 
RNA secondary structure that occludes the ability of cellular miRNAs to interact 
with viral mRNAs. Together, these data suggest that HIV-1, rather than seeking 
to control miRNA function in infected cells, has instead evolved a mechanism to 
become largely invisible to cellular miRNA effector mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.00193-13
PMCID: PMC3634607
PMID: 23592263 [Indexed for MEDLINE]