1. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 17;8(4):e61210. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061210. Print 
2013.

Identification of human monoclonal antibodies specific for human SOD1 
recognizing distinct epitopes and forms of SOD1.

Broering TJ(1), Wang H, Boatright NK, Wang Y, Baptista K, Shayan G, Garrity KA, 
Kayatekin C, Bosco DA, Matthews CR, Ambrosino DM, Xu Z, Babcock GJ.

Author information:
(1)MassBiologics, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts, United States of America. teresa.broering@gmail.com

Mutations in the gene encoding human SOD1 (hSOD1) can cause amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis (ALS) yet the mechanism by which mutant SOD1 can induce ALS is not 
fully understood. There is currently no cure for ALS or treatment that 
significantly reduces symptoms or progression. To develop tools to understand 
the protein conformations present in mutant SOD1-induced ALS and as possible 
immunotherapy, we isolated and characterized eleven unique human monoclonal 
antibodies specific for hSOD1. Among these, five recognized distinct linear 
epitopes on hSOD1 that were not available in the properly-folded protein but 
were available on forms of protein with some degree of misfolding. The other six 
antibodies recognized conformation-dependent epitopes that were present in the 
properly-folded protein with two different recognition profiles: three could 
bind hSOD1 dimer or monomer and the other three were specific for hSOD1 dimer 
only. Antibodies with the capacity to bind hSOD1 monomer were able to prevent 
increased hydrophobicity when mutant hSOD1 was exposed to increased temperature 
and EDTA, suggesting that the antibodies stabilized the native structure of 
hSOD1. Two antibodies were tested in a G93A mutant hSOD1 transgenic mouse model 
of ALS but did not yield a statistically significant increase in overall 
survival. It may be that the two antibodies selected for testing in the mouse 
model were not effective for therapy or that the model and/or route of 
administration were not optimal to produce a therapeutic effect. Therefore, 
additional testing will be required to determine therapeutic potential for SOD1 
mutant ALS and potentially some subset of sporadic ALS.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061210
PMCID: PMC3629177
PMID: 23613814 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have the 
following interests. This study was primarily funded by MassBiologics. TJB, NKB, 
YW, KB, GS, KAG, DMA, and GJB were employees of MassBiologics while executing 
research for this manuscript. TJB, DMA, ZX, and GJB are named as coinventors on 
the following patent with all rights and royalties assigned to MassBiologics: 
Ant-SOD1 antibodies and uses thereof, WO/2012/058220. There are no further 
patents, products in development or marketed products to declare. This does not 
alter the authors' adherence to all the PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and 
materials, as detailed online in the guide for authors.