1. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2013 May;1284(1):17-23. doi: 10.1111/nyas.12115.

Integration of epidemiology, immunobiology, and translational research for brain 
tumors.

Okada H(1), Scheurer ME, Sarkar SN, Bondy ML.

Author information:
(1)University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. 
okadah@upmc.edu

We recently identified a pivotal role for the host type I interferon (IFN) 
pathway in immunosurveillance against de novo mouse glioma development, 
especially through the regulation of immature myeloid cells (IMCs) in the glioma 
microenvironment. The present paper summarizes our published work in a number of 
areas. We have identified single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in human IFN 
genes that dictate altered prognosis of patients with glioma. One of these SNPs 
(rs12553612) is located in the promoter of IFNA8 and influences its activity. 
Conversely, recent epidemiologic data show that chronic use of nonsteroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs lowers the risk of glioma. We translated these findings 
back to our de novo glioma model and found that cyclooxygenase-2 inhibition 
enhances antiglioma immunosurveillance by reducing glioma-associated IMCs. Taken 
together, these findings suggest that alterations in myeloid cell function 
condition the brain for glioma development. Finally, in preliminary work, we 
have begun applying novel immunotherapeutic approaches to patients with 
low-grade glioma with the aim of preventing malignant transformation. Future 
research will hopefully better integrate epidemiological, immunobiological, and 
translational techniques to develop novel, preventive approaches for malignant 
gliomas.

© 2013 New York Academy of Sciences.

DOI: 10.1111/nyas.12115
PMCID: PMC3648859
PMID: 23651189 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest Hideho Okada is an 
inventor of the HLA-A2–binding CTL epitope peptide derived from IL-13Rα2, which 
has been exclusively licensed to Stemline Therapeutics, Inc. (US Application 
Serial # 11/231,618), and also serves on the Advisory Board of Stemline 
Therapeutics, Inc. Hideho Okada has completed all COI management plans according 
to University of Pittsburgh COI policies. Data related to the use of this 
invention were not evaluated or interpreted by Hideho Okada alone, but by the 
entire research team collaboratively.