1. Proteins. 2013 Sep;81(9):1593-609. doi: 10.1002/prot.24318. Epub 2013 Jun 17.

Molecular function prediction for a family exhibiting evolutionary tendencies 
toward substrate specificity swapping: recurrence of tyrosine aminotransferase 
activity in the Iα subfamily.

Muratore KE(1), Engelhardt BE, Srouji JR, Jordan MI, Brenner SE, Kirsch JF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
California.

The subfamily Iα aminotransferases are typically categorized as having narrow 
specificity toward carboxylic amino acids (AATases), or broad specificity that 
includes aromatic amino acid substrates (TATases). Because of their general role 
in central metabolism and, more specifically, their association with 
liver-related diseases in humans, this subfamily is biologically interesting. 
The substrate specificities for only a few members of this subfamily have been 
reported, and the reliable prediction of substrate specificity from protein 
sequence has remained elusive. In this study, a diverse set of aminotransferases 
was chosen for characterization based on a scoring system that measures the 
sequence divergence of the active site. The enzymes that were experimentally 
characterized include both narrow-specificity AATases and broad-specificity 
TATases, as well as AATases with broader-specificity and TATases with 
narrower-specificity than the previously known family members. Molecular 
function and phylogenetic analyses underscored the complexity of this family's 
evolution as the TATase function does not follow a single evolutionary thread, 
but rather appears independently multiple times during the evolution of the 
subfamily. The additional functional characterizations described in this 
article, alongside a detailed sequence and phylogenetic analysis, provide some 
novel clues to understanding the evolutionary mechanisms at work in this family.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Proteins published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/prot.24318
PMCID: PMC3823064
PMID: 23671031 [Indexed for MEDLINE]