1. PLoS One. 2013 May 6;8(5):e61918. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061918. Print
2013.

The mode of action of recombinant Mycobacterium tuberculosis shikimate kinase: 
kinetics and thermodynamics analyses.

Rosado LA(1), Vasconcelos IB, Palma MS, Frappier V, Najmanovich RJ, Santos DS, 
Basso LA.

Author information:
(1)Centro de Pesquisas em Biologia Molecular e Funcional (CPBMF), Instituto 
Nacional de Ciência e Tecnologia em Tuberculose (INCT-TB), Pontifícia 
Universidade Católica do Rio Grande do Sul (PUCRS), Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.

Tuberculosis remains as one of the main cause of mortality worldwide due to a 
single infectious agent, Mycobacterium tuberculosis. The aroK-encoded M. 
tuberculosis Shikimate Kinase (MtSK), shown to be essential for survival of 
bacilli, catalyzes the phosphoryl transfer from ATP to the carbon-3 hydroxyl 
group of shikimate (SKH), yielding shikimate-3-phosphate and ADP. Here we 
present purification to homogeneity, and oligomeric state determination of 
recombinant MtSK. Biochemical and biophysical data suggest that the chemical 
reaction catalyzed by monomeric MtSK follows a rapid-equilibrium random order of 
substrate binding, and ordered product release. Isothermal titration calorimetry 
(ITC) for binding of ligands to MtSK provided thermodynamic signatures of 
non-covalent interactions to each process. A comparison of steady-state kinetics 
parameters and equilibrium dissociation constant value determined by ITC showed 
that ATP binding does not increase the affinity of MtSK for SKH. We suggest that 
MtSK would more appropriately be described as an aroL-encoded type II shikimate 
kinase. Our manuscript also gives thermodynamic description of SKH binding to 
MtSK and data for the number of protons exchanged during this bimolecular 
interaction. The negative value for the change in constant pressure heat 
capacity (ΔCp) and molecular homology model building suggest a pronounced 
contribution of desolvation of non-polar groups upon binary complex formation. 
Thermodynamic parameters were deconvoluted into hydrophobic and vibrational 
contributions upon MtSK:SKH binary complex formation. Data for the number of 
protons exchanged during this bimolecular interaction are interpreted in light 
of a structural model to try to propose the likely amino acid side chains that 
are the proton donors to bulk solvent following MtSK:SKH complex formation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061918
PMCID: PMC3646032
PMID: 23671579 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The co-author Rafael J. 
Najmanovich is a PLOS ONE Editorial Board member. In addition the authors also 
declare that this does not alter their adherence to all the PLOS ONE policies on 
sharing data and materials.