1. Ann Surg. 2014 May;259(5):993-8. doi: 10.1097/SLA.0b013e318291da85.

Burn injury enhances bone formation in heterotopic ossification model.

Peterson JR(1), De La Rosa S, Sun H, Eboda O, Cilwa KE, Donneys A, Morris M, 
Buchman SR, Cederna PS, Krebsbach PH, Wang SC, Levi B.

Author information:
(1)*Department of Surgery, University of Michigan Medical School †Department of 
Biologic and Materials Sciences, University of Michigan School of Dentistry 
‡Department of Chemistry, University of Michigan Medical School §Department of 
Surgery, Division of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, University of Michigan 
Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI.

OBJECTIVE: To demonstrate the pro-osteogenic effect of burn injury on 
heterotopic bone formation using a novel burn ossicle in vivo model.
BACKGROUND: Heterotopic ossification (HO), or the abnormal formation of bone in 
soft tissue, is a troubling sequela of burn and trauma injuries. The exact 
mechanism by which burn injury influences bone formation is unknown. The aim of 
this study was to develop a mouse model to study the effect of burn injury on 
heterotopic bone formation. We hypothesized that burn injury would enhance early 
vascularization and subsequent bone formation of subcutaneously implanted 
mesenchymal stem cells.
METHODS: Mouse adipose-derived stem cells were harvested from C57/BL6 mice, 
transfected with a BMP-2 adenovirus, seeded on collagen scaffolds (ossicles), 
and implanted subcutaneously in the flank region of 8 adult mice. Burn and sham 
groups were created with exposure of 30% surface area on the dorsum to 60°C 
water or 30°C water for 18 seconds, respectively (n = 4/group). Heterotopic bone 
volume was analyzed in vivo by micro-computed tomography for 3 months. 
Histological analysis of vasculogenesis was performed with platelet endothelial 
cell adhesion molecule staining. Osteogenic histological analysis was performed 
by Safranin O, Picrosirius red, and aniline blue staining. Qualitative analysis 
of heterotopic bone composition was completed with ex vivo Raman spectroscopy.
RESULTS: Subcutaneously implanted ossicles formed heterotopic bone. Ossicles 
from mice with burn injuries developed significantly more bone than sham control 
mice, analyzed by micro-computed tomography at 1, 2, and 3 months (P < 0.05), 
and had enhanced early and late endochondral ossification as demonstrated by 
Safranin O, Picrosirius red, and aniline blue staining. In addition, burn injury 
enhanced vascularization of the ossicles (P < 0.05). All ossicles demonstrated 
chemical composition characteristic of bone as demonstrated by Raman 
spectroscopy.
CONCLUSIONS: Burn injury increases the predilection to osteogenic 
differentiation of ectopically implanted ossicles. Early differences in 
vascularity correlated with later bone development. Understanding the role of 
burn injury on heterotopic bone formation is an important first step toward the 
development of treatment strategies aimed to prevent unwanted and detrimental 
heterotopic bone formation.

DOI: 10.1097/SLA.0b013e318291da85
PMCID: PMC4498401
PMID: 23673767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]