1. Genome Med. 2013 Apr 29;5(4):34. doi: 10.1186/gm438. eCollection 2013.

The genomics of preterm birth: from animal models to human studies.

Bezold KY(1), Karjalainen MK(2), Hallman M(2), Teramo K(3), Muglia LJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Prevention of Preterm Birth and Molecular and Developmental 
Biology Program, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, and Department 
of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 
45229, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Oulu, 
Oulu, 90014, Finland.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University Central Hospital, 
Helsinki, 00029 Finland.

Preterm birth (delivery at less than 37 weeks of gestation) is the leading cause 
of infant mortality worldwide. So far, the application of animal models to 
understand human birth timing has not substantially revealed mechanisms that 
could be used to prevent prematurity. However, with amassing data implicating an 
important role for genetics in the timing of the onset of human labor, the use 
of modern genomic approaches, such as genome-wide association studies, rare 
variant analyses using whole-exome or genome sequencing, and family-based 
designs, holds enormous potential. Although some progress has been made in the 
search for causative genes and variants associated with preterm birth, the major 
genetic determinants remain to be identified. Here, we review insights from and 
limitations of animal models for understanding the physiology of parturition, 
recent human genetic and genomic studies to identify genes involved in preterm 
birth, and emerging areas that are likely to be informative in future 
investigations. Further advances in understanding fundamental mechanisms, and 
the development of preventative measures, will depend upon the acquisition of 
greater numbers of carefully phenotyped pregnancies, large-scale informatics 
approaches combining genomic information with information on environmental 
exposures, and new conceptual models for studying the interaction between the 
maternal and fetal genomes to personalize therapies for mothers and infants. 
Information emerging from these advances will help us to identify new biomarkers 
for earlier detection of preterm labor, develop more effective therapeutic 
agents, and/or promote prophylactic measures even before conception.

DOI: 10.1186/gm438
PMCID: PMC3707062
PMID: 23673148