1. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013 Jul 16;62(3):169-180. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2013.04.044.
 Epub 2013 May 15.

Impact of genetics on the clinical management of channelopathies.

Schwartz PJ(1), Ackerman MJ(2), George AL Jr(3), Wilde AAM(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy; 
Department of Cardiology, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy; 
Cardiovascular Genetics Laboratory, Hatter Institute for Cardiovascular Research 
in Africa, Department of Medicine, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South 
Africa; Department of Medicine, University of Stellenbosch, Stellenbosch, South 
Africa; Chair of Sudden Death, Department of Family and Community Medicine, 
College of Medicine, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. Electronic 
address: peter.schwartz@unipv.it.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiovascular Diseases, Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, Minnesota; Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric 
Cardiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota; Department of Molecular 
Pharmacology & Experimental Therapeutics, Windland Smith Rice Sudden Death 
Genomics Laboratory, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(3)Division of Genetic Medicine, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University, 
Nashville, Tennessee; Institute for Integrative Genomics, Vanderbilt University, 
Nashville, Tennessee.
(4)Department of Cardiology, Heart Failure Research Centre, Academic Medical 
Centre, Amsterdam, the Netherlands; Princess Al Jawhara Albrahim Centre of 
Excellence in Research of Hereditary Disorders, King Abdulaziz University, 
Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.

There are few areas in cardiology in which the impact of genetics and genetic 
testing on clinical management has been as great as in cardiac channelopathies, 
arrhythmic disorders of genetic origin related to the ionic control of the 
cardiac action potential. Among the growing number of diseases identified as 
channelopathies, 3 are sufficiently prevalent to represent significant clinical 
and societal problems and to warrant adequate understanding by practicing 
cardiologists: long QT syndrome, catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular 
tachycardia, and Brugada syndrome. This review will focus selectively on the 
impact of genetic discoveries on clinical management of these 3 diseases. For 
each disorder, we will discuss to what extent genetic knowledge and clinical 
genetic test results modify the way cardiologists should approach and manage 
affected patients. We will also address the optimal use of genetic testing, 
including its potential limitations and the potential medico-legal implications 
when such testing is not performed. We will highlight how important it is to 
understand the ways that genotype can affect clinical manifestations, risk 
stratification, and responses to the therapy. We will also illustrate the close 
bridge between molecular biology and clinical medicine, and will emphasize that 
consideration of the genetic basis for these heritable arrhythmia syndromes and 
the proper use and interpretation of clinical genetic testing should remain the 
standard of care.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jacc.2013.04.044
PMCID: PMC3710520
PMID: 23684683 [Indexed for MEDLINE]