1. Oncogene. 2014 Apr 24;33(17):2157-68. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.178. Epub 2013 May
 27.

The NuRD complex cooperates with DNMTs to maintain silencing of key colorectal 
tumor suppressor genes.

Cai Y(1), Geutjes EJ(2), de Lint K(2), Roepman P(3), Bruurs L(2), Yu LR(4), Wang 
W(1), van Blijswijk J(2), Mohammad H(1), de Rink I(5), Bernards R(2), Baylin 
SB(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology and The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at 
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(2)Division of Molecular Carcinogenesis, Center for Biomedical Genetics and 
Cancer Genomics Centre, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(3)Department of Research and Development, Agendia NV, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(4)Division of Systems Biology, Center of Excellence for Proteomics, National 
Center for Toxicological Research, US Food and Drug Administration, Jefferson, 
AR, USA.
(5)Central Microarray and Deep Sequencing Core Facility, The Netherlands Cancer 
Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Many tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) are silenced through synergistic layers of 
epigenetic regulation including abnormal DNA hypermethylation of promoter CpG 
islands, repressive chromatin modifications and enhanced nucleosome deposition 
over transcription start sites. The protein complexes responsible for silencing 
of many of such TSGs remain to be identified. Our previous work demonstrated 
that multiple silenced TSGs in colorectal cancer cells can be partially 
reactivated by DNA demethylation in cells disrupted for the DNA 
methyltransferases 1 and 3B (DNMT1 and 3B) or by DNMT inhibitors (DNMTi). 
Herein, we used proteomic and functional genetic approaches to identify 
additional proteins that cooperate with DNMTs in silencing these key silenced 
TSGs in colon cancer cells. We discovered that DNMTs and the core components of 
the NuRD (Mi-2/nucleosome remodeling and deacetylase) nucleosome remodeling 
complex, chromo domain helicase DNA-binding protein 4 (CHD4) and histone 
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) occupy the promoters of several of these hypermethylated 
TSGs and physically and functionally interact to maintain their silencing. 
Consistent with this, we find an inverse relationship between expression of 
HDAC1 and 2 and these TSGs in a large panel of primary colorectal tumors. We 
demonstrate that DNMTs and NuRD cooperate to maintain the silencing of several 
negative regulators of the WNT and other signaling pathways. We find that 
depletion of CHD4 is synergistic with DNMT inhibition in reducing the viability 
of colon cancer cells in correlation with reactivation of TSGs, suggesting that 
their combined inhibition may be beneficial for the treatment of colon cancer. 
Since CHD4 has ATPase activity, our data identify CHD4 as a potentially novel 
drug target in cancer.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2013.178
PMCID: PMC3883927
PMID: 23708667 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST The authors declare no 
conflict of interest.