1. Microb Cell Fact. 2013 May 29;12:55. doi: 10.1186/1475-2859-12-55.

Replicating DNA by cell factories: roles of central carbon metabolism and 
transcription in the control of DNA replication in microbes, and implications 
for understanding this process in human cells.

Barańska S(1), Glinkowska M, Herman-Antosiewicz A, Maciąg-Dorszyńska M, Nowicki 
D, Szalewska-Pałasz A, Węgrzyn A, Węgrzyn G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Gdańsk, Wita Stwosza 59, 
Gdańsk 80-308, Poland.

Precise regulation of DNA replication is necessary to ensure the inheritance of 
genetic features by daughter cells after each cell division. Therefore, 
determining how the regulatory processes operate to control DNA replication is 
crucial to our understanding and application to biotechnological processes. 
Contrary to early concepts of DNA replication, it appears that this process is 
operated by large, stationary nucleoprotein complexes, called replication 
factories, rather than by single enzymes trafficking along template molecules. 
Recent discoveries indicated that in bacterial cells two processes, central 
carbon metabolism (CCM) and transcription, significantly and specifically 
influence the control of DNA replication of various replicons. The impact of 
these discoveries on our understanding of the regulation of DNA synthesis is 
discussed in this review. It appears that CCM may influence DNA replication by 
either action of specific metabolites or moonlighting activities of some enzymes 
involved in this metabolic pathway. The role of transcription in the control of 
DNA replication may arise from either topological changes in nucleic acids which 
accompany RNA synthesis or direct interactions between replication and 
transcription machineries. Due to intriguing similarities between some 
prokaryotic and eukaryotic regulatory systems, possible implications of studies 
on regulation of microbial DNA replication on understanding such a process 
occurring in human cells are discussed.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2859-12-55
PMCID: PMC3698200
PMID: 23714207 [Indexed for MEDLINE]