1. mBio. 2013 May 28;4(3):e00282-13. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00282-13.

Cyclic di-AMP is critical for Listeria monocytogenes growth, cell wall 
homeostasis, and establishment of infection.

Witte CE(1), Whiteley AT, Burke TP, Sauer JD, Portnoy DA, Woodward JJ.

Author information:
(1)Graduate Group in Microbiology, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, 
California, USA.

Listeria monocytogenes infection leads to robust induction of an innate immune 
signaling pathway referred to as the cytosolic surveillance pathway (CSP), 
characterized by expression of beta interferon (IFN-β) and coregulated genes. We 
previously identified the IFN-β stimulatory ligand as secreted cyclic di-AMP. 
Synthesis of c-di-AMP in L. monocytogenes is catalyzed by the diadenylate 
cyclase DacA, and multidrug resistance transporters are necessary for secretion. 
To identify additional bacterial factors involved in L. monocytogenes detection 
by the CSP, we performed a forward genetic screen for mutants that induced 
altered levels of IFN-β. One mutant that stimulated elevated levels of IFN-β 
harbored a transposon insertion in the gene lmo0052. Lmo0052, renamed here PdeA, 
has homology to a cyclic di-AMP phosphodiesterase, GdpP (formerly YybT), of 
Bacillus subtilis and is able to degrade c-di-AMP to the linear dinucleotide 
pApA. Reduction of c-di-AMP levels by conditional depletion of the di-adenylate 
cyclase DacA or overexpression of PdeA led to marked decreases in growth rates, 
both in vitro and in macrophages. Additionally, mutants with altered levels of 
c-di-AMP had different susceptibilities to peptidoglycan-targeting antibiotics, 
suggesting that the molecule may be involved in regulating cell wall 
homeostasis. During intracellular infection, increases in c-di-AMP production 
led to hyperactivation of the CSP. Conditional depletion of dacA also led to 
increased IFN-β expression and a concomitant increase in host cell pyroptosis, a 
result of increased bacteriolysis and subsequent bacterial DNA release. These 
data suggest that c-di-AMP coordinates bacterial growth, cell wall stability, 
and responses to stress and plays a crucial role in the establishment of 
bacterial infection.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.00282-13
PMCID: PMC3663569
PMID: 23716572 [Indexed for MEDLINE]