1. J Diabetes Metab Disord. 2013 Jun 6;12(1):25. doi: 10.1186/2251-6581-12-25.

Glycogen Storage Disease type 1a - a secondary cause for hyperlipidemia: report 
of five cases.

Carvalho PM(1), Silva NJ, Dias PG, Porto JF, Santos LC, Costa JM.

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine Ward, Coimbra University Hospital, Av, Bissaya Barreto e 
Praceta Prof, Mota Pinto, 3000-075, Coimbra, Portugal. pms.carvalho@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Glycogen storage disease type Ia (GSD Ia) is a rare 
metabolic disorder, caused by deficient activity of glucose-6-phosphatase-α. It 
produces fasting induced hypoglycemia and hepatomegaly, usually manifested in 
the first semester of life. Besides, it is also associated with growth delay, 
anemia, platelet dysfunction, osteopenia and sometimes osteoporosis. 
Hyperlipidemia and hyperuricemia are almost always present and hepatocellular 
adenomas and renal dysfunction frequent late complications.
METHODS: The authors present a report of five adult patients with GSD Ia 
followed in internal medicine appointments and subspecialties.
RESULTS: Four out of five patients were diagnosed in the first 6 months of life, 
while the other one was diagnosed in adult life after the discovery of 
hepatocellular adenomas. In two cases genetic tests were performed, being 
identified the missense mutation R83C in one, and the mutation IVS4-3C > G in 
the intron 4 of glucose-6-phosphatase gene, not previously described, in the 
other. Growth retardation was present in 3 patients, and all of them had anemia, 
increased bleeding tendency and hepatocellular adenomas; osteopenia/osteoporosis 
was present in three cases. All but one patient had marked hyperlipidemia and 
hyperuricemia, with evidence of endothelial dysfunction in one case and of brain 
damage with refractory epilepsy in another case. Proteinuria was present in two 
cases and end-stage renal disease in another case. There was a great variability 
in the dietary measures; in one case, liver transplantation was performed, with 
correction of the metabolic derangements.
CONCLUSIONS: Hyperlipidemia is almost always present and only partially responds 
to dietary and drug therapy; liver transplantation is the only definitive 
solution. Although its association with premature atherosclerosis is rare, there 
have been reports of endothelial dysfunction, raising the possibility for 
increased cardiovascular risk in this group of patients. Being a rare disease, 
no single metabolic center has experience with large numbers of patients and the 
recommendations are based on clinical experience more than large scale studies.

DOI: 10.1186/2251-6581-12-25
PMCID: PMC3937210
PMID: 23738826