1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2013 May 27;4:59. doi: 10.3389/fendo.2013.00059. 
eCollection 2013.

The Glutamate-Glutamine (GABA) Cycle: Importance of Late Postnatal Development 
and Potential Reciprocal Interactions between Biosynthesis and Degradation.

Hertz L(1).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Pharmacology, Medical University of China Shenyang, China.

The gold standard for studies of glutamate-glutamine (GABA) cycling and its 
connections to brain biosynthesis from glucose of glutamate and GABA and their 
subsequent metabolism are the elegant in vivo studies by (13)C magnetic 
resonance spectroscopy (NMR), showing the large fluxes in the cycle. However, 
simpler experiments in intact brain tissue (e.g., immunohistochemistry), brain 
slices, cultured brain cells, and mitochondria have also made important 
contributions to the understanding of details, mechanisms, and functional 
consequences of glutamate/GABA biosynthesis and degradation. The purpose of this 
review is to attempt to integrate evidence from different sources regarding (i) 
the enzyme(s) responsible for the initial conversion of α-ketoglutarate to 
glutamate; (ii) the possibility that especially glutamate oxidation is 
essentially confined to astrocytes; and (iii) the ontogenetically very late 
onset and maturation of glutamine-glutamate (GABA) cycle function. Pathway 
models based on the functional importance of aspartate for glutamate synthesis 
suggest the possibility of interacting pathways for biosynthesis and degradation 
of glutamate and GABA and the use of transamination as the default mechanism for 
initiation of glutamate oxidation. The late development and maturation are 
related to the late cortical gliogenesis and convert brain cortical function 
from being purely neuronal to becoming neuronal-astrocytic. This conversion is 
associated with huge increases in energy demand and production, and the 
character of potentially incurred gains of function are discussed. These may 
include alterations in learning mechanisms, in mice indicated by lack of pairing 
of odor learning with aversive stimuli in newborn animals but the development of 
such an association 10-12 days later. The possibility is suggested that 
analogous maturational changes may contribute to differences in the way learning 
is accomplished in the newborn human brain and during later development.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2013.00059
PMCID: PMC3664331
PMID: 23750153