1. Oncotarget. 2013 Jun;4(6):844-59. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.1051.

Cross-species genomic and epigenomic landscape of retinoblastoma.

Benavente CA(1), McEvoy JD, Finkelstein D, Wei L, Kang G, Wang YD, Neale G, 
Ragsdale S, Valentine V, Bahrami A, Temirov J, Pounds S, Zhang J, Dyer MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, St. Jude Children's Research 
Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA.

Genetically engineered mouse models (GEMMs) of human cancer are important for 
advancing our understanding of tumor initiation and progression as well as for 
testing novel therapeutics. Retinoblastoma is a childhood cancer of the 
developing retina that initiates with biallelic inactivation of the RB1 gene. 
GEMMs faithfully recapitulate the histopathology, molecular, cellular, 
morphometric, neuroanatomical and neurochemical features of human 
retinoblastoma. In this study, we analyzed the genomic and epigenomic landscape 
of murine retinoblastoma and compared them to human retinoblastomas to gain 
insight into shared mechanisms of tumor progression across species. Similar to 
human retinoblastoma, mouse tumors have low rates of single nucleotide 
variations. However, mouse retinoblastomas have higher rates of aneuploidy and 
regional and focal copy number changes that vary depending on the genetic 
lesions that initiate tumorigenesis in the developing murine retina. 
Furthermore, the epigenetic landscape in mouse retinoblastoma was significantly 
different from human tumors and some pathways that are candidates for molecular 
targeted therapy for human retinoblastoma such as SYK or MCL1 are not 
deregulated in GEMMs. Taken together, these data suggest there are important 
differences between mouse and human retinoblastomas with respect to the 
mechanism of tumor progression and those differences can have significant 
implications for translational research to test the efficacy of novel therapies 
for this devastating childhood cancer.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.1051
PMCID: PMC3757242
PMID: 23765217 [Indexed for MEDLINE]