1. PLoS Genet. 2013 Jun;9(6):e1003584. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003584. Epub
2013  Jun 20.

Comprehensive high-resolution analysis of the role of an Arabidopsis gene family 
in RNA editing.

Bentolila S(1), Oh J, Hanson MR, Bukowski R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Biotechnology Building, Cornell 
University, Ithaca, New York, USA. sb46@cornell.edu

In flowering plants, mitochondrial and chloroplast mRNAs are edited by C-to-U 
base modification. In plant organelles, RNA editing appears to be generally a 
correcting mechanism that restores the proper function of the encoded product. 
Members of the Arabidopsis RNA editing-Interacting Protein (RIP) family have 
been recently shown to be essential components of the plant editing machinery. 
We report the use of a strand- and transcript-specific RNA-seq method 
(STS-PCRseq) to explore the effect of mutation or silencing of every RIP gene on 
plant organelle editing. We confirm RIP1 to be a major editing factor that 
controls the editing extent of 75% of the mitochondrial sites and 20% of the 
plastid C targets of editing. The quantitative nature of RNA sequencing allows 
the precise determination of overlapping effects of RIP factors on RNA editing. 
Over 85% of the sites under the influence of RIP3 and RIP8, two moderately 
important mitochondrial factors, are also controlled by RIP1. Previously 
uncharacterized RIP family members were found to have only a slight effect on 
RNA editing. The preferential location of editing sites controlled by RIP7 on 
some transcripts suggests an RNA metabolism function for this factor other than 
editing. In addition to a complete characterization of the RIP factors for their 
effect on RNA editing, our study highlights the potential of RNA-seq for 
studying plant organelle editing. Unlike previous attempts to use RNA-seq to 
analyze RNA editing extent, our methodology focuses on sequencing of organelle 
cDNAs corresponding to known transcripts. As a result, the depth of coverage of 
each editing site reaches unprecedented values, assuring a reliable measurement 
of editing extent and the detection of numerous new sites. This strategy can be 
applied to the study of RNA editing in any organism.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003584
PMCID: PMC3688494
PMID: 23818871 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.