1. BMC Biophys. 2013 Jul 24;6(1):9. doi: 10.1186/2046-1682-6-9.

Interactions of the amphiphiles arbutin and tryptophan with phosphatidylcholine 
and phosphatidylethanolamine bilayers in the dry state.

Popova AV(1), Hincha DK.

Author information:
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Pflanzenphysiologie, Am Mühlenberg 1, 
D-14476 Potsdam, Germany. hincha@mpimp-golm.mpg.de.

BACKGROUND: Water is essential for life, but some organisms can survive complete 
desiccation, while many more survive partial dehydration during drying or 
freezing. The function of some protective molecules, such as sugars, has been 
extensively studied, but much less is known about the effects of amphiphiles 
such as flavonoids and other aromatic compounds. Amphiphiles may be largely 
soluble under fully hydrated conditions, but will partition into membranes upon 
removal of water. Little is known about the effects of amphiphiles on membrane 
stability and how amphiphile structure and function are related. Here, we have 
used two of the most intensively studied amphiphiles, tryptophan (Trp) and 
arbutin (Arb), along with their isolated hydrophilic moieties glycine (Gly) and 
glucose (Glc) to better understand structure-function relationships in 
amphiphile-membrane interactions in the dry state.
RESULTS: Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy was used to measure 
gel-to-liquid crystalline phase transition temperatures (Tm) of liposomes formed 
from phosphatidylcholine and phosphatidylethanolamine in the presence of the 
different additives. In anhydrous samples, both Glc and Arb strongly depressed 
Tm, independent of lipid composition, while Gly had no measurable effect. Trp, 
on the other hand, either depressed or increased Tm, depending on lipid 
composition. We found no evidence for strong interactions of any of the 
compounds with the lipid carbonyl or choline groups, while all additives except 
Gly seemed to interact with the phosphate groups. In the case of Arb and Glc, 
this also had a strong effect on the sugar OH vibrations in the FTIR spectra. In 
addition, vibrations from the hydrophobic indole and phenol moieties of Trp and 
Arb, respectively, provided evidence for interactions with the lipid bilayers.
CONCLUSIONS: The two amphiphiles Arb and Trp interact differently with dry 
bilayers. The interactions of Arb are dominated by contributions of the Glc 
moiety, while the indole governs the effects of Trp. In addition, only 
Trp-membrane interactions showed a strong influence of lipid composition. 
Further investigations, using the large structural diversity of plant 
amphiphiles will help to understand how their structure determines the 
interaction with membranes and how that influences their biological functions, 
for example under freezing or dehydration conditions.

DOI: 10.1186/2046-1682-6-9
PMCID: PMC3726346
PMID: 23879885