1. Front Pharmacol. 2013 Jul 17;4:88. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2013.00088. eCollection 
2013.

Connexin and pannexin hemichannels in brain glial cells: properties, 
pharmacology, and roles.

Giaume C(1), Leybaert L, Naus CC, Sáez JC.

Author information:
(1)Collège de France, Center for Interdisciplinary Research in Biology/Centre 
National de la Recherche Scientifique, Unité Mixte de Recherche 7241/Institut 
National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U1050 Paris, France ; 
University Pierre et Marie Curie Paris, France ; MEMOLIFE Laboratory of 
Excellence and Paris Science Lettre Research University Paris, France.

Functional interaction between neurons and glia is an exciting field that has 
expanded tremendously during the past decade. Such partnership has multiple 
impacts on neuronal activity and survival. Indeed, numerous findings indicate 
that glial cells interact tightly with neurons in physiological as well as 
pathological situations. One typical feature of glial cells is their high 
expression level of gap junction protein subunits, named connexins (Cxs), thus 
the membrane channels they form may contribute to neuroglial interaction that 
impacts neuronal activity and survival. While the participation of gap junction 
channels in neuroglial interactions has been regularly reviewed in the past, the 
other channel function of Cxs, i.e., hemichannels located at the cell surface, 
has only recently received attention. Gap junction channels provide the basis 
for a unique direct cell-to-cell communication, whereas Cx hemichannels allow 
the exchange of ions and signaling molecules between the cytoplasm and the 
extracellular medium, thus supporting autocrine and paracrine communication 
through a process referred to as "gliotransmission," as well as uptake and 
release of metabolites. More recently, another family of proteins, termed 
pannexins (Panxs), has been identified. These proteins share similar membrane 
topology but no sequence homology with Cxs. They form multimeric membrane 
channels with pharmacology somewhat overlapping with that of Cx hemichannels. 
Such duality has led to several controversies in the literature concerning the 
identification of the molecular channel constituents (Cxs versus Panxs) in glia. 
In the present review, we update and discuss the knowledge of Cx hemichannels 
and Panx channels in glia, their properties and pharmacology, as well as the 
understanding of their contribution to neuroglial interactions in brain health 
and disease.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2013.00088
PMCID: PMC3713369
PMID: 23882216