1. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 22;8(7):e62743. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0062743. Print 
2013.

Histamine H(3) receptor integrates peripheral inflammatory signals in the 
neurogenic control of immune responses and autoimmune disease susceptibility.

Krementsov DN(1), Wall EH, Martin RA, Subramanian M, Noubade R, Del Rio R, Mawe 
GM, Bond JP, Poynter ME, Blankenhorn EP, Teuscher C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Immunobiology Program, University of Vermont, 
Burlington, Vermont, USA.

Histamine H(3) receptor (Hrh3/H(3)R) is primarily expressed by neurons in the 
central nervous system (CNS) where it functions as a presynaptic inhibitory 
autoreceptor and heteroreceptor. Previously, we identified an H(3)R-mediated 
central component in susceptibility to experimental allergic encephalomyelitis 
(EAE), the principal autoimmune model of multiple sclerosis (MS), related to 
neurogenic control of blood brain barrier permeability and peripheral T cell 
effector responses. Furthermore, we identified Hrh3 as a positional candidate 
for the EAE susceptibility locus Eae8. Here, we characterize Hrh3 polymorphisms 
between EAE-susceptible and resistant SJL and B10.S mice, respectively, and show 
that Hrh3 isoform expression in the CNS is differentially regulated by acute 
peripheral inflammatory stimuli in an allele-specific fashion. Next, we show 
that Hrh3 is not expressed in any subpopulations of the immune compartment, and 
that secondary lymphoid tissue is anatomically poised to be regulated by central 
H(3)R signaling. Accordingly, using transcriptome analysis, we show that, 
inflammatory stimuli elicit unique transcriptional profiles in the lymph nodes 
of H(3)RKO mice compared to WT mice, which is indicative of negative regulation 
of peripheral immune responses by central H(3)R signaling. These results further 
support a functional link between the neurogenic control of T cell responses and 
susceptibility to CNS autoimmune disease coincident with acute and/or chronic 
peripheral inflammation. Pharmacological targeting of H(3)R may therefore be 
useful in preventing the development and formation of new lesions in MS, thereby 
limiting disease progression.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0062743
PMCID: PMC3718788
PMID: 23894272 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Dr. Jingcai Chen (Johnson & 
Johnson) performed the pharmacological assays with Hrh3 alleles. There are no 
further patents, products in development or marketed products to declare. This 
does not alter the authors' adherence to all the PLOS ONE policies on sharing 
data and materials.