1. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 1;8(8):e71535. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071535. Print
2013.

Endonuclease IV Is the major apurinic/apyrimidinic endonuclease in Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis and is important for protection against oxidative damage.

Puri RV(1), Singh N, Gupta RK, Tyagi AK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Delhi South Campus, New Delhi, 
India.

During the establishment of an infection, bacterial pathogens encounter 
oxidative stress resulting in the production of DNA lesions. Majority of these 
lesions are repaired by base excision repair (BER) pathway. Amongst these, 
abasic sites are the most frequent lesions in DNA. Class II 
apurinic/apyrimidinic (AP) endonucleases play a major role in BER of damaged DNA 
comprising of abasic sites. Mycobacterium tuberculosis, a deadly pathogen, 
resides in the human macrophages and is continually subjected to oxidative 
assaults. We have characterized for the first time two AP endonucleases namely 
Endonuclease IV (End) and Exonuclease III (XthA) that perform distinct functions 
in M.tuberculosis. We demonstrate that M.tuberculosis End is a typical AP 
endonuclease while XthA is predominantly a 3'→5' exonuclease. The AP 
endonuclease activity of End and XthA was stimulated by Mg(2+) and Ca(2+) and 
displayed a preferential recognition for abasic site paired opposite to a 
cytosine residue in DNA. Moreover, End exhibited metal ion independent 3'→5' 
exonuclease activity while in the case of XthA this activity was metal ion 
dependent. We demonstrate that End is not only a more efficient AP endonuclease 
than XthA but it also represents the major AP endonuclease activity in 
M.tuberculosis and plays a crucial role in defense against oxidative stress.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071535
PMCID: PMC3731287
PMID: 23936515 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: AT is a member of the PLOS 
ONE Editorial Board. This does not alter the authors' adherence to all the PLOS 
ONE policies on sharing data and materials.