1. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 5;8(8):e70687. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0070687. Print
2013.

Rapid global fitting of large fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy datasets.

Warren SC(1), Margineanu A, Alibhai D, Kelly DJ, Talbot C, Alexandrov Y, Munro 
I, Katan M, Dunsby C, French PM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Institute for Chemical Biology, Imperial College 
London, London, United Kingdom. sean.warren09@imperial.ac.uk

Fluorescence lifetime imaging (FLIM) is widely applied to obtain quantitative 
information from fluorescence signals, particularly using Förster Resonant 
Energy Transfer (FRET) measurements to map, for example, protein-protein 
interactions. Extracting FRET efficiencies or population fractions typically 
entails fitting data to complex fluorescence decay models but such experiments 
are frequently photon constrained, particularly for live cell or in vivo 
imaging, and this leads to unacceptable errors when analysing data on a 
pixel-wise basis. Lifetimes and population fractions may, however, be more 
robustly extracted using global analysis to simultaneously fit the fluorescence 
decay data of all pixels in an image or dataset to a multi-exponential model 
under the assumption that the lifetime components are invariant across the image 
(dataset). This approach is often considered to be prohibitively slow and/or 
computationally expensive but we present here a computationally efficient global 
analysis algorithm for the analysis of time-correlated single photon counting 
(TCSPC) or time-gated FLIM data based on variable projection. It makes efficient 
use of both computer processor and memory resources, requiring less than a 
minute to analyse time series and multiwell plate datasets with hundreds of FLIM 
images on standard personal computers. This lifetime analysis takes account of 
repetitive excitation, including fluorescence photons excited by earlier pulses 
contributing to the fit, and is able to accommodate time-varying backgrounds and 
instrument response functions. We demonstrate that this global approach allows 
us to readily fit time-resolved fluorescence data to complex models including a 
four-exponential model of a FRET system, for which the FRET efficiencies of the 
two species of a bi-exponential donor are linked, and polarisation-resolved 
lifetime data, where a fluorescence intensity and bi-exponential anisotropy 
decay model is applied to the analysis of live cell homo-FRET data. A software 
package implementing this algorithm, FLIMfit, is available under an open source 
licence through the Open Microscopy Environment.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0070687
PMCID: PMC3734241
PMID: 23940626 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The historic experimental 
data shown in Figures 1 and 4 was acquired as part of an earlier project that 
was funded in part by a United Kingdom Technology Strategy Board Technology 
Award (CHBT/007/00030, EP/C54269X), in partnership with AstraZeneca, GE 
Healthcare, GSK, Kentech Instruments Ltd. This does not alter the authors’ 
adherence to all the PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.