1. Hum Mutat. 2013 Nov;34(11):1537-1546. doi: 10.1002/humu.22398. Epub 2013 Sep
17.

Screening of a large cohort of leber congenital amaurosis and retinitis 
pigmentosa patients identifies novel LCA5 mutations and new genotype-phenotype 
correlations.

Mackay DS(#)(1), Borman AD(#)(1)(2), Sui R(3), van den Born LI(4), Berson EL(5), 
Ocaka LA(1), Davidson AE(1), Heckenlively JR(6), Branham K(6), Ren H(7), Lopez 
I(7), Maria M(8)(9), Azam M(8)(9), Henkes A(8), Blokland E(8), Qamar R(9)(10), 
Webster AR(1)(2), Cremers FPM(#)(8), Moore AT(#)(1)(2), Koenekoop RK(#)(7); 
[LCA5 Study Group (see acknowledgements for Universities); Andreasson S(1), de 
Baere E(1), Bennett J(1), Chader GJ(1), Berger W(1), Golovleva I(1), Greenberg 
J(1), den Hollander AI(1), Klaver CCW(1), Klevering BJ(1), Lorenz B(1), Preising 
MN(1), Ramsear R(1), Roberts L(1), Roepman R(1), Rohrschneider K(1), Wissinger 
B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Institute of Ophthalmology, UCL, London, UK.
(2)Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, UK.
(3)Ophthalmology, Peking Union Med College Hosp, Beijing, China.
(4)The Rotterdam Eye Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(5)Berman-Gund Laboratory for the Study of Retinal Degenerations, Harvard 
Medical School, Massachusetts Eye and Ear, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(6)Kellogg Eye Center, Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, 
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
(7)McGill Ocular Genetics Laboratory, Departments of Pediatric Surgery, Human 
Genetics and Ophthalmology, McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, Quebec, 
Canada.
(8)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Centre, and Nijmegen 
Centre for Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(9)Department of Biosciences, COMSATS Institute of Information Technology, 
Islamabad, Pakistan.
(10)Al-Nafees Medical College & Hospital, Isra University, Islamabad, Pakistan.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    Hum Mutat. 2014 Jan;35(1):149. Ramsear, Raj [corrected to Ramesar, Raj].

This study was undertaken to investigate the prevalence of sequence variants in 
LCA5 in patients with Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA), early-onset retinal 
dystrophy (EORD), and autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa (arRP); to 
delineate the ocular phenotypes; and to provide an overview of all published 
LCA5 variants in an online database. Patients underwent standard ophthalmic 
evaluations after providing informed consent. In selected patients, optical 
coherence tomography (OCT) and fundus autofluorescence imaging were possible. 
DNA samples from 797 unrelated patients with LCA and 211 with the various types 
of retinitis pigmentosa (RP) were screened by Sanger sequence analysis of all 
LCA5 exons and intron/exon junctions. Some LCA patients were prescreened by APEX 
technology or selected based on homozygosity mapping. In silico analyses were 
performed to assess the pathogenicity of the variants. Segregation analysis was 
performed where possible. Published and novel LCA5 variants were collected, 
amended for their correct nomenclature, and listed in a Leiden Open Variation 
Database (LOVD). Sequence analysis identified 18 new probands with 19 different 
LCA5 variants. Seventeen of the 19 LCA5 variants were novel. Except for two 
missense variants and one splice site variant, all variants were 
protein-truncating mutations. Most patients expressed a severe phenotype, 
typical of LCA. However, some LCA subjects had better vision and intact inner 
segment/outer segment (IS/OS) junctions on OCT imaging. In two families with 
LCA5 variants, the phenotype was more compatible with EORD with affected 
individuals displaying preserved islands of retinal pigment epithelium. One of 
the families with a milder phenotype harbored a homozygous splice site mutation; 
a second family was found to have a combination of a stop mutation and a 
missense mutation. This is the largest LCA5 study to date. We sequenced 1,008 
patients (797 with LCA, 211 with arRP) and identified 18 probands with LCA5 
mutations. Mutations in LCA5 are a rare cause of childhood retinal dystrophy 
accounting for ∼2% of disease in this cohort, and the majority of LCA5 mutations 
are likely null. The LCA5 protein truncating mutations are predominantly 
associated with LCA. However, in two families with the milder EORD, the LCA5 
gene analysis revealed a homozygous splice site mutation in one and a stop 
mutation in combination with a missense mutation in a second family, suggesting 
that this milder phenotype is due to residual function of lebercilin and 
expanding the currently known phenotypic spectrum to include the milder early 
onset RP. Some patients have remaining foveal cone structures (intact IS/OS 
junctions on OCT imaging) and remaining visual acuities, which may bode well for 
upcoming treatment trials.

© 2013 WILEY PERIODICALS, INC.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.22398
PMCID: PMC4337959
PMID: 23946133 [Indexed for MEDLINE]