1. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(8):e1003657. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003657. Epub 2013
Aug  8.

GUESS-ing polygenic associations with multiple phenotypes using a GPU-based 
evolutionary stochastic search algorithm.

Bottolo L(1), Chadeau-Hyam M, Hastie DI, Zeller T, Liquet B, Newcombe P, Yengo 
L, Wild PS, Schillert A, Ziegler A, Nielsen SF, Butterworth AS, Ho WK, Castagné 
R, Munzel T, Tregouet D, Falchi M, Cambien F, Nordestgaard BG, Fumeron F, 
Tybjærg-Hansen A, Froguel P, Danesh J, Petretto E, Blankenberg S, Tiret L, 
Richardson S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Mathematics, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom. 
l.bottolo@imperial.ac.uk

Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) yielded significant advances in defining 
the genetic architecture of complex traits and disease. Still, a major hurdle of 
GWAS is narrowing down multiple genetic associations to a few causal variants 
for functional studies. This becomes critical in multi-phenotype GWAS where 
detection and interpretability of complex SNP(s)-trait(s) associations are 
complicated by complex Linkage Disequilibrium patterns between SNPs and 
correlation between traits. Here we propose a computationally efficient 
algorithm (GUESS) to explore complex genetic-association models and maximize 
genetic variant detection. We integrated our algorithm with a new Bayesian 
strategy for multi-phenotype analysis to identify the specific contribution of 
each SNP to different trait combinations and study genetic regulation of lipid 
metabolism in the Gutenberg Health Study (GHS). Despite the relatively small 
size of GHS (n  =  3,175), when compared with the largest published meta-GWAS (n 
> 100,000), GUESS recovered most of the major associations and was better at 
refining multi-trait associations than alternative methods. Amongst the new 
findings provided by GUESS, we revealed a strong association of SORT1 with 
TG-APOB and LIPC with TG-HDL phenotypic groups, which were overlooked in the 
larger meta-GWAS and not revealed by competing approaches, associations that we 
replicated in two independent cohorts. Moreover, we demonstrated the increased 
power of GUESS over alternative multi-phenotype approaches, both Bayesian and 
non-Bayesian, in a simulation study that mimics real-case scenarios. We showed 
that our parallel implementation based on Graphics Processing Units outperforms 
alternative multi-phenotype methods. Beyond multivariate modelling of 
multi-phenotypes, our Bayesian model employs a flexible hierarchical prior 
structure for genetic effects that adapts to any correlation structure of the 
predictors and increases the power to identify associated variants. This 
provides a powerful tool for the analysis of diverse genomic features, for 
instance including gene expression and exome sequencing data, where complex 
dependencies are present in the predictor space.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003657
PMCID: PMC3738451
PMID: 23950726 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.