1. PLoS Pathog. 2013;9(8):e1003534. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003534. Epub 2013 
Aug 8.

Structure of the parainfluenza virus 5 (PIV5) hemagglutinin-neuraminidase (HN) 
ectodomain.

Welch BD(1), Yuan P, Bose S, Kors CA, Lamb RA, Jardetzky TS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, Northwestern University, Evanston, 
Illinois, USA.

Paramyxoviruses cause a wide variety of human and animal diseases. They infect 
host cells using the coordinated action of two surface glycoproteins, the 
receptor binding protein (HN, H, or G) and the fusion protein (F). HN binds 
sialic acid on host cells (hemagglutinin activity) and hydrolyzes these 
receptors during viral egress (neuraminidase activity, NA). Additionally, 
receptor binding is thought to induce a conformational change in HN that 
subsequently triggers major refolding in homotypic F, resulting in fusion of 
virus and target cell membranes. HN is an oligomeric type II transmembrane 
protein with a short cytoplasmic domain and a large ectodomain comprising a long 
helical stalk and large globular head domain containing the enzymatic functions 
(NA domain). Extensive biochemical characterization has revealed that HN-stalk 
residues determine F specificity and activation. However, the F/HN interaction 
and the mechanisms whereby receptor binding regulates F activation are poorly 
defined. Recently, a structure of Newcastle disease virus (NDV) HN ectodomain 
revealed the heads (NA domains) in a "4-heads-down" conformation whereby two of 
the heads form a symmetrical interaction with two sides of the stalk. The 
interface includes stalk residues implicated in triggering F, and the heads 
sterically shield these residues from interaction with F (at least on two 
sides). Here we report the x-ray crystal structure of parainfluenza virus 5 
(PIV5) HN ectodomain in a "2-heads-up/2-heads-down" conformation where two heads 
(covalent dimers) are in the "down position," forming a similar interface as 
observed in the NDV HN ectodomain structure, and two heads are in an "up 
position." The structure supports a model in which the heads of HN transition 
from down to up upon receptor binding thereby releasing steric constraints and 
facilitating the interaction between critical HN-stalk residues and F.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003534
PMCID: PMC3738495
PMID: 23950713 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.