1. BMC Evol Biol. 2013 Sep 3;13:181. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-13-181.

Population structure of Wolbachia and cytoplasmic introgression in a complex of 
mosquito species.

Dumas E(1), Atyame CM, Milesi P, Fonseca DM, Shaikevich EV, Unal S, Makoundou P, 
Weill M, Duron O.

Author information:
(1)Institut des Sciences de l'Evolution, UMR5554 CNRS, Université Montpellier 2, 
34095 Montpellier cedex 05, France. olivier.duron@univ-montp2.fr.

BACKGROUND: The maternally inherited bacterium Wolbachia often acts as a subtle 
parasite that manipulates insect reproduction, resulting potentially in 
reproductive isolation between host populations. Whilst distinct Wolbachia 
strains are documented in a group of evolutionarily closely related mosquitoes 
known as the Culex pipiens complex, their impact on mosquito population genetics 
remains unclear. To this aim, we developed a PCR-RFLP test that discriminates 
the five known Wolbachia groups found in this host complex. We further examined 
the Wolbachia genetic diversity, the variability in the coinherited host 
mitochondria and their partitioning among members of the Cx. pipiens complex, in 
order to assess the impact of Wolbachia on host population structure.
RESULTS: There was a strong association between Wolbachia and mitochondrial 
haplotypes indicating a stable co-transmission in mosquito populations. Despite 
evidence that members of the Cx. pipiens complex are genetically distinct on the 
basis of nuclear DNA, the association of Wolbachia and mtDNA with members of the 
Cx. pipiens complex were limited. The Wolbachia wPip-I group, by far the most 
common, was associated with divergent Cx. pipiens members, including Cx. 
quinquefasciatus, Cx. pipiens pipiens form pipiens and Cx. pipiens pipiens form 
molestus. Four other wPip groups were also found in mosquito populations and all 
were shared between diverse Cx. pipiens members.
CONCLUSION: This data overall supports the hypothesis that wPip infections, and 
their allied mitochondria, are associated with regular transfers between Cx. 
pipiens members rather than specific host associations. Overall, this is 
suggestive of a recent and likely ongoing cytoplasmic introgression through 
hybridization events across the Cx. pipiens complex.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2148-13-181
PMCID: PMC3846486
PMID: 24006922 [Indexed for MEDLINE]