1. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 27;8(8):e72956. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072956. 
eCollection 2013.

QHREDGS enhances tube formation, metabolism and survival of endothelial cells in 
collagen-chitosan hydrogels.

Miklas JW(1), Dallabrida SM, Reis LA, Ismail N, Rupnick M, Radisic M.

Author information:
(1)The Institute of Biomaterials and Biomedical Engineering, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Cell survival in complex, vascularized tissues, has been implicated as a major 
bottleneck in advancement of therapies based on cardiac tissue engineering. This 
limitation motivates the search for small, inexpensive molecules that would 
simultaneously be cardio-protective and vasculogenic. Here, we present peptide 
sequence QHREDGS, based upon the fibrinogen-like domain of angiopoietin-1, as a 
prime candidate molecule. We demonstrated previously that QHREDGS improved 
cardiomyocyte metabolism and mitigated serum starved apoptosis. In this paper we 
further demonstrate the potency of QHREDGS in its ability to enhance endothelial 
cell survival, metabolism and tube formation. When endothelial cells were 
exposed to the soluble form of QHREDGS, improvements in endothelial cell barrier 
functionality, nitric oxide production and cell metabolism (ATP levels) in serum 
starved conditions were found. The functionality of the peptide was then 
examined when conjugated to collagen-chitosan hydrogel, a potential carrier for 
in vivo application. The presence of the peptide in the hydrogel mitigated 
paclitaxel induced apoptosis of endothelial cells in a dose dependent manner. 
Furthermore, the peptide modified hydrogels stimulated tube-like structure 
formation of encapsulated endothelial cells. When integrin αvβ3 or α5β1 were 
antibody blocked during cell encapsulation in peptide modified hydrogels, tube 
formation was abolished. Therefore, the dual protective nature of the novel 
peptide QHREDGS may position this peptide as an appealing augmentation for 
collagen-chitosan hydrogels that could be used for biomaterial delivered cell 
therapies in the settings of myocardial infarction.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072956
PMCID: PMC3754933
PMID: 24013716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.