1. Semin Arthritis Rheum. 2014 Feb;43(4):566-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.semarthrit.2013.07.015. Epub 2013 Sep 5.

Pachydermoperiostosis in an African patient caused by a Chinese/Japanese SLCO2A1 
mutation-case report and review of literature.

Madruga Dias JA(1), Rosa RS(2), Perpétuo I(3), Rodrigues AM(4), Janeiro A(5), 
Costa MM(6), Gaião L(3), Pereira da Silva JA(6), Fonseca JE(4), 
Miltenberger-Miltenyi G(5).

Author information:
(1)Rheumatology Research Unit, Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal; Rheumatology Department, Santa 
Maria Hospital, C.H.L.N., Lisbon, Portugal. Electronic address: 
joao_alexandre@hotmail.com.
(2)Ophthalmology Department, São José Hospital, C.H.L.C., Lisbon, Portugal.
(3)Rheumatology Research Unit, Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal.
(4)Rheumatology Research Unit, Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal; Rheumatology Department, Santa 
Maria Hospital, C.H.L.N., Lisbon, Portugal.
(5)Genomed, Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal.
(6)Rheumatology Department, Santa Maria Hospital, C.H.L.N., Lisbon, Portugal.

OBJECTIVES: Pachydermoperiostosis is a rare clinical entity characterized by 
skin thickening of the forehead, eyelids, and hands, digital clubbing, and 
periostosis. Two genes have been associated, HPGD and recently SLCO2A1. We 
present a detailed clinical and genetic description of an African 
pachydermoperiostosis patient with a SLCO2A1 mutation.
METHODS: Standard clinical and laboratory evaluation was carried out. Genetic 
screening was done with PCR followed by direct sequencing. We discuss the 
clinical features and known mutations of previously reported cases identified 
through a PubMed literature review.
RESULTS: The clinical findings showed special features, including exuberant knee 
effusions and an extraordinary good response on surgery of the blepharoptosis. 
We found a splice site mutation in the SLCO2A1 gene in homozygous form: 
c.940+1G>A. This mutation was previously reported only in 1 Chinese and 3 
Japanese cases and was considered as a founder mutation in Japan. Beside our 
case, only one other patient in the literature carried this mutation in 
homozygous condition, but with different main clinical symptoms.
CONCLUSIONS: Our case demonstrates phenotypic heterogeneity of PDP even between 
homozygous carriers of the same mutation, suggesting further modifiers. Besides, 
it shows that this rare SLCO2A1 mutation is not exclusively present in 
East-Asia, but can occur in various ethnicities, with different origin, thus the 
incidence is probably underestimated.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semarthrit.2013.07.015
PMID: 24012041 [Indexed for MEDLINE]