1. Front Neurol. 2013 Sep 4;4:128. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2013.00128.

Motor cortical plasticity in Parkinson's disease.

Udupa K(1), Chen R.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine, University of Toronto , 
Toronto, ON , Canada ; Division of Brain, Imaging and Behavior - Systems 
Neuroscience, Toronto Western Research Institute , Toronto, ON , Canada.

In Parkinson's disease (PD), there are alterations of the basal ganglia (BG) 
thalamocortical networks, primarily due to degeneration of nigrostriatal 
dopaminergic neurons. These changes in subcortical networks lead to plastic 
changes in primary motor cortex (M1), which mediates cortical motor output and 
is a potential target for treatment of PD. Studies investigating the motor 
cortical plasticity using non-invasive transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) 
have found altered plasticity in PD, but there are inconsistencies among these 
studies. This is likely because plasticity depends on many factors such as the 
extent of dopaminergic loss and disease severity, response to dopaminergic 
replacement therapies, development of l-DOPA-induced dyskinesias (LID), the 
plasticity protocol used, medication, and stimulation status in patients treated 
with deep brain stimulation (DBS). The influences of LID and DBS on BG and M1 
plasticity have been explored in animal models and in PD patients. In addition, 
many other factors such age, genetic factors (e.g., brain derived neurotropic 
factor and other neurotransmitters or receptors polymorphism), emotional state, 
time of the day, physical fitness have been documented to play role in the 
extent of plasticity induced by TMS in human studies. In this review, we 
summarize the studies that investigated M1 plasticity in PD and demonstrate how 
these afore-mentioned factors affect motor cortical plasticity in PD. We 
conclude that it is important to consider the clinical, demographic, and 
technical factors that influence various plasticity protocols while developing 
these protocols as diagnostic or prognostic tools in PD. We also discuss how the 
modulation of cortical excitability and the plasticity with these non-invasive 
brain stimulation techniques facilitate the understanding of the pathophysiology 
of PD and help design potential therapeutic possibilities in this disorder.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2013.00128
PMCID: PMC3761292
PMID: 24027555