1. Genome Biol Evol. 2013;5(10):1817-35. doi: 10.1093/gbe/evt135.

Tracing the evolution of streptophyte algae and their mitochondrial genome.

Turmel M(1), Otis C, Lemieux C.

Author information:
(1)Institut de Biologie Intégrative et des Systèmes, Département de Biochimie, 
de Microbiologie et de Bio-Informatique, Université Laval, Québec, Canada.

Six monophyletic groups of charophycean green algae are recognized within the 
Streptophyta. Although incongruent with earlier studies based on genes from 
three cellular compartments, chloroplast and nuclear phylogenomic analyses have 
resolved identical relationships among these groups, placing the Zygnematales or 
the Zygnematales + Coleochaetales as sister to land plants. The present 
investigation aimed at determining whether this consensus view is supported by 
the mitochondrial genome and at gaining insight into mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) 
evolution within and across streptophyte algal lineages and during the 
transition toward the first land plants. We present here the newly sequenced 
mtDNAs of representatives of the Klebsormidiales (Entransia fimbriata and 
Klebsormidium spec.) and Zygnematales (Closterium baillyanum and Roya obtusa) 
and compare them with their homologs in other charophycean lineages as well as 
in selected embryophyte and chlorophyte lineages. Our results indicate that 
important changes occurred at the levels of genome size, gene order, and intron 
content within the Zygnematales. Although the representatives of the 
Klebsormidiales display more similarity in genome size and intron content, gene 
order seems more fluid and gene losses more frequent than in other charophycean 
lineages. In contrast, the two members of the Charales display an extremely 
conservative pattern of mtDNA evolution. Collectively, our analyses of gene 
order and gene content and the phylogenies we inferred from 40 mtDNA-encoded 
proteins failed to resolve the relationships among the Zygnematales, 
Coleochaetales, and Charales; however, they are consistent with previous 
phylogenomic studies in favoring that the morphologically complex Charales are 
not sister to land plants.

DOI: 10.1093/gbe/evt135
PMCID: PMC3814193
PMID: 24022472 [Indexed for MEDLINE]