1. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 4;8(9):e72762. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072762.
eCollection  2013.

Molecular basis of renal adaptation in a murine model of congenital obstructive 
nephropathy.

Becknell B(1), Carpenter AR, Allen JL, Wilhide ME, Ingraham SE, Hains DS, McHugh 
KM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, The Ohio State University, 
Columbus, Ohio, United States of America ; Division of Pediatric Nephrology, 
Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, Ohio, United States of America.

Congenital obstructive nephropathy is a common cause of chronic kidney disease 
and a leading indication for renal transplant in children. The cellular and 
molecular responses of the kidney to congenital obstruction are incompletely 
characterized. In this study, we evaluated global transcription in kidneys with 
graded hydronephrosis in the megabladder (mgb (-/-)) mouse to better understand 
the pathophysiology of congenital obstructive nephropathy. Three primary 
pathways associated with kidney remodeling/repair were induced in mgb (-/-) 
kidneys independent of the degree of hydronephrosis. These pathways included 
retinoid signaling, steroid hormone metabolism, and renal response to injury. 
Urothelial proliferation and the expression of genes with roles in the integrity 
and maintenance of the renal urothelium were selectively increased in mgb (-/-) 
kidneys. Ngal/Lcn2, a marker of acute kidney injury, was elevated in 36% of 
kidneys with higher grades of hydronephrosis. Evaluation of Ngal(high) versus 
Ngal(low) kidneys identified the expression of several novel candidate markers 
of renal injury. This study indicates that the development of progressive 
hydronephrosis in mgb (-/-) mice results in renal adaptation that includes 
significant changes in the morphology and potential functionality of the renal 
urothelium. These observations will permit the development of novel biomarkers 
and therapeutic approaches to progressive renal injury in the context of 
congenital obstruction.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072762
PMCID: PMC3762787
PMID: 24023768 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.