1. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 2;8(9):e73565. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073565.
eCollection  2013.

Identification and characterization of the regions involved in the nuclear 
translocation of the heterodimeric leishmanial DNA topoisomerase IB.

Prada CF(1), Álvarez-Velilla R, Díaz-Gozález R, Pérez-Pertejo Y, Balaña-Fouce R, 
Reguera RM.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Ciencias Biomédicas, Universidad de León, Campus de Vegazana, 
León, Spain.

Leishmania donovani, the causative organism for visceral leishmaniasis, contains 
a unique heterodimeric DNA-topoisomerase IB (LdTopIB). LdTopIB is a heterodimer 
made up of a large subunit and a small subunit that must interact with each 
other to build an active enzyme able to solve the topological tensions on the 
DNA. As LdTopIB is located within the nucleus, one or more nuclear localization 
signals (NLS) should exist to ensure its nuclear translocation. In this report 
three novel NLS have been identified through a sequential deletion study of the 
genes encoding of both subunits fused to that encoding the green fluorescent 
protein (GFP). NLS1 is a highly basic sequence of 43 amino acids in the 
C-terminal extension of the large protomer. We found two well-defined sequences 
in the small protomer: NLS2 is a 10-amino acid motif located in the N-terminal 
extension of the protein; NLS3 consists of a complex region of 28 amino acids 
placed in the vicinity of the catalytic Tyr-222 included at the conserved SKINY 
signature within the C-terminal. Furthermore, by means of yeast cell viability 
assays, conducted with several LdTopIB chimeras lacking any of the NLS motives, 
we have revealed that both subunits are transported independently to the 
nucleus. There was no evidence of LdTopIB accumulation in mitochondria or 
association to the kinetoplast DNA network. The results rule out the former 
hypothesis, which attributes nucleocytoplasmic transport of LdTopIB entirely to 
the large subunit. The LdTopIB is localized to the nucleus only.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073565
PMCID: PMC3759442
PMID: 24023887 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.