1. Anticancer Res. 2013 Sep;33(9):4033-9.

Effect of thrombosis-related gene polymorphisms upon oral cancer: a regression 
analysis.

Vylliotis A(1), Yapijakis C, Nkenke E, Nisyrios T, Avgoustidis D, Adamopoulou M, 
Ragos V, Vassiliou S, Koronellos N, Vairaktaris E.

Author information:
(1)D.D.S., Ph.D., Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, University of 
Athens Medical School, Attikon Hospital, Rimini 1, Athens 12461, Greece. 
lvairakt@med.uoa.gr.

It is well-known that there is an interplay between hemostasis, thrombosis and 
cancer. Functional DNA polymorphisms in genes encoding factors related to 
thrombosis have been associated with increased risk for oral squamous cell 
carcinoma (OSCC). The present study investigated the possible combinatory effect 
of 10 such polymorphisms as primary risk predictors for OSCC in a European 
population. Two groups including 160 patients with OSCC and 168 healthy controls 
of Greek and German origin were studied. The patient and control groups were 
comparable regarding ethnicity, age and gender. For all studied individuals, 10 
genotypes of functional polymorphisms were investigated: 5,10-methylene 
tetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) C677T, coagulation factor V (F5) Leiden, 
coagulation factor II (F2, also known as prothrombin) G20210A, coagulation 
factor XII (F12) C46T, coagulation factor XIII A1 subunit (F13A1) Val34Leu, 
serpine1 (SERPINE1, also known as plasminogen activator inhibitor-1) 4G/5G, 
protein Z (PROZ) -A13G, angiotensin I-converting enzyme (ACE) I/D, 
angiotensinogen (AGT) Met325Thr, and carboxypeptidase B2 (CPB2, also known as 
thrombin-activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor) C1040T. Multivariate logistic 
regression models were used in order to evaluate the relation and contribution 
of homozygous and heterozygous variant polymorphisms upon overall, early and 
advanced stages of OSCC. Five out of the studied polymorphisms, influencing the 
expression of SERPINE1 and ACE genes, as well as the activity of CPB2, F12 and 
F13 proteins, were recognized as significant predictive factors for OSCC. The 
'mode of inheritance' regression model, in particular, revealed the low 
expression I allele of ACE to be a primary predictor in overall, early and 
advanced stages of oral cancer. Comparing the present findings with previous 
knowledge, possible interactions of these factors and their relation to the risk 
for OSCC development are discussed.

PMID: 24023347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]