1. Front Cell Neurosci. 2013 Sep 18;7:156. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2013.00156. 
eCollection 2013.

Paradoxical proepileptic response to NMDA receptor blockade linked to cortical 
interneuron defect in stargazer mice.

Maheshwari A(1), Nahm WK, Noebels JL.

Author information:
(1)Developmental Neurogenetics Laboratory, Department of Neurology, Baylor 
College of Medicine Houston, TX, USA.

Paradoxical seizure exacerbation by anti-epileptic medication is a well-known 
clinical phenomenon in epilepsy, but the cellular mechanisms remain unclear. One 
possibility is enhanced network disinhibition by unintended suppression of 
inhibitory interneurons. We investigated this hypothesis in the stargazer mouse 
model of absence epilepsy, which bears a mutation in stargazin, an AMPA receptor 
trafficking protein. If AMPA signaling onto inhibitory GABAergic neurons is 
impaired, their activation by glutamate depends critically upon NMDA receptors. 
Indeed, we find that stargazer seizures are exacerbated by NMDA receptor 
blockade with CPP (3-[(R)-2-carboxypiperazin-4-yl]-prop-2-enyl-1-phosphonic 
acid) and MK-801, whereas other genetic absence epilepsy models are sensitive to 
these antagonists. To determine how an AMPA receptor trafficking defect could 
lead to paradoxical network activation, we analyzed stargazin and AMPA receptor 
localization and found that stargazin is detected exclusively in 
parvalbumin-positive (PV (+)) fast-spiking interneurons in somatosensory cortex, 
where it is co-expressed with the AMPA receptor subunit GluA4. PV (+) cortical 
interneurons in stargazer show a near twofold decrease in the dendrite:soma 
GluA4 expression ratio compared to wild-type (WT) littermates. We explored the 
functional consequence of this trafficking defect on network excitability in 
neocortical slices. Both NMDA receptor antagonists suppressed 0 Mg (2) 
(+)-induced network discharges in WT but augmented bursting in stargazer cortex. 
Interneurons mediate this paradoxical response, since the difference between 
genotypes was masked by GABA receptor blockade. Our findings provide a cellular 
locus for AMPA receptor-dependent signaling defects in stargazer cortex and 
define an interneuron-dependent mechanism for paradoxical seizure exacerbation 
in absence epilepsy.

DOI: 10.3389/fncel.2013.00156
PMCID: PMC3776135
PMID: 24065886