1. Oncogene. 2014 Sep 4;33(36):4474-84. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.395. Epub 2013 Sep 
30.

Cell type-dependent pathogenic functions of overexpressed human cathepsin B in 
murine breast cancer progression.

Bengsch F(1), Buck A(2), Günther SC(2), Seiz JR(2), Tacke M(2), Pfeifer D(3), 
von Elverfeldt D(4), Sevenich L(5), Hillebrand LE(6), Kern U(1), Sameni M(7), 
Peters C(8), Sloane BF(9), Reinheckel T(8).

Author information:
(1)1] Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research, 
Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany [2] Spemann Graduate 
School of Biology and Medicine, Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, Freiburg, 
Germany [3] Faculty of Biology, Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, Freiburg, 
Germany.
(2)Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research, Albert-Ludwigs-University 
Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(3)Department of Hematology/Oncology, Genomics Core Lab, University Medical 
Center, Freiburg, Germany.
(4)Department of Radiology, Medical Physics, University Medical Center, 
Freiburg, Germany.
(5)1] Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research, 
Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany [2].
(6)1] Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research, 
Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany [2] Faculty of Biology, 
Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany [3] BIOSS Centre for 
Biological Signalling Studies, Freiburg, Germany.
(7)Department of Pharmacology, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA.
(8)1] Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research, 
Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany [2] BIOSS Centre for 
Biological Signalling Studies, Freiburg, Germany.
(9)1] Department of Pharmacology, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA [2] 
Barbara Ann Carmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA.

The cysteine protease cathepsin B (CTSB) is frequently overexpressed in human 
breast cancer and correlated with a poor prognosis. Genetic deficiency or 
pharmacological inhibition of CTSB attenuates tumor growth, invasion and 
metastasis in mouse models of human cancers. CTSB is expressed in both cancer 
cells and cells of the tumor stroma, in particular in tumor-associated 
macrophages (TAM). In order to evaluate the impact of tumor- or stromal 
cell-derived CTSB on Polyoma Middle T (PyMT)-induced breast cancer progression, 
we used in vivo and in vitro approaches to induce human CTSB overexpression in 
PyMT cancer cells or stromal cells alone or in combination. Orthotopic 
transplantation experiments revealed that CTSB overexpression in cancer cells 
rather than in the stroma affects PyMT tumor progression. In 3D cultures, 
primary PyMT tumor cells showed higher extracellular matrix proteolysis and 
enhanced collective cell invasion when CTSB was overexpressed and 
proteolytically active. Coculture of PyMT cells with bone marrow-derived 
macrophages induced a TAM-like macrophage phenotype in vitro, and the presence 
of such M2-polarized macrophages in 3D cultures enhanced sprouting of tumor 
spheroids. We employed a doxycycline (DOX)-inducible CTSB expression system to 
selectively overexpress human CTSB either in cancer cells or in macrophages in 
3D cocultures. Tumor spheroid invasiveness was only enhanced when CTSB was 
overexpressed in cancer cells, whereas CTSB expression in macrophages alone did 
not further promote invasiveness of tumor spheroids. We conclude that CTSB 
overexpression in the PyMT mouse model promotes tumor progression not by a 
stromal effect, but by a direct, cancer cell-inherent mode of action: CTSB 
overexpression renders the PyMT cancers more invasive by increasing proteolytic 
extracellular matrix protein degradation fostering collective cell invasion into 
adjacent tissue.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2013.395
PMCID: PMC4139469
PMID: 24077280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST The authors declare no 
conflict of interest.