1. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 24;8(9):e75057. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075057. 
eCollection 2013.

Origins of Myc proteins--using intrinsic protein disorder to trace distant 
relatives.

Mahani A(1), Henriksson J, Wright AP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Center for Biosciences, Karolinska 
Institute, Huddinge, Sweden.

Mammalian Myc proteins are important determinants of cell proliferation as well 
as the undifferentiated state of stem cells and their activity is frequently 
deregulated in cancer. Based mainly on conservation in the C-terminal 
DNA-binding and dimerization domain, Myc-like proteins have been reported in 
many simpler organisms within and outside the Metazoa but they have not been 
found in fungi or plants. Several important signature motifs defining mammalian 
Myc proteins are found in the N-terminal domain but the extent to which these 
are found in the Myc-like proteins from simpler organisms is not well 
established. The extent of N-terminal signature sequence conservation would give 
important insights about the evolution of Myc proteins and their current 
function in mammalian physiology and disease. In a systematic study of Myc-like 
proteins we show that N-terminal signature motifs are not readily detectable in 
individual Myc-like proteins from invertebrates but that weak similarities to 
Myc boxes 1 and 2 can be found in the N-termini of the simplest Metazoa as well 
as the unicellular choanoflagellate, Monosiga brevicollis, using multiple 
protein alignments. Phylogenetic support for the connections of these proteins 
to established Myc proteins is however poor. We show that the pattern of 
predicted protein disorder along the length of Myc proteins can be used as a 
complementary approach to making dendrograms of Myc proteins that aids the 
classification of Myc proteins. This suggests that the pattern of disorder 
within Myc proteins is more conserved through evolution than their amino acid 
sequence. In the disorder-based dendrograms the Myc-like proteins from simpler 
organisms, including M. brevicollis, are connected to established Myc proteins 
with a higher degree of certainty. Our results suggest that protein disorder 
based dendrograms may be of general significance for studying distant 
relationships between proteins, such as transcription factors, that have high 
levels of intrinsic disorder.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075057
PMCID: PMC3782479
PMID: 24086436 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.