1. PLoS Pathog. 2013;9(9):e1003667. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003667. Epub 2013 
Sep 26.

Assisted evolution enables HIV-1 to overcome a high TRIM5α-imposed genetic 
barrier to rhesus macaque tropism.

Soll SJ(1), Wilson SJ, Kutluay SB, Hatziioannou T, Bieniasz PD.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Retrovirology, The Rockefeller University, New York, New York, 
United States of America ; Aaron Diamond AIDS Research Center, The Rockefeller 
University, New York, New York, United States of America ; Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute, The Rockefeller University, New York, New York, United States of 
America.

Diversification of antiretroviral factors during host evolution has erected 
formidable barriers to cross-species retrovirus transmission. This phenomenon 
likely protects humans from infection by many modern retroviruses, but it has 
also impaired the development of primate models of HIV-1 infection. Indeed, 
rhesus macaques are resistant to HIV-1, in part due to restriction imposed by 
the TRIM5α protein (rhTRIM5α). Initially, we attempted to derive 
rhTRIM5α-resistant HIV-1 strains using two strategies. First, HIV-1 was passaged 
in engineered human cells expressing rhTRIM5α. Second, a library of randomly 
mutagenized capsid protein (CA) sequences was screened for mutations that 
reduced rhTRIM5α sensitivity. Both approaches identified several individual 
mutations in CA that reduced rhTRIM5α sensitivity. However, neither approach 
yielded mutants that were fully resistant, perhaps because the locations of the 
mutations suggested that TRIM5α recognizes multiple determinants on the capsid 
surface. Moreover, even though additive effects of various CA mutations on HIV-1 
resistance to rhTRIM5α were observed, combinations that gave full resistance 
were highly detrimental to fitness. Therefore, we employed an 'assisted 
evolution' approach in which individual CA mutations that reduced rhTRIM5α 
sensitivity without fitness penalties were randomly assorted in a library of 
viral clones containing synthetic CA sequences. Subsequent passage of the viral 
library in rhTRIM5α-expressing cells resulted in the selection of individual 
viral species that were fully fit and resistant to rhTRIM5α. These viruses 
encoded combinations of five mutations in CA that conferred complete or near 
complete resistance to the disruptive effects of rhTRIM5α on incoming viral 
cores, by abolishing recognition of the viral capsid. Importantly, HIV-1 
variants encoding these CA substitutions and SIV(mac239) Vif replicated 
efficiently in primary rhesus macaque lymphocytes. These findings demonstrate 
that rhTRIM5α is difficult to but not impossible to evade, and doing so should 
facilitate the development of primate models of HIV-1 infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003667
PMCID: PMC3784476
PMID: 24086139 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.