1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2013;9(10):e1003218. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003218. Epub
 2013 Oct 3.

Thermal adaptation of conformational dynamics in ribonuclease H.

Stafford KA(1), Robustelli P, Palmer AG 3rd.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Columbia University, New 
York, New York, United States of America.

The relationship between inherent internal conformational processes and 
enzymatic activity or thermodynamic stability of proteins has proven difficult 
to characterize. The study of homologous proteins with differing 
thermostabilities offers an especially useful approach for understanding the 
functional aspects of conformational dynamics. In particular, ribonuclease HI 
(RNase H), an 18 kD globular protein that hydrolyzes the RNA strand of RNA:DNA 
hybrid substrates, has been extensively studied by NMR spectroscopy to 
characterize the differences in dynamics between homologs from the mesophilic 
organism E. coli and the thermophilic organism T. thermophilus. Herein, 
molecular dynamics simulations are reported for five homologous RNase H proteins 
of varying thermostabilities and enzymatic activities from organisms of markedly 
different preferred growth temperatures. For the E. coli and T. thermophilus 
proteins, strong agreement is obtained between simulated and experimental values 
for NMR order parameters and for dynamically averaged chemical shifts, 
suggesting that these simulations can be a productive platform for predicting 
the effects of individual amino acid residues on dynamic behavior. Analyses of 
the simulations reveal that a single residue differentiates between two 
different and otherwise conserved dynamic processes in a region of the protein 
known to form part of the substrate-binding interface. Additional key residues 
within these two categories are identified through the temperature-dependence of 
these conformational processes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003218
PMCID: PMC3789780
PMID: 24098095 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.