1. Iran J Basic Med Sci. 2013 Aug;16(8):928-35.

Interplay of Phosphorylated Apoptosis Repressor with CARD, Casein Kinase-2 and 
Reactive Oxygen Species in Regulating Endothelin-1-Induced Cardiomyocyte 
Hypertrophy.

Murtaza I(1), Wang HX, Mushtaq S, Javed Q, Li PF.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Research, National Key Laboratory of Biomembrane 
and Membrane Biotechnology, Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Beijing 100080, People's Republic of China ; Department of Biochemistry, Faculty 
of Biological Sciences, Quaid-i-Azam University Islamabad, 45320, Islamabad, 
Pakistan.

OBJECTIVE(S): The role of the Apoptosis repressor with caspase recruitment 
domain (ARC) in apoptosis and in certain hypertrophic responses has been 
previously investigated, but its regulation of Endothelin-1 induced cardiac 
hypertrophy remains unknown. The present study discusses the inhibitory role of 
ARC against endothelin-induced hypertrophy.
RESULTS: In present study Endothelin treated cardiomyocytes were used as a 
hypertrophic model, that were subsequently treated with adenovirus ARC and its 
mutant at different multiplicity of infections. Casein-kinase-2 inhibitors were 
used to produce dephosphorylated ARC and to study its effect on hypertrophy. 
Hypertrophy was assessed by cell surface area measurement, 
Atrial-natriuretic-Factor mRNA analysis and total protein assay. Reactive oxygen 
species analysis was carried out using the dichlorofluorescin-diacetate 
(DCFH-DA) assay. Over expression of ARC significantly inhibits 
Endothelin-induced cardiomyocyte hypertrophy. The nonphosphorylated mutant ARC 
(T149 A) remained unable to control endothelin-induced hypertrophy, suggesting a 
vital role for ARC phosphorylation in regulation of its activity. Sensitization 
study has been carried out to check the role of endogenous ARC using 
casein-kinase inhibitors. Finally, the significant role of ARC in regulating 
reactive oxygen species -mediated control of endothelin induced hypertrophy has 
also been assessed. Conclusion : Conclusively, present study showed the vital 
and potential therapeutic interventional role of ARC in preventing 
endothelin-1-induced cardiomyocyte hypertrophy. The regulation of hypertrophic 
pathway by ARC relies on blunting the reactive oxygen species attack. This study 
further suggests a mediatory role of casein-kinase-2 in Endothelin-induced 
hypertrophy, mainly through its phosphorylation of ARC.

PMCID: PMC3786106
PMID: 24106598