1. Biotechnol J. 2014 Apr;9(4):501-10. doi: 10.1002/biot.201300229. Epub 2013 Nov
 8.

Expression of human butyrylcholinesterase with an engineered glycosylation 
profile resembling the plasma-derived orthologue.

Schneider JD(1), Castilho A, Neumann L, Altmann F, Loos A, Kannan L, Mor TS, 
Steinkellner H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Applied Genetics and Cell Biology, University of Natural 
Resources and Life Sciences, Vienna, Austria.

Human butyrylcholinesterase (BChE) is considered a candidate bioscavenger of 
nerve agents for use in pre- and post-exposure treatment. However, the presence 
and functional necessity of complex N-glycans (i.e. sialylated structures) is a 
challenging issue in respect to its recombinant expression. Here we transiently 
co-expressed BChE cDNA in the model plant Nicotiana benthamiana with vectors 
carrying the genes necessary for in planta protein sialylation. Site-specific 
sugar profiling of secreted recombinant BChE (rBChE) collected from the 
intercellular fluid revealed the presence of mono- and di-sialylated N-glycans, 
which largely resembles to the plasma-derived orthologue. Attempts to increase 
that sialylation content of rBChE by the over-expression of an additional 
glycosylation enzyme that generates branched N-glycans (i.e. 
β1,4-N-acetylglucosaminyl-transferase IV), allowed the production of rBChE 
decorated with tri-sialylated structures (up to 70%). Sialylated and 
non-sialylated plant-derived rBChE exhibited functional in vitro activity 
comparable to that of its commercially available equine-derived counterpart. 
These results demonstrate the ability of plants to generate valuable proteins 
with designed sialylated glycosylation profiles optimized for therapeutic 
efficacy. Moreover, the efficient synthesis of carbohydrates present only in 
minute amounts on the native protein (tri-sialylated N-glycans) facilitates the 
generation of a product with superior efficacies and/or new therapeutic 
functions.

Copyright © 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/biot.201300229
PMCID: PMC3975692
PMID: 24130173 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors declare no 
commercial or financial conflict of interest.