1. Front Neural Circuits. 2013 Oct 11;7:162. doi: 10.3389/fncir.2013.00162. 
eCollection 2013.

Viral vector-mediated selective and reversible blockade of the pathway for 
visual orienting in mice.

Sooksawate T(1), Isa K, Matsui R, Kato S, Kinoshita M, Kobayashi K, Watanabe D, 
Kobayashi K, Isa T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental Physiology, National Institute for Physiological 
Sciences Okazaki, Japan ; Department of Pharmacology and Physiology, Faculty of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Chulalongkorn University Bangkok, Thailand.

Recently, by using a combination of two viral vectors, we developed a technique 
for pathway-selective and reversible synaptic transmission blockade, and 
successfully induced a behavioral deficit of dexterous hand movements in macaque 
monkeys by affecting a population of spinal interneurons. To explore the 
capacity of this technique to work in other pathways and species, and to obtain 
fundamental methodological information, we tried to block the crossed 
tecto-reticular pathway, which is known to control orienting responses to visual 
targets, in mice. A neuron-specific retrograde gene transfer vector with the 
gene encoding enhanced tetanus neurotoxin (eTeNT) tagged with enhanced green 
fluorescent protein (EGFP) under the control of a tetracycline responsive 
element was injected into the left medial pontine reticular formation. 7-17 days 
later, an adeno-associated viral vector with a highly efficient Tet-ON sequence, 
rtTAV16, was injected into the right superior colliculus. 5-9 weeks later, the 
daily administration of doxycycline (Dox) was initiated. Visual orienting 
responses toward the left side were impaired 1-4 days after Dox administration. 
Anti-GFP immunohistochemistry revealed that a number of neurons in the 
intermediate and deep layers of the right superior colliculus were positively 
stained, indicating eTeNT expression. After the termination of Dox 
administration, the anti-GFP staining returned to the baseline level within 28 
days. A second round of Dox administration, starting from 28 days after the 
termination of the first Dox administration, resulted in the reappearance of the 
behavioral impairment. These findings showed that pathway-selective and 
reversible blockade of synaptic transmission also causes behavioral effects in 
rodents, and that the crossed tecto-reticular pathway clearly controls visual 
orienting behaviors.

DOI: 10.3389/fncir.2013.00162
PMCID: PMC3795302
PMID: 24130520 [Indexed for MEDLINE]