1. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 16;8(10):e75653. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075653. 
eCollection 2013.

Diatom proteomics reveals unique acclimation strategies to mitigate Fe 
limitation.

Nunn BL(1), Faux JF, Hippmann AA, Maldonado MT, Harvey HR, Goodlett DR, Boyd PW, 
Strzepek RF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, 
United States of America ; Medicinal Chemistry Department, University of 
Washington, Seattle, Washington, United States of America.

Phytoplankton growth rates are limited by the supply of iron (Fe) in 
approximately one third of the open ocean, with major implications for carbon 
dioxide sequestration and carbon (C) biogeochemistry. To date, understanding how 
alteration of Fe supply changes phytoplankton physiology has focused on 
traditional metrics such as growth rate, elemental composition, and biophysical 
measurements such as photosynthetic competence (Fv/Fm). Researchers have 
subsequently employed transcriptomics to probe relationships between changes in 
Fe supply and phytoplankton physiology. Recently, studies have investigated 
longer-term (i.e. following acclimation) responses of phytoplankton to various 
Fe conditions. In the present study, the coastal diatom, Thalassiosira 
pseudonana, was acclimated (10 generations) to either low or high Fe conditions, 
i.e. Fe-limiting and Fe-replete. Quantitative proteomics and a newly developed 
proteomic profiling technique that identifies low abundance proteins were 
employed to examine the full complement of expressed proteins and consequently 
the metabolic pathways utilized by the diatom under the two Fe conditions. A 
total of 1850 proteins were confidently identified, nearly tripling previous 
identifications made from differential expression in diatoms. Given sufficient 
time to acclimate to Fe limitation, T. pseudonana up-regulates proteins involved 
in pathways associated with intracellular protein recycling, thereby decreasing 
dependence on extracellular nitrogen (N), C and Fe. The relative increase in the 
abundance of photorespiration and pentose phosphate pathway proteins reveal 
novel metabolic shifts, which create substrates that could support other 
well-established physiological responses, such as heavily silicified frustules 
observed for Fe-limited diatoms. Here, we discovered that proteins and hence 
pathways observed to be down-regulated in short-term Fe starvation studies are 
constitutively expressed when T. pseudonana is acclimated (i.e., nitrate and 
nitrite transporters, Photosystem II and Photosystem I complexes). Acclimation 
of the diatom to the desired Fe conditions and the comprehensive proteomic 
approach provides a more robust interpretation of this dynamic proteome than 
previous studies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075653
PMCID: PMC3797725
PMID: 24146769 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.