1. Ophthalmology. 2014 Jan;121(1):399-407. doi: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2013.08.028.
Epub  2013 Oct 18.

Involvement of LCA5 in Leber congenital amaurosis and retinitis pigmentosa in 
the Spanish population.

Corton M(1), Avila-Fernandez A(1), Vallespín E(2), López-Molina MI(3), Almoguera 
B(1), Martín-Garrido E(1), Tatu SD(1), Khan MI(4), Blanco-Kelly F(1), 
Riveiro-Alvarez R(1), Brión M(5), García-Sandoval B(3), Cremers FPM(4), 
Carracedo A(6), Ayuso C(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, IIS - Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain; Centre 
for Biomedical Network Research on Rare Diseases, ISCIII, Valencia, Spain.
(2)Instituto de Genética Médica y Molecular, IdiPaz, Hospital Universitario La 
Paz, Madrid, Spain; Centre for Biomedical Network Research on Rare Diseases, 
ISCIII, Valencia, Spain.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain; Centre 
for Biomedical Network Research on Rare Diseases, ISCIII, Valencia, Spain.
(4)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands.
(5)Genetics of Cardiovascular and Ophthalmologic Diseases, Instituto de 
Investigación Sanitaria de Santiago de Compostela, RIC, Spain; Centre for 
Biomedical Network Research on Rare Diseases, ISCIII, Valencia, Spain.
(6)Genomic Medicine Group-USC, Fundación Publica Galega de Medicina Xenómica, 
Santiago de Compostela, Spain; Centre for Biomedical Network Research on Rare 
Diseases, ISCIII, Valencia, Spain.
(7)Department of Genetics, IIS - Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain; Centre 
for Biomedical Network Research on Rare Diseases, ISCIII, Valencia, Spain. 
Electronic address: cayuso@fjd.es.

OBJECTIVE: We aimed to identify novel genetic defects in the LCA5 gene 
underlying Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA) in the Spanish population and to 
describe the associated phenotype.
DESIGN: Case series.
PARTICIPANTS: A cohort of 217 unrelated Spanish families affected by autosomal 
recessive or isolated retinal dystrophy, that is, 79 families with LCA and 138 
families with early-onset retinitis pigmentosa (EORP). A total of 100 healthy, 
unrelated Spanish individuals were screened as controls.
METHODS: High-resolution homozygosity mapping was performed in 44 patients with 
LCA using genome-wide single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) microarrays. Direct 
sequencing of the LCA5 gene was performed in 5 patients who showed homozygous 
regions at chromosome 6 and in 173 unrelated individuals with LCA or EORP. The 
ophthalmic history of 8 patients carrying LCA5 mutations was reviewed and 
additional examinations were performed, including electroretinography (ERG), 
optical coherence tomography (OCT), and fundus photography.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Single nucleotide polymorphism genotyping, 
identity-by-descent (IBD) regions, LCA5 mutations, best-corrected visual acuity, 
visual field assessments, fundus appearance, ERG, and OCT findings.
RESULTS: Four novel and 2 previously reported LCA5 mutations have been 
identified in 6 unrelated families with LCA by homozygosity mapping or Sanger 
sequencing. Thus, LCA5 mutations have a frequency of 7.6% in the Spanish 
population. However, no LCA5 mutations were found in 138 patients with EORP. 
Although most of the identified LCA5 mutations led to a truncated protein, a 
likely pathogenic missense variant was identified for the first time as a cause 
of LCA, segregating in 2 families. We also have characterized a novel splicing 
site mutation at the RNA level, demonstrating that the mutant LCA5 transcript 
was absent in a patient. All patients carrying LCA5 mutations presented 
nystagmus, night blindness, and progressive loss of visual acuity and visual 
field leading to blindness toward the third decade of life. Fundoscopy showed 
fundus features of pigmentary retinopathy with atrophic macular lesions.
CONCLUSIONS: This work reveals a higher frequency of LCA5 mutations in a Spanish 
LCA cohort than in other populations. This study established gene-specific 
frequencies and the underlying phenotype of LCA5 mutations in the Spanish 
population.

Copyright © 2014 American Academy of Ophthalmology. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2013.08.028
PMID: 24144451 [Indexed for MEDLINE]