1. J Chem Theory Comput. 2013;9(9):4046-4063. doi: 10.1021/ct4003702.

The Polarizable Atomic Multipole-based AMOEBA Force Field for Proteins.

Shi Y(1), Xia Z, Zhang J, Best R, Wu C, Ponder JW, Ren P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin, 
Austin, TX 78712.

Development of the AMOEBA (Atomic Multipole Optimized Energetics for 
Biomolecular Simulation) force field for proteins is presented. The current 
version (AMOEBA-2013) utilizes permanent electrostatic multipole moments through 
the quadrupole at each atom, and explicitly treats polarization effects in 
various chemical and physical environments. The atomic multipole electrostatic 
parameters for each amino acid residue type are derived from high-level gas 
phase quantum mechanical calculations via a consistent and extensible protocol. 
Molecular polarizability is modeled via a Thole-style damped interactive 
induction model based upon distributed atomic polarizabilities. Inter- and 
intramolecular polarization is treated in a consistent fashion via the Thole 
model. The intramolecular polarization model ensures transferability of 
electrostatic parameters among different conformations, as demonstrated by the 
agreement between QM and AMOEBA electrostatic potentials, and dipole moments of 
dipeptides. The backbone and side chain torsional parameters were determined by 
comparing to gas-phase QM (RI-TRIM MP2/CBS) conformational energies of 
dipeptides and to statistical distributions from the Protein Data Bank. 
Molecular dynamics simulations are reported for short peptides in explicit water 
to examine their conformational properties in solution. Overall the calculated 
conformational free energies and J-coupling constants are consistent with PDB 
statistics and experimental NMR results, respectively. In addition, the 
experimental crystal structures of a number of proteins are well maintained 
during molecular dynamics (MD) simulation. While further calculations are 
necessary to fully validate the force field, initial results suggest the AMOEBA 
polarizable multipole force field is able to describe the structure and 
energetics of peptides and proteins, in both gas-phase and solution 
environments.

DOI: 10.1021/ct4003702
PMCID: PMC3806652
PMID: 24163642

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.