1. J Exp Bot. 2014 Jan;65(1):47-59. doi: 10.1093/jxb/ert346. Epub 2013 Oct 29.

Variation in Rubisco activase (RCAβ) gene promoters and expression in soybean 
[Glycine max (L.) Merr].

Chao M(1), Yin Z, Hao D, Zhang J, Song H, Ning A, Xu X, Yu D.

Author information:
(1)National Center for Soybean Improvement, National Key Laboratory of Crop 
Genetics and Germplasm Enhancement, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing 
210095, China.

Understanding the genetic basis of Rubisco activase (RCA) gene regulation and 
altering its expression levels to optimize Rubisco activation may provide an 
approach to enhance plant productivity. However, the genetic mechanisms and the 
effect of RCA expression on phenotype are still unknown in soybean. This work 
analysed the expression of RCA genes and demonstrated that two RCA isoforms 
presented different expression patterns. Compared with GmRCAα, GmRCAβ was 
expressed at higher mRNA and protein levels. In addition, GmRCAα and GmRCAβ were 
positively correlated with chlorophyll fluorescence parameters and seed yield, 
suggesting that changes in expression of RCA has a potential applicability in 
breeding for enhanced soybean productivity. To identify the genetic factors that 
cause expression level variation of GmRCAβ, expression quantitative trait loci 
(eQTL) mapping was combined with allele mining in a natural population including 
219 landraces. The eQTL mapping showed that a combination of both cis- and 
trans-acting eQTLs might control GmRCAβ expression. As promoters can affect both 
cis- and trans-acting eQTLs by altering cis-acting regulatory elements or 
transcription factor binding sites, this work subsequently focused on the 
promoter region of GmRCAβ. Single-nucleotide polymorphisms in the GmRCAβ 
promoter were identified and shown to correlate with expression level diversity. 
These SNPs were classified into two groups, A and B. Further transient 
expression showed that GUS expression driven by the group A promoter was 
stronger than that by the group B promoter, suggesting that promoter sequence 
types could influence gene expression levels. These results would improve 
understanding how variation within promoters affects gene expression and, 
ultimately, phenotypic diversity in natural populations.

DOI: 10.1093/jxb/ert346
PMCID: PMC3883283
PMID: 24170743 [Indexed for MEDLINE]