1. BMC Genomics. 2013 Nov 1;14(1):750. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-750.

Heterogeneity in the entire genome for three genotypes of peach [Prunus persica 
(L.) Batsch] as distinguished from sequence analysis of genomic variants.

Fresnedo-Ramírez J(1), Martínez-García PJ, Parfitt DE, Crisosto CH, Gradziel TM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Sciences, University of California Davis, One Shields 
Ave, Davis, CA 95616, USA. jfresnedoramirez@ucdavis.edu.

BACKGROUND: Peach [Prunus persica (L.) Batsch] is an economically important 
fruit crop that has become a genetic-genomic model for all Prunus species in the 
family Rosaceae. A doubled haploid reference genome sequence length of 227.3 Mb, 
a narrow genetic base contrasted by a wide phenotypic variability, the 
generation of cultivars through hybridization with subsequent clonal 
propagation, and the current accessibility of many founder genotypes, as well as 
the pedigree of modern commercial cultivars make peach a model for the study of 
inter-cultivar genomic heterogeneity and its shaping by artificial selection.
RESULTS: The quantitative genomic differences among the three genotypes studied 
as genomic variants, included small variants (SNPs and InDels) and structural 
variants (SV) (duplications, inversions and translocations). The heirloom 
cultivar 'Georgia Belle' and an almond by peach introgression breeding line 
'F8,1-42' are more heterogeneous than is the modern cultivar 'Dr. Davis' when 
compared to the peach reference genome ('Lovell'). A pair-wise comparison of 
consensus genome sequences with 'Lovell' showed that 'F8,1-42' and 'Georgia 
Belle' were more divergent than were 'Dr. Davis' and 'Lovell'.
CONCLUSIONS: A novel application of emerging bioinformatics tools to the 
analysis of ongoing genome sequencing project outputs has led to the 
identification of a range of genomic variants. Results can be used to delineate 
the genomic and phenotypic differences among peach genotypes. For crops such as 
fruit trees, the availability of old cultivars, breeding selections and their 
pedigrees, make them suitable models for the study of genome shaping by 
artificial selection. The findings from the study of such genomic variants can 
then elucidate the control of pomological traits and the characterization of 
metabolic pathways, thus facilitating the development of protocols for the 
improvement of Prunus crops.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-750
PMCID: PMC4046826
PMID: 24182359 [Indexed for MEDLINE]