1. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 21;8(10):e78829. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0078829. 
eCollection 2013.

Industrial robustness: understanding the mechanism of tolerance for the Populus 
hydrolysate-tolerant mutant strain of Clostridium thermocellum.

Linville JL(1), Rodriguez M Jr, Land M, Syed MH, Engle NL, Tschaplinski TJ, 
Mielenz JR, Cox CD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of Tennessee, 
Knoxville, Tennessee, United States of America ; Bioenergy Science Center, Oak 
Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, Tennessee, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: An industrially robust microorganism that can efficiently degrade 
and convert lignocellulosic biomass into ethanol and next-generation fuels is 
required to economically produce future sustainable liquid transportation fuels. 
The anaerobic, thermophilic, cellulolytic bacterium Clostridium thermocellum is 
a candidate microorganism for such conversions but it, like many bacteria, is 
sensitive to potential toxic inhibitors developed in the liquid hydrolysate 
produced during biomass processing. Microbial processes leading to tolerance of 
these inhibitory compounds found in the pretreated biomass hydrolysate are 
likely complex and involve multiple genes.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In this study, we developed a 17.5% v/v Populus 
hydrolysate tolerant mutant strain of C. thermocellum by directed evolution. The 
genome of the wild type strain, six intermediate population samples and seven 
single colony isolates were sequenced to elucidate the mechanism of tolerance. 
Analysis of the 224 putative mutations revealed 73 high confidence mutations. A 
longitudinal analysis of the intermediate population samples, a pan-genomic 
analysis of the isolates, and a hotspot analysis revealed 24 core genes common 
to all seven isolates and 8 hotspots. Genetic mutations were matched with the 
observed phenotype through comparison of RNA expression levels during 
fermentation by the wild type strain and mutant isolate 6 in various 
concentrations of Populus hydrolysate (0%, 10%, and 17.5% v/v).
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: The findings suggest that there are multiple mutations 
responsible for the Populus hydrolysate tolerant phenotype resulting in several 
simultaneous mechanisms of action, including increases in cellular repair, and 
altered energy metabolism. To date, this study provides the most comprehensive 
elucidation of the mechanism of tolerance to a pretreated biomass hydrolysate by 
C. thermocellum. These findings make important contributions to the development 
of industrially robust strains of consolidated bioprocessing microorganisms.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0078829
PMCID: PMC3804516
PMID: 24205326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have read the 
Journal's policy and have the following conflicts: 1. CDC has a financial 
interest (stock ownership) in Renmatix, Inc. Renmatix is developing technology 
to produce sugars from biomass via abiotic processes. He acquired stock by 
exercising options awarded to him as compensation for providing technical advice 
in the early history of the company. He no longer has any relationship with the 
company other than stock ownership. It is unlikely that he would be unable to 
affect the future value of the stock through this publication, even if he were 
motivated to do so. 2. CDC is the Director of the Institute for a Secure and 
Sustainable Environment which provided funding to support JLL through 
institutional funds that he has been entrusted to administer. This does not 
alter the authors' adherence to all the PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and 
materials.