1. Front Physiol. 2013 Nov 14;4:323. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2013.00323. eCollection 
2013.

New advances in beta-blocker therapy in heart failure.

Barrese V(1), Taglialatela M.

Author information:
(1)Section of Pharmacology, Department of Neuroscience, University of Naples 
Federico II Naples, Italy.

The use of β-blockers (BB) in heart failure (HF) has been considered a 
contradiction for many years. Considering HF simply as a state of inadequate 
systolic function, BB were contraindicated because of their negative effects on 
myocardial contractility. Nevertheless, evidence collected in the past years 
have suggested that additional mechanisms, such as compensatory neuro-humoral 
hyperactivation or inflammation, could participate in the pathogenesis of this 
complex disease. Indeed, chronic activation of the sympathetic nervous system, 
although initially compensating the reduced cardiac output from the failing 
heart, increases myocardial oxygen demand, ischemia and oxidative stress; 
moreover, high catecholamine levels induce peripheral vasoconstriction and 
increase both cardiac pre- and after-load, thus determining additional stress to 
the cardiac muscle (1). As a consequence of such a different view of the 
pathogenic mechanisms of HF, the efficacy of BB in the treatment of HF has been 
investigated in numerous clinical trials. Results from these trials highlighted 
BB as valid therapeutic tools in HF, providing rational basis for their 
inclusion in many HF treatment guidelines. However, controversy still exists 
about their use, in particular with regards to the selection of specific 
molecules, since BB differ in terms of adrenergic β-receptors selectivity, 
adjunctive effects on α-receptors, and effects on reactive oxygen species and 
inflammatory cytokines production. Further concerns about the heterogeneity in 
the response to BB, as well as the use in specific patients, are matter of 
debate among clinicians. In this review, we will recapitulate the 
pharmacological properties and the classification of BB, and the alteration of 
the adrenergic system occurring during HF that provide a rationale for their 
use; we will also focus on the possible molecular mechanisms, such as genetic 
polymorphisms, underlying the different efficacy of molecules belonging to this 
class.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2013.00323
PMCID: PMC3827547
PMID: 24294204