1. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 2;8(12):e81183. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0081183. 
eCollection 2013.

Tumor versus stromal cells in culture--survival of the fittest?

Talasila KM(1), Brekka N(1), Mangseth K(2), Stieber D(3), Evensen L(1), Rosland 
GV(1), Torsvik A(1), Wagner M(1), Niclou SP(3), Mahesparan R(4), Vintermyr 
OK(2), Bjerkvig R(5), Nigro JM(1), Miletic H(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(2)Department of Pathology, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway.
(3)NorLux Neuro-Oncology Laboratory, Department of Oncology, Centre de Recherche 
Public de la Santé (CRP-Santé), Luxembourg, Luxembourg.
(4)Department of Neurosurgery, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway.
(5)Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway ; NorLux 
Neuro-Oncology Laboratory, Department of Oncology, Centre de Recherche Public de 
la Santé (CRP-Santé), Luxembourg, Luxembourg.
(6)Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway ; Department 
of Pathology, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway.

Two of the signature genetic events that occur in human gliomas, EGFR 
amplification and IDH mutation, are poorly represented in experimental models in 
vitro. EGFR amplification, for example, occurs in 40 to 50% of GBM, and yet, 
EGFR amplification is rarely preserved in cell cultures derived from human 
tumors. To analyze the fate of EGFR amplified and IDH mutated cells in culture, 
we followed the development over time of cultures derived from human xenografts 
in nude rats enriched for tumor cells with EGFR amplification and of cultures 
derived from patient samples with IDH mutations, in serum monolayer and spheroid 
suspension culture, under serum and serum free conditions. We observed under 
serum monolayer conditions, that nestin positive or nestin and SMA double 
positive rat stromal cells outgrew EGFR amplified tumor cells, while serum 
spheroid cultures preserved tumor cells with EGFR amplification. Serum free 
suspension culture exhibited a more variable cell composition in that the 
resultant cell populations were either predominantly nestin/SOX2 co-expressing 
rat stromal cells or human tumor cells, or a mixture of both. The selection for 
nestin/SMA positive stromal cells under serum monolayer conditions was also 
consistently observed in human oligodendrogliomas and oligoastrocytomas with IDH 
mutations. Our results highlight for the first time that serum monolayer 
conditions can select for stromal cells instead of tumor cells in certain brain 
tumor subtypes. This result has an important impact on the establishment of new 
tumor cell cultures from brain tumors and raises the question of the proper 
conditions for the growth of the tumor cell populations of interest.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0081183
PMCID: PMC3857854
PMID: 24349039 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.