1. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 11;8(12):e82549. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0082549. 
eCollection 2013.

CLCN1 mutations in Czech patients with myotonia congenita, in silico analysis of 
novel and known mutations in the human dimeric skeletal muscle chloride channel.

Skálová D(1), Zídková J(1), Voháňka S(2), Mazanec R(3), Mušová Z(4), Vondráček 
P(5), Mrázová L(5), Kraus J(6), Réblová K(7), Fajkusová L(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre of Molecular Biology and Gene Therapy, University Hospital, Brno, 
Brno, Czech Republic ; Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk 
University, Brno, Czech Republic.
(2)Department of Neurology, University Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech Republic.
(3)Department of Neurology, Charles University Second Faculty of Medicine and 
University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic.
(4)Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University Second Faculty 
of Medicine and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic.
(5)Department of Child Neurology, University Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech 
Republic.
(6)Department of Child Neurology, Second School of Medicine, Charles University 
and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic.
(7)Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech 
Republic.

Myotonia congenita (MC) is a genetic disease caused by mutations in the skeletal 
muscle chloride channel gene (CLCN1) encoding the skeletal muscle chloride 
channel (ClC-1). Mutations of CLCN1 result in either autosomal dominant MC 
(Thomsen disease) or autosomal recessive MC (Becker disease). The ClC-1 protein 
is a homodimer with a separate ion pore within each monomer. Mutations causing 
recessive myotonia most likely affect properties of only the mutant monomer in 
the heterodimer, leaving the wild type monomer unaffected, while mutations 
causing dominant myotonia affect properties of both subunits in the heterodimer. 
Our study addresses two points: 1) molecular genetic diagnostics of MC by 
analysis of the CLCN1 gene and 2) structural analysis of mutations in the 
homology model of the human dimeric ClC-1 protein. In the first part, 34 
different types of CLCN1 mutations were identified in 51 MC probands (14 
mutations were new). In the second part, on the basis of the homology model we 
identified the amino acids which forming the dimer interface and those which 
form the Cl(-) ion pathway. In the literature, we searched for mutations of 
these amino acids for which functional analyses were performed to assess the 
correlation between localisation of a mutation and occurrence of a 
dominant-negative effect (corresponding to dominant MC). This revealed that both 
types of mutations, with and without a dominant-negative effect, are localised 
at the dimer interface while solely mutations without a dominant-negative effect 
occur inside the chloride channel. This work is complemented by structural 
analysis of the homology model which provides elucidation of the effects of 
mutations, including a description of impacts of newly detected missense 
mutations.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0082549
PMCID: PMC3859631
PMID: 24349310 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.