1. Front Cell Neurosci. 2013 Nov 27;7:213. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2013.00213. 
eCollection 2013.

Optogenetically evoked gamma oscillations are disturbed by cocaine 
administration.

Dilgen JE(1), Tompa T(2), Saggu S(3), Naselaris T(1), Lavin A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Medical University of South Carolina Charleston, 
SC, USA.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, Medical University of South Carolina Charleston, 
SC, USA ; Faculty of Healthcare, Department of Preventive Medicine, University 
of Miskolc Miskolc, Hungary.
(3)Department of Neuroscience, Medical University of South Carolina Charleston, 
SC, USA ; Faculty of Sciences, Department of Biology, University of Tabuk Tabuk, 
Saudi Arabia.

Drugs of abuse have enormous societal impact by degrading the cognitive 
abilities, emotional state and social behavior of addicted individuals. Among 
other events involved in the addiction cycle, the study of a single exposure to 
cocaine, and the contribution of the effects of that event to the continuous and 
further use of drugs of abuse are fundamental. Gamma oscillations are thought to 
be important neural correlates of cognitive processing in the prefrontal cortex 
(PFC) which include decision making, set shifting and working memory. It follows 
that cocaine exposure might modulate gamma oscillations, which could result in 
reduced cognitive ability. Parvalbumin-positive fast-spiking interneurons play 
an orchestrating role in gamma oscillation induction and it has been shown 
recently that gamma oscillations can be induced in an anesthetized animal using 
optogenetic techniques. We use a knock-in mouse model together with optogenetics 
and in vivo electrophysiology to study the effects of acute cocaine on PFC gamma 
oscillation as a step toward understanding the cortical changes that may 
underlie continuous use of stimulants. Our results show that acute cocaine 
administration increases entrainment of the gamma oscillation to the 
optogentically induced driving frequency. Our results also suggest that this 
modulation of gamma oscillations is driven trough activation of D1 receptors. 
The acute cocaine-mediated changes in mPFC may underlie the enhancement of 
attention and awareness commonly reported by cocaine users and may contribute to 
the further use and abuse of psychostimulants.

DOI: 10.3389/fncel.2013.00213
PMCID: PMC3841795
PMID: 24376397