1. Mol Pharm. 2014 Feb 3;11(2):545-59. doi: 10.1021/mp4005035. Epub 2014 Jan 6.

Modulation of pyridinium cationic lipid-DNA complex properties by pyridinium 
gemini surfactants and its impact on lipoplex transfection properties.

Sharma VD(1), Lees J, Hoffman NE, Brailoiu E, Madesh M, Wunder SL, Ilies MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences and Moulder Center for Drug Discovery 
Research, Temple University School of Pharmacy , 3307 N. Broad Street, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19140, United States.

The study presents the effects of blending a cationic gemini surfactant into 
cationic lipid bilayers and its impact on the plasmid DNA compaction and 
delivery process. Using nanoDSC, dynamic light scattering, zeta potential, and 
electrophoretic mobility measurements, together with transfection (2D- and 3D-) 
and viability assays, we identified the main physicochemical parameters of the 
lipid bilayers, liposomes, and lipoplexes that are affected by the gemini 
surfactant addition. We also correlated the cationic bilayer composition with 
the dynamics of the DNA compaction process and with transfection efficiency, 
cytotoxicity, and the internalization mechanism of the resultant nucleic acid 
complexes. We found that the blending of gemini surfactant into the cationic 
bilayers fluidized the supramolecular assemblies, reduced the amount of positive 
charge required to fully compact the plasmid DNA and, in certain cases, changed 
the internalization mechanism of the lipoplexes. The transfection efficiency of 
select ternary lipoplexes derived from cationic gemini surfactants and lipids 
was several times superior to the transfection efficiency of corresponding 
binary lipoplexes, also surpassing standard transfection systems. The overall 
impact of gemini surfactants into the formation and dynamic of cationic bilayers 
was found to depend heavily on the presence of colipids, their nature, and 
amount present in lipoplexes. The study confirmed the possibility of combining 
the specific properties of pyridinium gemini surfactants and cationic lipids 
synergistically to obtain efficient synthetic transfection systems with 
negligible cytotoxicity useful for therapeutic gene delivery.

DOI: 10.1021/mp4005035
PMCID: PMC4031282
PMID: 24377350 [Indexed for MEDLINE]