1. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(12):e1004071. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004071. Epub 2013 
Dec 26.

Smc5/6 coordinates formation and resolution of joint molecules with chromosome 
morphology to ensure meiotic divisions.

Copsey A(1), Tang S(2), Jordan PW(1), Blitzblau HG(3), Newcombe S(1), Chan 
AC(1), Newnham L(1), Li Z(1), Gray S(1), Herbert AD(1), Arumugam P(4), Hochwagen 
A(5), Hunter N(6), Hoffmann E(1).

Author information:
(1)MRC Genome Damage and Stability Centre, University of Sussex, Brighton, 
United Kingdom.
(2)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California, Davis, Davis, 
California, United States of America ; Department of Microbiology & Molecular 
Genetics, University of California, Davis, Davis, California, United States of 
America.
(3)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United 
States of America.
(4)Department of Life Sciences, University of Warwick, Coventry, United Kingdom.
(5)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United 
States of America ; Department of Biology, New York University, New York, New 
York, United States of America.
(6)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California, Davis, Davis, 
California, United States of America ; Department of Microbiology & Molecular 
Genetics, University of California, Davis, Davis, California, United States of 
America ; Department of Biology, New York University, New York, New York, United 
States of America ; Department of Molecular & Cellular Biology, University of 
California, Davis, Davis, California, United States of America ; Department of 
Cell Biology & Human Anatomy, University of California, Davis, Davis, 
California, United States of America.

During meiosis, Structural Maintenance of Chromosome (SMC) complexes underpin 
two fundamental features of meiosis: homologous recombination and chromosome 
segregation. While meiotic functions of the cohesin and condensin complexes have 
been delineated, the role of the third SMC complex, Smc5/6, remains enigmatic. 
Here we identify specific, essential meiotic functions for the Smc5/6 complex in 
homologous recombination and the regulation of cohesin. We show that Smc5/6 is 
enriched at centromeres and cohesin-association sites where it regulates 
sister-chromatid cohesion and the timely removal of cohesin from chromosomal 
arms, respectively. Smc5/6 also localizes to recombination hotspots, where it 
promotes normal formation and resolution of a subset of joint-molecule 
intermediates. In this regard, Smc5/6 functions independently of the major 
crossover pathway defined by the MutLγ complex. Furthermore, we show that Smc5/6 
is required for stable chromosomal localization of the XPF-family endonuclease, 
Mus81-Mms4(Eme1). Our data suggest that the Smc5/6 complex is required for 
specific recombination and chromosomal processes throughout meiosis and that in 
its absence, attempts at cell division with unresolved joint molecules and 
residual cohesin lead to severe recombination-induced meiotic catastrophe.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004071
PMCID: PMC3873251
PMID: 24385939 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.