1. J Tehran Heart Cent. 2013 Jul;8(3):127-31. Epub 2013 Jul 30.

Adenosine Preconditioning versus Ischemic Preconditioning in Patients undergoing 
Off-Pump Coronary Artery Bypass (OPCAB).

Forouzannia SK(1), Abdollahi MH(1), Mirhosseini SJ(1), Hadadzadeh M(1), Zarepur 
R(1), Zarepur E(1), Beiki O(2), Sarebanhassanabadi M(1).

Author information:
(1)Yazd Cardiovascular Research Center, Shahid Sadoughi University of Medical 
Sciences, Yazd, Iran.
(2)Kermanshah University of Medical Sciences, Kermanshah, Iran.

BACKGROUND: During off-pump coronary artery bypass (OPCAB), the heart is 
subjected to ischemic and reperfusion injury. Preconditioning is a mechanism 
that permits the heart to tolerate myocardial ischemia. The aim of this study 
was to compare the effects of Adenosine preconditioning with ischemic 
preconditioning on the global ejection fraction (EF) in patients undergoing 
OPCAB.
METHODS: In this single-blind, randomized controlled trial, sixty patients 
undergoing OPCAB were allocated into three equally-numbered groups through 
simple randomization: Adenosine group, ischemic group, and control group. The 
patients in the Adenosine group received an infusion of Adenosine. In the 
ischemic group, ischemic preconditioning was induced by the temporary occlusion 
of the left anterior descending coronary artery twice for a 2-minute period, 
followed by 3-minute reperfusion before bypass grafting of the first coronary 
vessel. The control group received an intravenous infusion of 0.9% saline. Blood 
samples at different times were sent for the measurement of creatine kinase 
isoenzyme MB (CK-MB) and cardiac troponin I (cTnI). We also recorded 
electrocardiographic indices and clinical parameters, including postoperative 
use of inotropic drugs and preoperative and postoperative EF.
RESULTS: History of myocardial infarction, hyperlipidemia, diabetes mellitus, 
kidney disease, preoperative arrhythmias, and utilization of postoperative 
inotrope was the same between the three groups. The incidence of postoperative 
arrhythmias was not significant between the three groups. Also, there were no 
significant differences in preoperative and postoperative EF and the serum 
levels of enzymes (cTnI and CK-MB) between the groups.
CONCLUSION: Based on the findings of this study, there was no significant 
difference in the postoperative EF between the groups. Although the incidence of 
arrhythmias was higher in the ischemic preconditioning group than in the other 
groups, the difference between the groups did not constitute statistical 
significance.

PMCID: PMC3874371
PMID: 24396361