1. J Comp Neurol. 2014 Jul 1;522(10):2319-35. doi: 10.1002/cne.23536.

Early fear memory defects are associated with altered synaptic plasticity and 
molecular architecture in the TgCRND8 Alzheimer's disease mouse model.

Steele JW(1), Brautigam H, Short JA, Sowa A, Shi M, Yadav A, Weaver CM, Westaway 
D, Fraser PE, St George-Hyslop PH, Gandy S, Hof PR, Dickstein DL.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience, Rockefeller University, 
New York, NY, 10065, USA; Fishberg Department of Neuroscience, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, 10029, USA; Department of Neurology, 
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, 10029, USA. 
jsteele@amicusrx.com.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a complex and slowly progressing dementing disorder 
that results in neuronal and synaptic loss, deposition in brain of aberrantly 
folded proteins, and impairment of spatial and episodic memory. Most studies of 
mouse models of AD have employed analyses of cognitive status and assessment of 
amyloid burden, gliosis, and molecular pathology during disease progression. 
Here we sought to understand the behavioral, cellular, ultrastructural, and 
molecular changes that occur at a pathological stage equivalent to the early 
stages of human AD. We studied the TgCRND8 mouse, a model of aggressive AD 
amyloidosis, at an early stage of plaque pathology (3 months of age) in 
comparison to their wildtype littermates and assessed changes in cognition, 
neuron and spine structure, and expression of synaptic glutamate receptor 
proteins. We found that, at this age, TgCRND8 mice display substantial plaque 
deposition in the neocortex and hippocampus and impairment on cued and 
contextual memory tasks. Of particular interest, we also observed a significant 
decrease in the number of neurons in the hippocampus. Furthermore, analysis of 
CA1 neurons revealed significant changes in apical and basal dendritic spine 
types, as well as altered expression of GluN1 and GluA2 receptors. This change 
in molecular architecture within the hippocampus may reflect a rising 
representation of inherently less stable thin spine populations, which can cause 
cognitive decline. These changes, taken together with toxic insults from 
amyloid-β protein, may underlie the observed neuronal loss.

Copyright © 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/cne.23536
PMCID: PMC4251468
PMID: 24415002 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors 
declare no competing financial interests.