1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2014 Jan 9;8(1):e2637. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0002637. 
eCollection 2014.

Production of CXC and CC chemokines by human antigen-presenting cells in 
response to Lassa virus or closely related immunogenic viruses, and in 
cynomolgus monkeys with lassa fever.

Pannetier D(1), Reynard S(2), Russier M(2), Carnec X(3), Baize S(2).

Author information:
(1)Unité de Biologie des Infections Virales Emergentes, Institut Pasteur, Lyon, 
France ; Laboratoire P4 Inserm-Jean Mérieux, US003, Lyon, France.
(2)Unité de Biologie des Infections Virales Emergentes, Institut Pasteur, Lyon, 
France ; Centre International de Recherche en Infectiologie (CIRI), Université 
de Lyon, INSERM U1111, Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, Université Lyon 1, CNRS 
UMR5308, Lyon, France.
(3)Unité de Génétique Moléculaire des Bunyavirus, Institut Pasteur, Paris, 
France.

The pathogenesis of Lassa fever (LF), a hemorrhagic fever endemic to West 
Africa, remains unclear. We previously compared Lassa virus (LASV) with its 
genetically close, but nonpathogenic homolog Mopeia virus (MOPV) and 
demonstrated that the strong activation of antigen-presenting cells (APC), 
including type I IFN production, observed in response to MOPV probably plays a 
crucial role in controlling infection. We show here that human macrophages (MP) 
produce large amounts of CC and CXC chemokines in response to MOPV infection, 
whereas dendritic cells (DC) release only moderate amounts of CXC chemokines. 
However, in the presence of autologous T cells, DCs produced CC and CXC 
chemokines. Chemokines were produced in response to type I IFN synthesis, as the 
levels of both mediators were strongly correlated and the neutralization of type 
I IFN resulted in an inhibition of chemokine production. By contrast, LASV 
induced only low levels of CXCL-10 and CXCL-11 production. These differences in 
chemokine production may profoundly affect the generation of virus-specific 
T-cell responses and may therefore contribute to the difference of pathogenicity 
between these two viruses. In addition, a recombinant LASV (rLASV) harboring the 
NP-D389A/G392A mutations, which abolish the inhibition of type I IFN response by 
nucleoprotein (NP), induced the massive synthesis of CC and CXC chemokines in 
both DC and MP, confirming the crucial role of arenavirus NP in 
immunosuppression and pathogenicity. Finally, we confirmed, using PBMC samples 
and lymph nodes obtained from LASV-infected cynomolgus monkeys, that LF was 
associated with high levels of CXC chemokine mRNA synthesis, suggesting that the 
very early synthesis of these mediators may be correlated with a favourable 
outcome.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0002637
PMCID: PMC3888467
PMID: 24421914 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.