1. Hepatology. 2014 Jun;59(6):2251-62. doi: 10.1002/hep.27026. Epub 2014 May 1.

Epigenetic reprogramming modulates malignant properties of human liver cancer.

Raggi C(1), Factor VM, Seo D, Holczbauer A, Gillen MC, Marquardt JU, Andersen 
JB, Durkin M, Thorgeirsson SS.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Carcinogenesis, Center for Cancer Research, 
National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD.

Reversal of DNA hypermethylation and associated gene silencing is an emerging 
cancer therapy approach. Here we addressed the impact of epigenetic alterations 
and cellular context on functional and transcriptional reprogramming of 
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells. Our strategy employed a 3-day treatment of 
established and primary human HCC-derived cell lines grown as a monolayer at 
various cell densities with the DNMT1 inhibitor zebularine (ZEB) followed by a 
3D culture to identify cells endowed with self-renewal potential. Differences in 
self-renewal, gene expression, tumorigenicity, and metastatic potential of 
spheres at generations G1-G5 were examined. Transient ZEB exposure produced 
differential cell density-dependent responses. In cells grown at low density, 
ZEB caused a remarkable increase in self-renewal and tumorigenicity associated 
with long-lasting gene expression changes characterized by a stable 
overexpression of cancer stem cell-related and key epithelial-mesenchymal 
transition genes. These effects persisted after restoration of DNMT1 expression. 
In contrast, at high cell density, ZEB caused a gradual decrease in self-renewal 
and tumorigenicty, and up-regulation of apoptosis- and differentiation-related 
genes. A permanent reduction of DNMT1 protein using short hairpin RNA 
(shRNA)-mediated DNMT1 silencing rendered HCC cells insensitive both to cell 
density and ZEB effects. Similarly, WRL68 and HepG2 hepatoblastoma cells 
expressing low DNMT1 basal levels also possessed a high self-renewal, 
irrespective of cell density or ZEB exposure. Spheres formed by low-density 
cells treated with ZEB or shDNMT1 displayed a high molecular similarity which 
was sustained through consecutive generations, confirming the essential role of 
DNMT1 depletion in the enhancement of cancer stem cell properties.
CONCLUSION: These results identify DNA methylation as a key epigenetic 
regulatory mechanism determining the pool of cancer stem cells in liver cancer 
and possibly other solid tumors.

Published 2014. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public 
domain in the USA.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.27026
PMCID: PMC4043911
PMID: 24449497 [Indexed for MEDLINE]