1. J Biomed Sci. 2014 Jan 22;21(1):5. doi: 10.1186/1423-0127-21-5.

Recovery of neurological function of ischemic stroke by application of 
conditioned medium of bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells derived from normal and 
cerebral ischemia rats.

Tsai MJ, Tsai SK, Hu BR, Liou DY, Huang SL, Huang MC, Huang WC, Cheng H(1), 
Huang SS.

Author information:
(1)Neural Regeneration Laboratory, Center for Neural Regeneration, Department of 
Neurosurgery, Neurological Institute, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, No, 322, 
Section 2, Shih-Pai Road, Taipei City, Beitou District 112, Taiwan. 
hc_cheng@vghtpe.gov.tw.

BACKGROUND: Several lines of evidence have demonstrated that bone marrow-derived 
mesenchymal stem cells (BM-MSC) release bioactive factors and provide 
neuroprotection for CNS injury. However, it remains elusive whether BM-MSC 
derived from healthy donors or stroke patients provides equal therapeutic 
potential. The present work aims to characterize BM-MSC prepared from normal 
healthy rats (NormBM-MSC) and cerebral ischemia rats (IschBM-MSC), and examine 
the effects of their conditioned medium (Cm) on ischemic stroke animal model.
RESULTS: Isolated NormBM-MSC or IschBM-MSC formed fibroblastic like morphology 
and expressed CD29, CD90 and CD44 but failed to express the hematopoietic marker 
CD34. The number of colony formation of BM-MSC was more abundant in IschBM-MSC 
than in NormBM-MSC. This is in contrast to the amount of Ficoll-fractionated 
mononuclear cells from normal donor and ischemic rats. The effect of cm of 
BM-MSC was further examined in cultures and in middle cerebral artery occlusion 
(MCAo) animal model. Both NormBM-MSC Cm and IschBM-MSC Cm effectively increased 
neuronal connection and survival in mixed neuron-glial cultures. In vivo, 
intravenous infusion of NormBM-MSC Cm and IschBM-MSC Cm after stroke onset 
remarkably improved functional recovery. Furthermore, NormBM-MSC Cm and 
IschBM-MSC Cm increased neurogenesis and attenuated microglia/ macrophage 
infiltration in MCAo rat brains.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest equal effectiveness of BM-MSC Cm derived from 
ischemic animals or from a normal population. Our results thus revealed the 
potential of BM-MSC Cm on treatment of ischemic stroke.

DOI: 10.1186/1423-0127-21-5
PMCID: PMC3922747
PMID: 24447306 [Indexed for MEDLINE]