1. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 22;9(1):e86142. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0086142. 
eCollection 2014.

Identification of human disease genes from interactome network using graphlet 
interaction.

Wang XD(1), Huang JL(2), Yang L(3), Wei DQ(4), Qi YX(1), Jiang ZL(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Mechanobiology and Medical Engineering, School of Life Sciences 
& Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Bioinformatics, Integrated Platform Science, GlaxoSmithKline Research and 
Development China, Shanghai, China.
(3)Bio-X Institutes, Key Laboratory for the Genetics of Developmental and 
Neuropsychiatric Disorders, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Microbial Metabolism, School of Life Sciences & 
Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.

Identifying genes related to human diseases, such as cancer and cardiovascular 
disease, etc., is an important task in biomedical research because of its 
applications in disease diagnosis and treatment. Interactome networks, 
especially protein-protein interaction networks, had been used to disease genes 
identification based on the hypothesis that strong candidate genes tend to 
closely relate to each other in some kinds of measure on the network. We 
proposed a new measure to analyze the relationship between network nodes which 
was called graphlet interaction. The graphlet interaction contained 28 different 
isomers. The results showed that the numbers of the graphlet interaction isomers 
between disease genes in interactome networks were significantly larger than 
random picked genes, while graphlet signatures were not. Then, we designed a new 
type of score, based on the network properties, to identify disease genes using 
graphlet interaction. The genes with higher scores were more likely to be 
disease genes, and all candidate genes were ranked according to their scores. 
Then the approach was evaluated by leave-one-out cross-validation. The precision 
of the current approach achieved 90% at about 10% recall, which was apparently 
higher than the previous three predominant algorithms, random walk, Endeavour 
and neighborhood based method. Finally, the approach was applied to predict new 
disease genes related to 4 common diseases, most of which were identified by 
other independent experimental researches. In conclusion, we demonstrate that 
the graphlet interaction is an effective tool to analyze the network properties 
of disease genes, and the scores calculated by graphlet interaction is more 
precise in identifying disease genes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0086142
PMCID: PMC3899204
PMID: 24465923 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: One author is an employee 
of GlaxoSmithKline. However, this does not alter the authors' adherence to all 
the PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials, as detailed online in the 
guide for authors.