1. Front Cell Neurosci. 2014 Jan 22;8:2. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2014.00002.
eCollection  2014.

Optogenetic evocation of field inhibitory postsynaptic potentials in hippocampal 
slices: a simple and reliable approach for studying pharmacological effects on 
GABAA and GABAB receptor-mediated neurotransmission.

Dine J(1), Kühne C(2), Deussing JM(2), Eder M(1).

Author information:
(1)Research Group Neuronal Network Dynamics, Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry 
Munich, Germany.
(2)Research Group Molecular Neurogenetics, Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry 
Munich, Germany.

The GABAergic system is the main source of inhibition in the mammalian brain. 
Consequently, much effort is still made to develop new modulators of GABAergic 
synaptic transmission. In contrast to glutamatergic postsynaptic potentials 
(PSPs), accurate monitoring of GABA receptor-mediated PSPs (GABAR-PSPs) and 
their pharmacological modulation in brain tissue invariably requires the use of 
intracellular recording techniques. However, these techniques are expensive, 
time- and labor-consuming, and, in case of the frequently employed whole-cell 
patch-clamp configuration, impact on intracellular ion concentrations, signaling 
cascades, and pH buffering systems. Here, we describe a novel approach to 
circumvent these drawbacks. In particular, we demonstrate in mouse hippocampal 
slices that selective optogenetic activation of interneurons leads to prominent 
field inhibitory GABAAR- and GABABR-PSPs in area CA1 which are easily and 
reliably detectable by a single extracellular recording electrode. The field 
PSPs exhibit typical temporal and pharmacological characteristics, display 
pronounced paired-pulse depression, and remain stable over many consecutive 
evocations. Additionally validating the methodological value of this approach, 
we further show that the neuroactive steroid 5α-THDOC (5 μM) shifts the 
inhibitory GABAAR-PSPs towards excitatory ones.

DOI: 10.3389/fncel.2014.00002
PMCID: PMC3898519
PMID: 24478627