1. J Am Heart Assoc. 2014 Jan 27;3(1):e000555. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.113.000555.

Elimination of NADPH oxidase activity promotes reductive stress and sensitizes 
the heart to ischemic injury.

Yu Q(1), Lee CF, Wang W, Karamanlidis G, Kuroda J, Matsushima S, Sadoshima J, 
Tian R.

Author information:
(1)Mitochondria and Metabolism Center, Department of Anesthesiology & Pain 
Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA.

BACKGROUND: The NADPH oxidase family (Nox) produces reactive oxygen species by 
adding the electron donated by NADPH to oxygen. Excessive reactive oxygen 
species production under a variety of pathological conditions has been 
attributed to increased Nox activity. Here, we aimed at investigating the role 
of Nox in cardiac ischemic injury through gain- and loss-of-function approaches.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We modulated Nox activity in the heart by cardiac-specific 
expression of Nox4 and dominant negative Nox4. Modulation of Nox activity 
drastically changes the cellular redox status. Increasing Nox activity by 
cardiac-specific overexpression of Nox4 imposed oxidative stress on the 
myocardium [increased NAD(P)(+)/NAD(P)H and decreased glutathione/glutathione 
disulfide ratio] and worsened cardiac energetics and contractile function after 
ischemia-reperfusion. Overexpression of the dominant negative Nox4 (DN), which 
abolished the Nox function, led to a markedly reduced state [decreased 
NAD(P)(+)/NAD(P)H and increased glutathione/glutathione disulfide ratio] at 
baseline and paradoxically promoted mitochondrial reactive oxygen species 
production during ischemia resulting in no recovery of heart function after 
reperfusion. Limiting the generation of reducing equivalent through modulating 
carbon substrates availability partially restored the NAD(+)/NADH ratio and 
protected dominant negative Nox4 hearts from ischemic injury.
CONCLUSIONS: This study reveals an important role of Nox in cardiac redox 
regulation and highlights the complexity of developing therapies that affect the 
intricately connected redox states.

DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.113.000555
PMCID: PMC3959718
PMID: 24470522 [Indexed for MEDLINE]