1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2014 Jan 16;5:1. doi: 10.3389/fendo.2014.00001. 
eCollection 2014.

Role of estrogen receptors and g protein-coupled estrogen receptor in regulation 
of hypothalamus-pituitary-testis axis and spermatogenesis.

Chimento A(1), Sirianni R(1), Casaburi I(1), Pezzi V(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Applied Biology, Department of Pharmacy, Health and Nutrition 
Sciences, University of Calabria , Cosenza , Italy.

Male reproductive function is under the control of both gonadotropins and 
androgens through a negative feedback loop that involves the hypothalamus, 
pituitary, and testis known as hypothalamus-pituitary-gonadal axis (HPG). 
Indeed, estrogens also play an important role in regulating HPG axis but the 
study on relative contribution to the inhibition of gonadotropins secretion 
exerted by the amount of estrogens produced within the hypothalamus and/or the 
pituitary or by the amount of circulating estrogens is still ongoing. Moreover, 
it is known that the maintenance of spermatogenesis is controlled by 
gonadotropins and testosterone, the effects of which are modulated by a complex 
network of locally produced factors, including estrogens. Physiological effects 
of estrogens are mediated by the classical nuclear estrogen receptor alpha and 
estrogen receptor beta, which mediate both genomic and rapid signaling events. 
In addition, estrogens induce rapid non-genomic responses through a 
membrane-associated G protein-coupled estrogen receptor (GPER). Ours and other 
studies reported that, in the testis, GPER is expressed in both normal germ 
cells and somatic cells and it is involved in mediating the estrogen action in 
spermatogenesis controlling proliferative and/or apoptotic events. 
Interestingly, GPER expression has been revealed also in the hypothalamus and 
pituitary. However, its role in mediating estrogen rapid actions in this context 
is under investigation. Recent studies indicate that GPER is involved in 
modulating gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) release as well as 
gonadotropins secretion. In this review, we will summarize the current knowledge 
concerning the role of estrogen/estrogen receptors molecular pathways in 
regulating GnRH, follicle-stimulating hormone, and luteinizing hormone release 
at the hypothalamic and pituitary levels in males as well as in controlling 
specific testicular functions such as spermatogenesis, focusing our attention 
mainly on estrogen signaling mediated by GPER.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2014.00001
PMCID: PMC3893621
PMID: 24474947