1. Brain. 2014 Mar;137(Pt 3):668-82. doi: 10.1093/brain/awt371. Epub 2014 Jan 29.

The Gdap1 knockout mouse mechanistically links redox control to 
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease.

Niemann A(1), Huber N, Wagner KM, Somandin C, Horn M, Lebrun-Julien F, Angst B, 
Pereira JA, Halfter H, Welzl H, Feltri ML, Wrabetz L, Young P, Wessig C, Toyka 
KV, Suter U.

Author information:
(1)1 Institute of Molecular Health Sciences, Cell Biology, Department of 
Biology, ETH Zurich, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Switzerland, 
ETH-Hönggerberg, 8093 Zürich, Switzerland.

The ganglioside-induced differentiation-associated protein 1 (GDAP1) is a 
mitochondrial fission factor and mutations in GDAP1 cause Charcot-Marie-Tooth 
disease. We found that Gdap1 knockout mice (Gdap1(-/-)), mimicking genetic 
alterations of patients suffering from severe forms of Charcot-Marie-Tooth 
disease, develop an age-related, hypomyelinating peripheral neuropathy. Ablation 
of Gdap1 expression in Schwann cells recapitulates this phenotype. Additionally, 
intra-axonal mitochondria of peripheral neurons are larger in Gdap1(-/-) mice 
and mitochondrial transport is impaired in cultured sensory neurons of 
Gdap1(-/-) mice compared with controls. These changes in mitochondrial 
morphology and dynamics also influence mitochondrial biogenesis. We demonstrate 
that mitochondrial DNA biogenesis and content is increased in the peripheral 
nervous system but not in the central nervous system of Gdap1(-/-) mice compared 
with control littermates. In search for a molecular mechanism we turned to the 
paralogue of GDAP1, GDAP1L1, which is mainly expressed in the unaffected central 
nervous system. GDAP1L1 responds to elevated levels of oxidized glutathione by 
translocating from the cytosol to mitochondria, where it inserts into the 
mitochondrial outer membrane. This translocation is necessary to substitute for 
loss of GDAP1 expression. Accordingly, more GDAP1L1 was associated with 
mitochondria in the spinal cord of aged Gdap1(-/-) mice compared with controls. 
Our findings demonstrate that Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease caused by mutations in 
GDAP1 leads to mild, persistent oxidative stress in the peripheral nervous 
system, which can be compensated by GDAP1L1 in the unaffected central nervous 
system. We conclude that members of the GDAP1 family are responsive and 
protective against stress associated with increased levels of oxidized 
glutathione.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awt371
PMCID: PMC3927703
PMID: 24480485 [Indexed for MEDLINE]