1. Exp Gerontol. 2014 Apr;52:55-69. doi: 10.1016/j.exger.2014.01.022. Epub 2014
Jan  29.

Joint inhibition of TOR and JNK pathways interacts to extend the lifespan of 
Brachionus manjavacas (Rotifera).

Snell TW(1), Johnston RK(2), Rabeneck B(2), Zipperer C(2), Teat S(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Biology, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332-0230, 
USA. Electronic address: terry.snell@biology.gatech.edu.
(2)School of Biology, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332-0230, 
USA.

The TOR kinase pathway is central in modulating aging in a variety of animal 
models. The target of rapamycin (TOR) integrates a complex network of signals 
from growth conditions, nutrient availability, energy status, and physiological 
stresses and matches an organism's growth rate to the resource environment. 
Important remaining problems are the identification of the pathways that 
interact with TOR and their characterization as additive or synergistic. One of 
the most versatile stress sensors in metazoans is the Jun-N-terminal kinase 
(JNK) signaling pathway. JNK is an evolutionarily conserved stress-activated 
protein kinase that is induced by a range of stressors, including UV 
irradiation, reactive oxygen species, DNA damage, heat, and bacterial antigens. 
JNK is thought to interact with the TOR pathway, but its effects on TOR are 
poorly understood. We used the rotifer Brachionus manjavacas as a model animal 
to probe the regulation of TOR and JNK pathways and explore their interaction. 
The effect of various chemical inhibitors was examined in life table and 
stressor challenge experiments. A survey of 12 inhibitors revealed two, 
rapamycin and JNK inhibitor, that significantly extended lifespan of B. 
manjavacas. At 1 μM concentration, exposure to rapamycin or JNK inhibitor 
extended mean rotifer lifespan by 35% and maximum lifespan by 37%. Exposure to 
both rapamycin and JNK inhibitor simultaneously extended mean rotifer lifespan 
by 65% more than either alone. Exposure to a combination of rapamycin and JNK 
inhibitors conveyed greater protection to starvation, UV and osmotic stress than 
either inhibitor alone. RNAi knockdown of TOR and JNK gene expression was 
investigated for its ability to extend rotifer lifespan. RNAi knockdown of the 
TOR gene resulted in 29% extension of the mean lifespan compared to control and 
knockdown of the JNK gene resulted in 51% mean lifespan extension. In addition 
to the lifespan, we quantified mitochondria activity using the fluorescent 
marker MitoTracker and lysosome activity using LysoTracker. Treatment of 
rotifers with JNK inhibitor enhanced mitochondria activity nearly 3-fold, 
whereas rapamycin treatment had no significant effect. Treatment of rotifers 
with rapamycin or JNK inhibitor reduced lysosome activity in 1, 3 and 8 day old 
animals, but treatment with both inhibitors did not produce any additive effect. 
We conclude that inhibition of TOR and JNK pathways significantly extends the 
lifespan of B. manjavacas. These pathways interact so that inhibition of both 
simultaneously acts additively to extend rotifer lifespan more than the 
inhibition of either alone.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exger.2014.01.022
PMCID: PMC3970784
PMID: 24486130 [Indexed for MEDLINE]