1. Evol Med Public Health. 2013 Jan;2013(1):225-40. doi: 10.1093/emph/eot020.
Epub  2013 Oct 1.

Genome organization and the role of centromeres in evolution of the 
erythroleukaemia cell line HEL.

Mackinnon RN(1), Wall M, Zordan A, Nutalapati S, Mercer B, Peverall J, Campbell 
LJ.

Author information:
(1)Victorian Cancer Cytogenetics Service, St Vincent's Hospital, Melbourne, 
Fitzroy, Vic, Australia; Department of Medicine, St Vincent's Hospital, 
University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Vic, Australia; and PathWest Department of 
Diagnostic Genomics, QEII Medical Centre, Nedlands, WA, Australia.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: The human erythroleukaemia (HEL) cell line has a 
highly rearranged genome. We matched whole chromosome analysis with cytogenomic 
microarray data to build a detailed description of these rearrangements.
METHODOLOGY: We used a combination of single nucleotide polymorphism array and 
multiple fluorescence in situ hybridization approaches, and compared our array 
data with publicly available data for different sublines of HEL. B allele 
frequencies revealed the fate of each homologue for most chromosomes.
RESULTS: At least two instances of the breakage-fusion-bridge cycle appear to 
have facilitated amplification of oncogenes and deletion of tumour suppressor 
genes. Because our study included centromere identification, we found that some 
abnormal chromosomes had centromeres that did not match the identity of the rest 
of the chromosome.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: This study highlights the variety of complementary 
methods required to understand remodelling of the genome in cancer and uncover 
some of the mechanisms involved. We present evidence of centromere capture as a 
means of preserving broken chromosome segments. Testing for another highly 
repetitive DNA region, the nucleolus organizer region, helped identify the steps 
involved in chromosome 9 copy number aberrations. Increased use of techniques 
for identifying centromeres and other repetitive DNA regions will add to our 
understanding of genome remodelling and evolution. The pattern of chromosome 20 
aberration in HEL supports an association of 20q11.21 amplification with 
erythroleukaemia (acute myeloid leukaemia subtype M6) in the context of 20q12 
deletion. The differences between the karyotypes in different HEL sublines 
highlight the constantly evolving genomes of cultured cell lines.

DOI: 10.1093/emph/eot020
PMCID: PMC3868402
PMID: 24481202