1. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 3;9(2):e87686. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0087686.
eCollection  2014.

PRODH polymorphisms, cortical volumes and thickness in schizophrenia.

Ota VK(1), Bellucco FT(2), Gadelha A(3), Santoro ML(1), Noto C(3), Christofolini 
DM(4), Assunção IB(5), Yamada KM(2), Ribeiro-dos-Santos AK(6), Santos S(6), Mari 
JJ(5), Smith MA(2), Melaragno MI(2), Bressan RA(3), Sato JR(7), Jackowski AP(8), 
Belangero SI(9).

Author information:
(1)Disciplina de Genética, Departamento de Morfologia e Genética, Universidade 
Federal de Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil ; LiNC - 
Laboratório Interdisciplinar de Neurociências Clínicas, Universidade Federal de 
Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Disciplina de Genética, Departamento de Morfologia e Genética, Universidade 
Federal de Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil.
(3)LiNC - Laboratório Interdisciplinar de Neurociências Clínicas, Universidade 
Federal de Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil ; Departamento de 
Psiquiatria, Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), Sao Paulo, Brazil.
(4)Disciplina de Genética e Reproducao Humana, Departamento de Ginecologia e 
Obstetrícia, Faculdade de Medicina do ABC (FMABC), Santo Andre, Sao Paulo, 
Brazil.
(5)Departamento de Psiquiatria, Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), Sao 
Paulo, Brazil.
(6)Laboratório de Genética Humana e Médica, Universidade Federal do Pará (UFPA), 
Belém, Pará, Brazil.
(7)LiNC - Laboratório Interdisciplinar de Neurociências Clínicas, Universidade 
Federal de Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil ; Center of 
Mathematics, Computation and Cognition, Universidade Federal do ABC, Santo 
Andre, Brazil.
(8)LiNC - Laboratório Interdisciplinar de Neurociências Clínicas, Universidade 
Federal de Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil.
(9)Disciplina de Genética, Departamento de Morfologia e Genética, Universidade 
Federal de Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil ; LiNC - 
Laboratório Interdisciplinar de Neurociências Clínicas, Universidade Federal de 
Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil ; Departamento de Psiquiatria, 
Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo (UNIFESP), Sao Paulo, Brazil.

Schizophrenia is a neurodevelopmental disorder with high heritability. Several 
lines of evidence indicate that the PRODH gene may be related to the disorder. 
Therefore, our study investigates the effects of 12 polymorphisms of PRODH on 
schizophrenia and its phenotypes. To further evaluate the roles of the 
associated variants in the disorder, we have conducted magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) scans to assess cortical volumes and thicknesses. A total of 192 
patients were evaluated using the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV 
(SCID), Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS), Calgary Depression Scale, 
Global Assessment of Functioning (GAF) and Clinical Global Impression (CGI) 
instruments. The study included 179 controls paired by age and gender. The 
samples were genotyped using the real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR), 
restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP)-PCR and Sanger sequencing 
methods. A sample of 138 patients and 34 healthy controls underwent MRI scans. 
One polymorphism was associated with schizophrenia (rs2904552), with the 
G-allele more frequent in patients than in controls. This polymorphism is likely 
functional, as predicted by PolyPhen and SIFT, but it was not associated with 
brain morphology in our study. In summary, we report a functional PRODH variant 
associated with schizophrenia that may have a neurochemical impact, altering 
brain function, but is not responsible for the cortical reductions found in the 
disorder.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0087686
PMCID: PMC3912045
PMID: 24498354 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Dr. Mari served as a 
symposia speaker from Eli Lilly and Astra Zeneca. Also Dr. Bressan has received 
honoraria and/or consultations fees from Astra Zeneca, Janssen and Lundbeck; has 
received research funding from Janssen, Eli Lilly, Lundibeck, Novartis and 
Roche; and is a shareholder of Biomolecular Technology Ltda. Dr. Gadelha reports 
having received PhD fellowship from CNPq (Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento 
Científico e Tecnológico) and served as a speaker from Janssen-Cilag. The other 
authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose. This does not alter the 
authors' adherence to all the PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.