1. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 31;9(1):e87906. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0087906. 
eCollection 2014.

Human but not mouse hepatocytes respond to interferon-lambda in vivo.

Hermant P(1), Demarez C(1), Mahlakõiv T(2), Staeheli P(3), Meuleman P(4), 
Michiels T(1).

Author information:
(1)de Duve Institute, Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.
(2)Institute for Virology, University Medical Center Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany 
; Spemann Graduate School of Biology and Medicine (SGBM), University Medical 
Center Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(3)Institute for Virology, University Medical Center Freiburg, Freiburg, 
Germany.
(4)Center for Vaccinology, Department of Clinical Chemistry, Microbiology and 
Immunology, Ghent University and Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.

The type III interferon (IFN) receptor is preferentially expressed by epithelial 
cells. It is made of two subunits: IFNLR1, which is specific to IFN-lambda 
(IFN-λ) and IL10RB, which is shared by other cytokine receptors. Human 
hepatocytes express IFNLR1 and respond to IFN-λ. In contrast, the IFN-λ response 
of the mouse liver is very weak and IFNLR1 expression is hardly detectable in 
this organ. Here we investigated the IFN-λ response at the cellular level in the 
mouse liver and we tested whether human and mouse hepatocytes truly differ in 
responsiveness to IFN-λ. When monitoring expression of the IFN-responsive Mx 
genes by immunohistofluorescence, we observed that the IFN-λ response in mouse 
livers was restricted to cholangiocytes, which form the bile ducts, and that 
mouse hepatocytes were indeed not responsive to IFN-λ. The lack of mouse 
hepatocyte response to IFN-λ was observed in different experimental settings, 
including the infection with a hepatotropic strain of influenza A virus which 
triggered a strong local production of IFN-λ. With the help of chimeric mice 
containing transplanted human hepatocytes, we show that hepatocytes of human 
origin readily responded to IFN-λ in a murine environment. Thus, our data 
suggest that human but not mouse hepatocytes are responsive to IFN-λ in vivo. 
The non-responsiveness is an intrinsic property of mouse hepatocytes and is not 
due to the mouse liver micro-environment.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0087906
PMCID: PMC3909289
PMID: 24498220 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.