1. Biomatter. 2014;4:e27979. doi: 10.4161/biom.27979. Epub 2014 Feb 6.

Grafting of a model protein on lactide and caprolactone based biodegradable 
films for biomedical applications.

Larrañaga A(1), Guay-Bégin AA(1), Chevallier P(2), Sabbatier G(2), Fernández 
J(3), Laroche G(2), Sarasua JR(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mining-Metallurgy Engineering and Materials Science; POLYMAT; 
University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU); School of Engineering; Bilbao, 
Spain; Laboratoire d'Ingénierie de Surface (LIS); Centre de recherche du CHU de 
Québec; Hôpital Saint-François d'Assise; Québec, QC Canada.
(2)Laboratoire d'Ingénierie de Surface (LIS); Centre de recherche du CHU de 
Québec; Hôpital Saint-François d'Assise; Québec, QC Canada; Département de génie 
des mines, de la métallurgie et des matériaux; Centre de Recherche sur les 
Matériaux Avancés (CERMA); Université Laval; Québec, QC Canada.
(3)Department of Mining-Metallurgy Engineering and Materials Science; POLYMAT; 
University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU); School of Engineering; Bilbao, 
Spain.

Thermoplastic biodegradable polymers displaying elastomeric behavior and 
mechanical consistency are greatly appreciated for the regeneration of soft 
tissues and for various medical devices. However, while the selection of a 
suitable base material is determined by mechanical and biodegradation 
considerations, it is the surface properties of the biomaterial that are 
responsible for the biological response. In order to improve the interaction 
with cells and modulate their behavior, biologically active molecules can be 
incorporated onto the surface of the material. With this aim, the surface of a 
lactide and caprolactone based biodegradable elastomeric terpolymer was modified 
in two stages. First, the biodegradable polymer surface was aminated by 
atmospheric pressure plasma treatment and second a crosslinker was grafted in 
order to covalently bind the biomolecule. In this study, albumin was used as a 
model protein. According to X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and atomic 
force microscopy (AFM), albumin was efficiently immobilized on the surface of 
the terpolymer, the degree of albumin surface coverage (ΓBSA) reached ~35%. 
Moreover, gel permeation chromatography (GPC) studies showed that the hydrolytic 
degradation kinetic of the synthesized polymer was slightly delayed when albumin 
was grafted. However, the degradation process in the bulk of the material was 
unaffected, as demonstrated by Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) analyses. 
Furthermore, XPS analyses showed that the protein was still present on the 
surface after 28 days of degradation, meaning that the surface modification was 
stable, and that there had been enough time for the biological environment to 
interact with the modified material.

DOI: 10.4161/biom.27979
PMCID: PMC4014455
PMID: 24509417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]