1. Skelet Muscle. 2014 Feb 12;4(1):5. doi: 10.1186/2044-5040-4-5.

Glypican-1 regulates myoblast response to HGF via Met in a lipid raft-dependent 
mechanism: effect on migration of skeletal muscle precursor cells.

Gutiérrez J, Cabrera D, Brandan E(1).

Author information:
(1)Centro de Regulación Celular y Patología (CRCP), Centro de Regeneración y 
Envejecimiento (CARE), Departamento de Biología Celular y Molecular, MIFAB, 
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile. ebrandan@bio.puc.cl.

BACKGROUND: Via the hepatocyte growth factor receptor (Met), hepatocyte growth 
factor (HGF) exerts key roles involving skeletal muscle development and 
regeneration. Heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs) are critical modulators of 
HGF activity, but the role of specific HSPGs in HGF regulation is poorly 
understood. Glypican-1 is the only HSPG expressed in myoblasts that localize in 
lipid raft membrane domains, controlling cell responses to extracellular 
stimuli. We determined if glypican-1 in these domains is necessary to stabilize 
the HGF-Met signaling complex and myoblast response to HGF.
METHODS: C2C12 myoblasts and a derived clone (C6) with low glypican-1 expression 
were used as an experimental model. The activation of Met, ERK1/2 and AKT in 
response to HGF was evaluated. The distribution of Met and its activated form in 
lipid raft domains, as well as its dependence on glypican-1, were characterized 
by sucrose density gradient fractionation in both cell types. Rescue experiments 
reexpressing glypican-1 or a chimeric glypican-1 fused to the transmembrane and 
cytoplasmic domains of mouse syndecan-1 or myoblast pretreatment with MβCD were 
conducted. In vitro and in vivo myoblast migration assays in response to HGF 
were also performed.
RESULTS: Glypican-1 localization in membrane raft domains was required for a 
maximum cell response to HGF. It stabilized Met and HGF in lipid raft domains, 
forming a signaling complex where the active phospho-Met receptor was 
concentrated. Glypican-1 also stabilized CD44 in a HGF-dependent manner. In 
addition, glypican-1 was required for in vitro and in vivo HGF-dependent 
myoblast migration.
CONCLUSIONS: Glypican-1 is a regulator of HGF-dependent signaling via Met in 
lipid raft domains.

DOI: 10.1186/2044-5040-4-5
PMCID: PMC3923899
PMID: 24517345