1. Circ Res. 2014 Mar 28;114(7):1125-32. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.114.301315. Epub
 2014 Feb 10.

Thioredoxin-interacting protein is a biomechanical regulator of Src activity: 
key role in endothelial cell stress fiber formation.

Spindel ON(1), Burke RM, Yan C, Berk BC.

Author information:
(1)From the Departments of Medicine (O.N.S., R.M.B., C.Y., B.C.B.) and 
Pharmacology and Physiology (O.N.S., C.Y., B.C.B.), University of Rochester 
School of Medicine and Dentistry, Aab Cardiovascular Research Institute, NY.

RATIONALE: Fluid shear stress differentially regulates endothelial cell stress 
fiber formation with decreased stress fibers in areas of disturbed flow compared 
with steady flow areas. Importantly, stress fibers are critical for several 
endothelial cell functions including cell shape, mechano-signal transduction, 
and endothelial cell-cell junction integrity. A key mediator of steady 
flow-induced stress fiber formation is Src that regulates downstream signaling 
mediators such as phosphorylation of cortactin, activity of focal adhesion 
kinase, and small GTPases.
OBJECTIVE: Previously, we showed that thioredoxin-interacting protein (TXNIP, 
also VDUP1 [vitamin D upregulated protein 1] and TBP-2 [thioredoxin binding 
protein 2]) was regulated by fluid shear stress; TXNIP expression was increased 
in disturbed flow compared with steady flow areas. Although TXNIP was originally 
characterized for its role in redox and metabolic cellular functions, recent 
reports show important scaffold functions related to its α-arrestin structure. 
Based on these findings, we hypothesized that TXNIP acts as a biomechanical 
sensor that regulates Src kinase activity and stress fiber formation.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Using en face immunohistochemistry of the aorta and 
cultured endothelial cells, we show inverse relationship between TXNIP 
expression and Src activity. Specifically, steady flow increased Src activity 
and stress fiber formation, whereas it decreased TXNIP expression. In contrast, 
disturbed flow had opposite effects. We studied the role of TXNIP in regulating 
Src homology phosphatase-2 plasma membrane localization and vascular endothelial 
cadherin binding because Src homology phosphatase-2 indirectly regulates 
dephosphorylation of Src tyrosine 527 that inhibits Src activity. Using 
immunohistochemistry and immunoprecipitation, we found that TXNIP prevented Src 
homology phosphatase-2-vascular endothelial cadherin interaction.
CONCLUSIONS: In summary, these data characterize a fluid shear stress-mediated 
mechanism for stress fiber formation that involves a TXNIP-dependent vascular 
endothelial cadherin-Src homology phosphatase-2-Src pathway.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.114.301315
PMCID: PMC3981969
PMID: 24515523 [Indexed for MEDLINE]