1. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2014 Feb 28;2:25. doi: 10.1186/2051-5960-2-25.

Deregulation of subcellular biometal homeostasis through loss of the metal 
transporter, Zip7, in a childhood neurodegenerative disorder.

Grubman A, Lidgerwood GE, Duncan C, Bica L, Tan JL, Parker SJ, Caragounis A, 
Meyerowitz J, Volitakis I, Moujalled D, Liddell JR, Hickey JL, Horne M, Longmuir 
S, Koistinaho J, Donnelly PS, Crouch PJ, Tammen I, White AR(1), Kanninen KM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC 3010, 
Australia. arwhite@unimelb.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: Aberrant biometal metabolism is a key feature of neurodegenerative 
disorders including Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases. Metal modulating 
compounds are promising therapeutics for neurodegeneration, but their mechanism 
of action remains poorly understood. Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCLs), 
caused by mutations in CLN genes, are fatal childhood neurodegenerative 
lysosomal storage diseases without a cure. We previously showed biometal 
accumulation in ovine and murine models of the CLN6 variant NCL, but the 
mechanism is unknown. This study extended the concept that alteration of 
biometal functions is involved in pathology in these disorders, and investigated 
molecular mechanisms underlying impaired biometal trafficking in CLN6 disease.
RESULTS: We observed significant region-specific biometal accumulation and 
deregulation of metal trafficking pathways prior to disease onset in CLN6 
affected sheep. Substantial progressive loss of the ER/Golgi-resident Zn 
transporter, Zip7, which colocalized with the disease-associated protein, CLN6, 
may contribute to the subcellular deregulation of biometal homeostasis in NCLs. 
Importantly, the metal-complex, ZnII(atsm), induced Zip7 upregulation, promoted 
Zn redistribution and restored Zn-dependent functions in primary mouse Cln6 
deficient neurons and astrocytes.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates the central role of the metal transporter, 
Zip7, in the aberrant biometal metabolism of CLN6 variants of NCL and further 
highlights the key contribution of deregulated biometal trafficking to the 
pathology of neurodegenerative diseases. Importantly, our results suggest that 
ZnII(atsm) may be a candidate for therapeutic trials for NCLs.

DOI: 10.1186/2051-5960-2-25
PMCID: PMC4029264
PMID: 24581221 [Indexed for MEDLINE]