1. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 21;9(2):e89292. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0089292. 
eCollection 2014.

Store-operated Ca2+ entry (SOCE) regulates melanoma proliferation and cell 
migration.

Umemura M(1), Baljinnyam E(2), Feske S(3), De Lorenzo MS(2), Xie LH(2), Feng 
X(1), Oda K(1), Makino A(1), Fujita T(1), Yokoyama U(1), Iwatsubo M(2), Chen 
S(4), Goydos JS(5), Ishikawa Y(1), Iwatsubo K(6).

Author information:
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute, Yokohama City University School of 
Medicine, Yokohama, Japan.
(2)Department of Cell Biology and Molecular Medicine, New Jersey Medical School, 
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, Newark, New Jersey, United States 
of America.
(3)Department of Pathology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, 
New York, United States of America.
(4)Department of Chemical Biology, Susan Lehman Cullen Laboratory of Cancer 
Research in the Ernest Mario School of Pharmacy, Rutgers, The State University 
of New Jersey, Piscataway, New Jersey, United States of America.
(5)Division of Surgical Oncology, Department of Surgery, Robert Wood Johnson 
Medical School, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, Piscataway, New 
Jersey, United States of America.
(6)Cardiovascular Research Institute, Yokohama City University School of 
Medicine, Yokohama, Japan ; Department of Cell Biology and Molecular Medicine, 
New Jersey Medical School, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, Newark, 
New Jersey, United States of America.

Store-operated Ca(2+) entry (SOCE) is a major mechanism of Ca(2) (+) import from 
extracellular to intracellular space, involving detection of Ca(2+) store 
depletion in endoplasmic reticulum (ER) by stromal interaction molecule (STIM) 
proteins, which then translocate to plasma membrane and activate Orai Ca(2+) 
channels there. We found that STIM1 and Orai1 isoforms were abundantly expressed 
in human melanoma tissues and multiple melanoma/melanocyte cell lines. We 
confirmed that these cell lines exhibited SOCE, which was inhibited by knockdown 
of STIM1 or Orai1, or by a pharmacological SOCE inhibitor. Inhibition of SOCE 
suppressed melanoma cell proliferation and migration/metastasis. Induction of 
SOCE was associated with activation of extracellular-signal-regulated kinase 
(ERK), and was inhibited by inhibitors of calmodulin kinase II (CaMKII) or 
Raf-1, suggesting that SOCE-mediated cellular functions are controlled via the 
CaMKII/Raf-1/ERK signaling pathway. Our findings indicate that SOCE contributes 
to melanoma progression, and therefore may be a new potential target for 
treatment of melanoma, irrespective of whether or not Braf mutation is present.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0089292
PMCID: PMC3931742
PMID: 24586666 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.