1. J Virol. 2014 May;88(10):5228-41. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00284-14. Epub 2014 Mar 5.

Nuclear-cytoplasmic partitioning of cucumber mosaic virus protein 2b determines 
the balance between its roles as a virulence determinant and an RNA-silencing 
suppressor.

Du Z(1), Chen A, Chen W, Liao Q, Zhang H, Bao Y, Roossinck MJ, Carr JP.

Author information:
(1)College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang Sci-Tech University, Hangzhou, China.

The Cucumber Mosaic Virus (CMV) 2b protein is an RNA-silencing suppressor that 
plays roles in CMV accumulation and virulence. The 2b proteins of subgroup IA 
CMV strains partition between the nucleus and cytoplasm, but the biological 
significance of this is uncertain. We fused an additional nuclear localization 
signal (NLS) to the 2b protein of subgroup IA strain Fny-CMV to create 2b-NLS 
and tested its effects on subcellular distribution, silencing, and virulence. 
The additional NLS enhanced 2b protein nuclear and nucleolar accumulation, but 
nuclear and nucleolar enrichment correlated with markedly diminished silencing 
suppressor activity in patch assays and abolished 2b protein-mediated disruption 
of microRNA activity in transgenic Arabidopsis. Nucleus/nucleolus-localized 2b 
protein possesses at least some ability to inhibit antiviral silencing, but this 
was not sufficient to prevent recovery from disease in younger, developing 
leaves in Arabidopsis. However, enhanced nuclear and nucleolar accumulation of 
2b increased virulence and accelerated symptom appearance in older leaves. 
Experiments with Arabidopsis lines carrying mutant Dicer-like alleles 
demonstrated that compromised suppressor activity explained the diminished 
ability of 2b-NLS to enhance virus accumulation. Remarkably, the increased 
virulence that 2b-NLS engendered was unrelated to effects on microRNA- or short 
interfering RNA-regulated host functions. Thus, although nucleus- and 
nucleolus-localized 2b protein is less efficient at silencing suppression than 
cytoplasm-localized 2b, it enhances CMV virulence. We propose that partitioning 
of the 2b protein between the cytoplasmic and nuclear/nucleolar compartments 
allows CMV to regulate the balance between virus accumulation and damage to the 
host, presumably to maximize the benefit for the virus.
IMPORTANCE: In this work, the main finding is that nucleus/nucleolus-localized 
2b protein is strongly associated with CMV virulence, which is independent of 
its effect on small RNA pathways. Moreover, this work supports the contention 
that the silencing suppressor activity of CMV 2b protein is predominantly 
exerted by that portion of the 2b protein residing in the cytoplasm. Thus, we 
propose that partitioning of the 2b protein between the cytoplasmic and 
nuclear/nucleolar compartments allows CMV to regulate the balance between virus 
accumulation and damage to the host, presumably to maximize the benefit for the 
virus.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00284-14
PMCID: PMC4019134
PMID: 24599997 [Indexed for MEDLINE]