1. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 10;9(3):e91701. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091701. 
eCollection 2014.

Measuring virgin female aggression in the female intruder test (FIT): effects of 
oxytocin, estrous cycle, and anxiety.

de Jong TR(1), Beiderbeck DI(1), Neumann ID(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Behavioral and Molecular Neurobiology, University of 
Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany.

The costs of violence and aggression in our society have stimulated the 
scientific search for the predictors and causes of aggression. The majority of 
studies have focused on males, which are considered to be more aggressive than 
females in most species. However, rates of offensive behavior in girls and young 
women are considerable and are currently rising in Western society. The 
extrapolation of scientific results from males to young, non-maternal females is 
a priori limited, based on the profound sex differences in brain areas and 
functioning of neurotransmitters involved in aggression. Therefore, we 
established a paradigm to assess aggressive behavior in young virgin female 
rats, i.e. the female intruder test (FIT). We found that approximately 40% of 
un-manipulated adult (10-11 weeks old) female Wistar rats attack an intruder 
female during the FIT, independent of their estrous phase or that of their 
intruder. In addition, adolescent (7-8 weeks old) female rats selected for high 
anxiety behavior (HABs) displayed significantly more aggression than 
non-selected (NAB) or low-anxiety (LAB) rats. Intracerebroventricular infusion 
of oxytocin (OXT, 0.1 µg/5 µl) inhibited aggressive behavior in adult NAB and 
LAB, but not HAB females. Adolescent NAB rats that had been aggressive towards 
their intruder showed increased pERK immunoreactivity (IR) in the hypothalamic 
attack area and reduced pERK-IR in OXT neurons in the paraventricular 
hypothalamic nucleus compared to non-aggressive NAB rats. Taken together, 
aggressive behavior in young virgin female rats is partly dependent on trait 
anxiety, and appears to be under considerable OXT control.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091701
PMCID: PMC3948875
PMID: 24614336 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.