1. Mol Psychiatry. 2015 Feb;20(2):252-62. doi: 10.1038/mp.2014.17. Epub 2014 Mar 
11.

Intraperitoneal injection of the pancreatic peptide amylin potently reduces 
behavioral impairment and brain amyloid pathology in murine models of 
Alzheimer's disease.

Zhu H(1), Wang X(1), Wallack M(1), Li H(1), Carreras I(2), Dedeoglu A(2), Hur 
JY(3), Zheng H(4), Li H(4), Fine R(5), Mwamburi M(6), Sun X(2), Kowall N(2), 
Stern RA(7), Qiu WQ(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Boston University 
Medical Campus, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)1] Department of Neurology, Boston University Medical Campus, Boston, MA, USA 
[2] Alzheimer's Disease Center, Boston University Medical Campus, Boston, MA, 
USA.
(3)Memorial Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, NY, USA.
(4)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX, USA.
(5)1] Alzheimer's Disease Center, Boston University Medical Campus, Boston, MA, 
USA [2] ENRM VA Medical Center, Bedford, MA, USA.
(6)Department of Public Health and Family Medicine, Tufts University, Boston, 
MA, USA.
(7)1] Department of Neurology, Boston University Medical Campus, Boston, MA, USA 
[2] Alzheimer's Disease Center, Boston University Medical Campus, Boston, MA, 
USA [3] Department of Neural Surgery, Boston University Medical Campus, Boston, 
MA, USA.
(8)1] Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Boston 
University Medical Campus, Boston, MA, USA [2] Alzheimer's Disease Center, 
Boston University Medical Campus, Boston, MA, USA [3] Department of Psychiatry, 
Boston University Medical Campus, Boston, MA, USA.

Amylin, a pancreatic peptide, and amyloid-beta peptides (Aβ), a major component 
of Alzheimer's disease (AD) brain, share similar β-sheet secondary structures, 
but it is not known whether pancreatic amylin affects amyloid pathogenesis in 
the AD brain. Using AD mouse models, we investigated the effects of amylin and 
its clinical analog, pramlintide, on AD pathogenesis. Surprisingly, chronic 
intraperitoneal (i.p.) injection of AD animals with either amylin or pramlintide 
reduces the amyloid burden as well as lowers the concentrations of Aβ in the 
brain. These treatments significantly improve their learning and memory assessed 
by two behavioral tests, Y maze and Morris water maze. Both amylin and 
pramlintide treatments increase the concentrations of Aβ1-42 in cerebral spinal 
fluid (CSF). A single i.p. injection of either peptide also induces a surge of 
Aβ in the serum, the magnitude of which is proportionate to the amount of Aβ in 
brain tissue. One intracerebroventricular injection of amylin induces a more 
significant surge in serum Aβ than one i.p. injection of the peptide. In 330 
human plasma samples, a positive association between amylin and Aβ1-42 as well 
as Aβ1-40 is found only in patients with AD or amnestic mild cognitive 
impairment. As amylin readily crosses the blood-brain barrier, our study 
demonstrates that peripheral amylin's action on the central nervous system 
results in translocation of Aβ from the brain into the CSF and blood that could 
be an explanation for a positive relationship between amylin and Aβ in blood. As 
naturally occurring amylin may play a role in regulating Aβ in brain, amylin 
class peptides may provide a new avenue for both treatment and diagnosis of AD.

DOI: 10.1038/mp.2014.17
PMCID: PMC4161670
PMID: 24614496 [Indexed for MEDLINE]