1. J Clin Invest. 2014 Apr;124(4):1468-82. doi: 10.1172/JCI70372. Epub 2014 Mar
10.

Dominant β-catenin mutations cause intellectual disability with recognizable 
syndromic features.

Tucci V, Kleefstra T, Hardy A, Heise I, Maggi S, Willemsen MH, Hilton H, Esapa 
C, Simon M, Buenavista MT, McGuffin LJ, Vizor L, Dodero L, Tsaftaris S, Romero 
R, Nillesen WN, Vissers LE, Kempers MJ, Vulto-van Silfhout AT, Iqbal Z, Orlando 
M, Maccione A, Lassi G, Farisello P, Contestabile A, Tinarelli F, Nieus T, 
Raimondi A, Greco B, Cantatore D, Gasparini L, Berdondini L, Bifone A, Gozzi A, 
Wells S, Nolan PM.

The recent identification of multiple dominant mutations in the gene encoding 
β-catenin in both humans and mice has enabled exploration of the molecular and 
cellular basis of β-catenin function in cognitive impairment. In humans, 
β-catenin mutations that cause a spectrum of neurodevelopmental disorders have 
been identified. We identified de novo β-catenin mutations in patients with 
intellectual disability, carefully characterized their phenotypes, and were able 
to define a recognizable intellectual disability syndrome. In parallel, 
characterization of a chemically mutagenized mouse line that displays features 
similar to those of human patients with β-catenin mutations enabled us to 
investigate the consequences of β-catenin dysfunction through development and 
into adulthood. The mouse mutant, designated batface (Bfc), carries a Thr653Lys 
substitution in the C-terminal armadillo repeat of β-catenin and displayed a 
reduced affinity for membrane-associated cadherins. In association with this 
decreased cadherin interaction, we found that the mutation results in decreased 
intrahemispheric connections, with deficits in dendritic branching, long-term 
potentiation, and cognitive function. Our study provides in vivo evidence that 
dominant mutations in β-catenin underlie losses in its adhesion-related 
functions, which leads to severe consequences, including intellectual 
disability, childhood hypotonia, progressive spasticity of lower limbs, and 
abnormal craniofacial features in adults.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI70372
PMCID: PMC3973091
PMID: 24614104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]