1. Sci Rep. 2014 Mar 11;4:4347. doi: 10.1038/srep04347.

Changes in IgG and total plasma protein glycomes in acute systemic inflammation.

Novokmet M(1), Lukić E(2), Vučković F(1), Ðurić Ž(3), Keser T(4), Rajšl K(4), 
Remondini D(5), Castellani G(5), Gašparović H(3), Gornik O(6), Lauc G(7).

Author information:
(1)Genos Glycoscience Laboratory, Zagreb, Croatia.
(2)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery University Hospital Centre Zagreb, Croatia.
(3)Clinic for Cardiac Surgery, University Hospital Centre Zagreb, Croatia.
(4)University of Zagreb, Faculty of Pharmacy and Biochemistry, Department of 
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Zagreb, Croatia.
(5)Department of Physics and Astronomy DIFA, University of Bologna, Bologna, 
Italy.
(6)1] University of Zagreb, Faculty of Pharmacy and Biochemistry, Department of 
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Zagreb, Croatia [2].
(7)1] Genos Glycoscience Laboratory, Zagreb, Croatia [2] University of Zagreb, 
Faculty of Pharmacy and Biochemistry, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular 
Biology, Zagreb, Croatia [3].

Recovery after cardiac surgery is a complex process that has to compensate for 
both individual variability and extensive tissue damage in the context of 
systemic inflammation. Protein glycosylation is essential in many steps of the 
inflammatory cascade, but due to technological limitations the role of 
individual variation in glycosylation in systemic inflammation has not been 
addressed until now. We analysed composition of the total plasma and IgG 
N-glycomes in 107 patients undergoing cardiac surgery. In nearly all individuals 
plasma N-glycome underwent the same pattern of changes in the first 72 h, 
revealing a general mechanism of glycosylation changes. To the contrary, changes 
in the IgG glycome were very individualized. Bi-clustering analysis revealed the 
existence of four distinct patterns of changes. One of them, characterized by a 
rapid increase in galactosylated glycoforms, was associated with nearly double 
mortality risk measured by EuroSCORE II. Our results indicate that individual 
variation in IgG glycosylation changes during acute systemic inflammation 
associates with increased mortality risk and indicates new avenues for the 
development of personalized diagnostic and therapeutic approach.

DOI: 10.1038/srep04347
PMCID: PMC3949295
PMID: 24614541 [Indexed for MEDLINE]