1. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 12;9(3):e91323. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091323. 
eCollection 2014.

Chimeric proton-pumping rhodopsins containing the cytoplasmic loop of bovine 
rhodopsin.

Sasaki K(1), Yamashita T(2), Yoshida K(1), Inoue K(3), Shichida Y(2), Kandori 
H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Frontier Materials, Nagoya Institute of Technology, Showa-ku, 
Nagoya, Japan.
(2)Department of Biophysics, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, 
Kyoto, Japan.
(3)Department of Frontier Materials, Nagoya Institute of Technology, Showa-ku, 
Nagoya, Japan; PRESTO, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Honcho Kawaguchi, 
Saitama, Japan.

G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) transmit stimuli to intracellular signaling 
systems. Rhodopsin (Rh), which is a prototypical GPCR, possesses an 11-cis 
retinal. Photoisomerization of 11-cis to all-trans leads to structural changes 
in the protein of cytoplasmic loops, activating G-protein. Microbial rhodopsins 
are similar heptahelical membrane proteins that function as bacterial sensors, 
light-driven ion-pumps, or light-gated channels. They possess an all-trans 
retinal, and photoisomerization to 13-cis triggers structural changes in 
protein. Despite these similarities, there is no sequence homology between 
visual and microbial rhodopsins, and microbial rhodopsins do not activate 
G-proteins. In this study, new chimeric proton-pumping rhodopsins, 
proteorhodopsin (PR) and Gloeobacter rhodopsin (GR) were designed by replacing 
cytoplasmic loops with bovine Rh loops. Although G-protein was not activated by 
the PR chimeras, all 12 GR chimeras activated G-protein. The GR chimera 
containing the second cytoplasmic loop of bovine Rh did not activate G-protein. 
However, the chimera with a second and third double-loop further enhanced 
G-protein activation. Introduction of an E132Q mutation slowed the photocycle 
30-fold and enhanced activation. The highest catalytic activity of the GR 
chimera was still 3,200 times lower than bovine Rh but only 64 times lower than 
amphioxus Go-rhodopsin. This GR chimera showed a strong absorption change of the 
amide-I band on a light-minus-dark difference FTIR spectrum which could 
represent a larger helical opening, important for G-protein activation. The 
light-dependent catalytic activity of this GR chimera makes it a potential 
optogenetic tool for enzymatic activation by light.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091323
PMCID: PMC3951393
PMID: 24621599 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.