1. Asian J Androl. 2014 Jul-Aug;16(4):536-40. doi: 10.4103/1008-682X.125907.

The Xu's chart for prostate biopsy: a visual presentation of the added value of 
biomarkers to prostate-specific antigen for estimating detection rates of 
prostate cancer.

Xu J(1).

Author information:
(1)Fudan Institute of Urology, Huashan Hospital, Shanghai; State Key Laboratory 
of Genetic Engineering, School of Life Science, Shanghai; School of Public 
Health, Fudan University, Shanghai, China; Center for Cancer Genomics, Wake 
Forest School of Medicine, Winston Salem, North Carolina, USA, .

Elevated serum prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level is the primary indication 
for prostate biopsy for detection of prostate cancer (PCa) in the modern era. 
The detection rate of PCa from biopsy is typically below 30%, especially among 
patients with PSA levels at 4–10 ng ml−1. In the past several years, additional 
biomarkers, such as Prostate Health Index, PCA3 and genetic risk score (GRS) 
derived from multiple PCa risk-associated single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
have been shown to provide added value to PSA in discriminating prostate biopsy 
outcomes. However, the adoption rate of these novel biomarkers in clinics is 
low, largely due to poor understanding of the added value of novel biomarkers. 
To address this matter, we developed a chart to visually present (i) expected 
detection rates of PCa from biopsy with respect to PSA levels, and more 
importantly, (ii) a range of PCa detection rates at the same PSA levels when 
novel biomarkers are considered. This chart, called the Xu's chart for prostate 
biopsy, is not a formal risk prediction model; rather, a simple visual tool for 
urologists to communicate with their patients an initial evaluation of PCa 
detection rate based on their PSA levels and a possible recommendation for 
additional biomarkers. A more comprehensive evaluation of PCa risk using 
existing risk assessment tools such as nomograms can be followed once additional 
biomarkers are measured. The current version of the chart is only a prototype 
and should be further developed to include the detection rate of aggressive PCa, 
and validated in larger studies.

DOI: 10.4103/1008-682X.125907
PMCID: PMC4104076
PMID: 24625885 [Indexed for MEDLINE]