1. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 25;9(3):e92233. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0092233. 
eCollection 2014.

Snake and bird predation drive the repeated convergent evolution of correlated 
life history traits and phenotype in the Izu Island Scincid lizard (Plestiodon 
latiscutatus).

Brandley MC(1), Kuriyama T(2), Hasegawa M(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(2)Faculty of Science, Toho University, Funabashi City, Chiba, Japan.

Predation may create strong natural selection pressure on the phenotype and life 
history characteristics of prey species. The Izu scincid lizards (Plestiodon 
latiscutatus) that inhabit the four Japanese Izu Islands with only bird 
predators are drab brown, mature later, lay small clutches of large eggs, and 
hatch large neonates. In contrast, skinks on seven islands with both snake and 
bird predators are conspicuously colored, mature early, lay large clutches of 
small eggs, and hatch small neonates. We test the hypothesis that these suites 
of traits have evolved independently on each island via natural selection 
pressures from one of two predator regimes--birds-only and birds + snakes. Using 
two mtDNA genes and a nuclear locus, we infer a time-calibrated phylogeny of P. 
latiscutatus that reveals a basal split between Mikura and all islands south, 
and Miyake, all islands north, and the Izu Peninsula. Populations inhabiting 
Miyake, Niijima, Shikine, and Toshima are not monophyletic, suggesting either 
multiple colonizations or an artifact of incomplete lineage sorting (ILS). We 
therefore developed novel phylogenetic comparative analyses that assume either a 
multiple colonization or more restrictive single colonization ILS scenario and 
found 1) statistically significant support for the of different suites of 
phenotypic and life history characteristics with the presence of bird-only or 
bird + snake predator assemblages, and 2) strong phylogenetic support for at 
least two independent derivations of either the "bird-only" or "snakes + birds" 
phenotypes regardless of colonization scenario. Finally, our time-calibrated 
phylogeographic analysis supports the conclusion that the ancestor to modern Izu 
Island P. latiscutatus dispersed from the mainland to the Izu proto-islands 
between 3-7.6 million years ago (Ma). These lineages remained present in the 
area during successive formation of the islands, with one lineage re-colonizing 
the mainland 0.24-0.7 Ma.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0092233
PMCID: PMC3965430
PMID: 24667496 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.