1. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 3;9(4):e93233. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0093233.
eCollection  2014.

Discovery of possible gene relationships through the application of 
self-organizing maps to DNA microarray databases.

Chavez-Alvarez R(1), Chavoya A(1), Mendez-Vazquez A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Information Systems CUCEA, Universidad de Guadalajara, Zapopan, 
Jalisco, Mexico.
(2)Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Campus Guadalajara, 
Cinvestav, Zapopan, Jalisco, Mexico.

DNA microarrays and cell cycle synchronization experiments have made possible 
the study of the mechanisms of cell cycle regulation of Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
by simultaneously monitoring the expression levels of thousands of genes at 
specific time points. On the other hand, pattern recognition techniques can 
contribute to the analysis of such massive measurements, providing a model of 
gene expression level evolution through the cell cycle process. In this paper, 
we propose the use of one of such techniques--an unsupervised artificial neural 
network called a Self-Organizing Map (SOM)-which has been successfully applied 
to processes involving very noisy signals, classifying and organizing them, and 
assisting in the discovery of behavior patterns without requiring prior 
knowledge about the process under analysis. As a test bed for the use of SOMs in 
finding possible relationships among genes and their possible contribution in 
some biological processes, we selected 282 S. cerevisiae genes that have been 
shown through biological experiments to have an activity during the cell cycle. 
The expression level of these genes was analyzed in five of the most cited time 
series DNA microarray databases used in the study of the cell cycle of this 
organism. With the use of SOM, it was possible to find clusters of genes with 
similar behavior in the five databases along two cell cycles. This result 
suggested that some of these genes might be biologically related or might have a 
regulatory relationship, as was corroborated by comparing some of the clusters 
obtained with SOMs against a previously reported regulatory network that was 
generated using biological knowledge, such as protein-protein interactions, gene 
expression levels, metabolism dynamics, promoter binding, and modification, 
regulation and transport of proteins. The methodology described in this paper 
could be applied to the study of gene relationships of other biological 
processes in different organisms.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0093233
PMCID: PMC3974722
PMID: 24699245 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.