1. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 2;9(4):e93822. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0093822.
eCollection  2014.

Differential sRNA regulation in leaves and roots of sugarcane under water 
depletion.

Thiebaut F(1), Grativol C(1), Tanurdzic M(2), Carnavale-Bottino M(1), Vieira 
T(1), Motta MR(1), Rojas C(3), Vincentini R(4), Chabregas SM(5), Hemerly AS(1), 
Martienssen RA(6), Ferreira PC(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratório de Biologia Molecular de Plantas, Instituto de Bioquímica Médica, 
Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(2)School of Biological Sciences, The University of Queensland, Brisbane St 
Lucia, Queensland, Australia.
(3)Universidade Federal da INTEGRAÇÃO Latino-Americana, Foz do Iguaçu, Paraná, 
Brazil.
(4)Centro de Biologia Molecular e Engenharia Genética, Universidade Estadual de 
Campinas, Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil.
(5)Centro de Tecnologia Canavieira, Fazenda Santo Antônio - Laboratório de 
Biologia Molecular, Piracicaba, São Paulo, Brazil.
(6)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation, Cold 
Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, New York, United States of 
America.

Plants have developed multiple regulatory mechanisms to respond and adapt to 
stress. Drought stress is one of the major constraints to agricultural 
productivity worldwide and recent reports have highlighted the importance of 
plant sRNA in the response and adaptation to water availability. In order to 
increase our understanding of the roles of sRNA in response to water depletion, 
cultivars of sugarcane were submitted to treatment of ceasing drip irrigation 
for 24 hours. Deep sequencing analysis was carried out to identify the sRNA 
regulated in leaves and roots of sugarcane cultivars with different drought 
sensitivities. The pool of sRNA selected allowed the analysis of different sRNA 
classes (miRNA and siRNA). Twenty-eight and 36 families of conserved miRNA were 
identified in leaf and root libraries, respectively. Dynamic regulation of miRNA 
was observed and the expression profiles of eight miRNA were verified in leaf 
samples from three biological replicates by stem-loop qRT-PCR assay using the 
cultivars: SP90-1638--sensitive cultivar--and SP83-2847 and SP83-5073--tolerant 
cultivars. Altered miRNA regulation was correlated with changes in mRNA levels 
of specific targets. Two leaf libraries from individual sugarcane cultivars with 
contrasting drought-tolerance properties were also analyzed. An enrichment of 
22-nt sRNA species was observed in leaf libraries. 22-nt miRNA triggered siRNA 
production by cleavage of their targets in response to water depletion. A number 
of genes of the sRNA biogenesis pathway were down-regulated in tolerant 
genotypes and up-regulated in sensitive in response to water depletion 
treatment. Our analysis contributes to increase the knowledge on the roles of 
sRNA in sugarcane submitted to water depletion.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0093822
PMCID: PMC3973653
PMID: 24695493 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.