1. Harv Rev Psychiatry. 2014 May-Jun;22(3):139-48. doi: 
10.1097/HRP.0000000000000034.

Adolescent depression: stress and reward dysfunction.

Auerbach RP(1), Admon R, Pizzagalli DA.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Psychiatry, Harvard Medical School; Center for 
Depression, Anxiety and Stress Research, McLean Hospital, Belmont, MA.

After participating in this educational activity, the physician should be better 
able to 1. Evaluate the relationship between reward processes, stress, and 
depression. 2. Assess the characteristics of the three etiological models of 
stress and reward processes. 3. Identify the biological basis for stress and 
reward processes. Adolescence is a peak period for the onset of depression, and 
it is also a time marked by substantial stress as well as neural development 
within the brain reward circuitry. In this review, we provide a selective 
overview of current animal and human research investigating the relationship 
among reward processes, stress, and depression. Three separate, but related, 
etiological models examine the differential roles that stress may play in 
relation to reward dysfunction and adolescent depression. First, the reward 
mediation model suggests that both acute and chronic stress contribute to reward 
deficits, which, in turn, potentiate depressive symptoms or increase the risk 
for depression. Second, in line with the stress generation perspective, it is 
plausible that premorbid reward-related dysfunction generates stress--in 
particular, interpersonal stress--which then leads to the manifestation of 
depressive symptoms. Third, consistent with a diathesis-stress model, the 
interaction between stress and premorbid reward dysfunction may contribute to 
the onset of depression. Given the equifinal nature of depression, these models 
could shed important light on different etiological pathways during adolescence, 
particularly as they may relate to understanding the heterogeneity of 
depression. To highlight the translational potential of these insights, a 
hypothetical case study is provided as a means of demonstrating the importance 
of targeting reward dysfunction in both assessment and treatment of adolescent 
depression.

DOI: 10.1097/HRP.0000000000000034
PMCID: PMC4016104
PMID: 24704785 [Indexed for MEDLINE]