1. RNA Biol. 2014;11(4):313-9. doi: 10.4161/rna.28646. Epub 2014 Apr 2.

Adventures in time and space: splicing efficiency and RNA polymerase II 
elongation rate.

Moehle EA(1), Braberg H(2), Krogan NJ(3), Guthrie C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics; University of California; San 
Francisco, CA USA.
(2)Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology; University of California; 
San Francisco, CA USA; California Institute for Quantitative Biosciences; QB3; 
San Francisco, CA USA.
(3)Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology; University of California; 
San Francisco, CA USA; California Institute for Quantitative Biosciences; QB3; 
San Francisco, CA USA; J. David Gladstone Institutes; San Francisco, CA USA.

Control of pre-mRNA splicing is a critical part of the eukaryotic gene 
expression process. Extensive evidence indicates that transcription and splicing 
are spatiotemporally coordinated and that most splicing events occur 
co-transcriptionally. A kinetic coupling model has been proposed in metazoans to 
describe how changing RNA Polymerase II (RNAPII) elongation rate can impact 
which alternative splice sites are used. In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, in which 
most spliced genes have only a single intron and splice sites adhere to a strong 
consensus sequence, we recently observed that splicing efficiency was sensitive 
to mutations in RNAPII that increase or decrease its elongation rate. Our data 
revealed that RNAPII speed and splicing efficiency are generally 
anti-correlated: at many genes, increased elongation rate caused decreased 
splicing efficiency, while decreased elongation rate increased splicing 
efficiency. An improved splicing phenotype was also observed upon deletion of 
SUB1, a condition in which elongation rate is slowed. We discuss these data in 
the context of a growing field and expand the kinetic coupling model to apply to 
both alternative splicing and splicing efficiency.

DOI: 10.4161/rna.28646
PMCID: PMC4075515
PMID: 24717535 [Indexed for MEDLINE]