1. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 15;9(4):e94650. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0094650. 
eCollection 2014.

Long-read sequencing of chicken transcripts and identification of new transcript 
isoforms.

Thomas S(1), Underwood JG(2), Tseng E(3), Holloway AK(1); Bench To Basinet CvDC 
Informatics Subcommittee.

Author information:
(1)The Gladstone Institutes, San Francisco, California, United States of 
America; Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of California 
San Francisco, San Francisco, California, United States of America.
(2)University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, United States of America; 
Pacific Biosciences, Menlo Park, California, United States of America.
(3)Pacific Biosciences, Menlo Park, California, United States of America.

The chicken has long served as an important model organism in many fields, and 
continues to aid our understanding of animal development. Functional genomics 
studies aimed at probing the mechanisms that regulate development require 
high-quality genomes and transcript annotations. The quality of these resources 
has improved dramatically over the last several years, but many isoforms and 
genes have yet to be identified. We hope to contribute to the process of 
improving these resources with the data presented here: a set of long cDNA 
sequencing reads, and a curated set of new genes and transcript isoforms not 
currently represented in the most up-to-date genome annotation currently 
available to the community of researchers who rely on the chicken genome.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0094650
PMCID: PMC3988055
PMID: 24736250 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: J. Underwood formerly 
worked for, and E. Tseng currently works for Pacific Biosciences, which has 
financial interests in long-read sequencing technology. There are no patents, 
products in development or marketed products to declare. This does not alter the 
authors' adherence to all the PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials, 
as detailed online in the guide for authors.