1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Aug;99(8):E1482-6. doi: 10.1210/jc.2013-3853.
Epub  2014 Apr 23.

The clinical phenotype of SDHC-associated hereditary paraganglioma syndrome 
(PGL3).

Else T(1), Marvin ML, Everett JN, Gruber SB, Arts HA, Stoffel EM, Auchus RJ, 
Raymond VM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Divisions of Metabolism Endocrinology and 
Diabetes (T.E., R.J.A.), Molecular Medicine and Genetics (J.N.E., V.M.R.), and 
Gastroenterology (E.M.S.), Department of Human Genetics (M.L.M.), and Department 
of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery (H.A.A.) at the University of Michigan 
Hospital and Health Systems, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109; and Norris Cancer Center 
(S.B.G.), University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California 90033.

CONTEXT: Mutations in the genes encoding subunits of the succinate dehydrogenase 
complex cause hereditary paraganglioma syndromes. Although the phenotypes 
associated with the more commonly mutated genes, SDHB and SDHD, are well 
described, less is known about SDHC-associated paragangliomas.
OBJECTIVE: To describe functionality, penetrance, number of primary tumors, 
biological behavior, and location of paragangliomas associated with SDHC 
mutations.
DESIGN: Families with an SDHC mutation were identified through a large cancer 
genetics registry. A retrospective chart review was conducted with a focus on 
patient and tumor characteristics. In addition, clinical reports on SDHC-related 
paragangliomas were identified in the medical literature to further define the 
phenotype and compare findings.
SETTING: A cancer genetics clinic and registry at a tertiary referral center.
PATIENTS: Eight index patients with SDHC-related paraganglioma were identified.
RESULTS: Three of the eight index patients had mediastinal paraganglioma and 
four of the eight patients had more than one paraganglioma. Interestingly, the 
index patients were the only affected individuals in all families. When 
combining these index cases with reported cases in the medical literature, the 
mediastinum is the second most common location for SDHC-related paraganglioma 
(10% of all tumors), occurring in up to 13% of patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that thoracic paragangliomas are common in 
patients with SDHC mutations, and imaging of this area should be included in 
surveillance of mutation carriers. In addition, the absence of paragangliomas 
among at-risk relatives of SDHC mutation carriers suggests a less penetrant 
phenotype as compared to SDHB and SDHD mutations.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2013-3853
PMCID: PMC4121019
PMID: 24758179 [Indexed for MEDLINE]