1. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2014 Apr 24;2:47. doi: 10.1186/2051-5960-2-47.

The instability of the BTB-KELCH protein Gigaxonin causes Giant Axonal 
Neuropathy and constitutes a new penetrant and specific diagnostic test.

Boizot A, Talmat-Amar Y, Morrogh D, Kuntz NL, Halbert C, Chabrol B, Houlden H, 
Stojkovic T, Schulman BA, Rautenstrauss B, Bomont P(1).

Author information:
(1)Atip-Avenir team, Inserm U1051, Institut des Neurosciences de Montpellier, 
Montpellier, France. pascale.bomont@inserm.fr.

BACKGROUND: The BTB-KELCH protein Gigaxonin plays key roles in sustaining neuron 
survival and cytoskeleton architecture. Indeed, recessive mutations in the 
Gigaxonin-encoding gene cause Giant Axonal Neuropathy (GAN), a severe 
neurodegenerative disorder characterized by a wide disorganization of the 
Intermediate Filament network. Growing evidences suggest that GAN is a continuum 
with the peripheral neuropathy Charcot-Marie-Tooth diseases type 2 (CMT2). 
Sharing similar sensory-motor alterations and aggregation of Neurofilaments, few 
reports have revealed that GAN and some CMT2 forms can be misdiagnosed on 
clinical and histopathological examination. The goal of this study is to propose 
a new differential diagnostic test for GAN/CMT2. Moreover, we aim at identifying 
the mechanisms causing the loss-of-function of Gigaxonin, which has been 
proposed to bind CUL3 and substrates as part of an E3 ligase complex.
RESULTS: We establish that determining Gigaxonin level constitutes a very 
valuable diagnostic test in discriminating new GAN cases from clinically related 
inherited neuropathies. Indeed, in a set of seven new families presenting a 
neuropathy resembling GAN/CMT2, only five exhibiting a reduced Gigaxonin 
abundance have been subsequently genetically linked to GAN. Generating the 
homology modeling of Gigaxonin, we suggest that disease mutations would lead to 
a range of defects in Gigaxonin stability, impairing its homodimerization, BTB 
or KELCH domain folding, or CUL3 and substrate binding. We further demonstrate 
that regardless of the mutations or the severity of the disease, Gigaxonin 
abundance is severely reduced in all GAN patients due to both mRNA and protein 
instability mechanisms.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, we developed a new penetrant and specific test to 
diagnose GAN among a set of individuals exhibiting CMT2 of unknown etiology to 
suggest that the prevalence of GAN is probably under-evaluated among peripheral 
neuropathies. We propose to use this new test in concert with the clinical 
examination and prior to the systematic screening of GAN mutations that has 
shown strong limitations for large deletions. Combining the generation of the 
structural modeling of Gigaxonin to an analysis of Gigaxonin transcripts and 
proteins in patients, we provide the first evidences of the instability of this 
E3 ligase adaptor in disease.

DOI: 10.1186/2051-5960-2-47
PMCID: PMC4234992
PMID: 24758703 [Indexed for MEDLINE]