1. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 24;9(4):e95527. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0095527. 
eCollection 2014.

Dietary flavanols modulate the transcription of genes associated with 
cardiovascular pathology without changes in their DNA methylation state.

Milenkovic D(1), Vanden Berghe W(2), Boby C(3), Leroux C(3), Declerck K(4), 
Szarc vel Szic K(4), Heyninck K(5), Laukens K(6), Bizet M(7), Defrance M(7), 
Dedeurwaerder S(7), Calonne E(7), Fuks F(7), Haegeman G(5), Haenen GR(8), Bast 
A(8), Weseler AR(8).

Author information:
(1)INRA, UMR 1019, UNH, CRNH Auvergne, Clermont-Ferrand; Clermont Université, 
Université d'Auvergne, Unité de Nutrition Humaine, Clermont-Ferrand, France.
(2)Laboratory of Eukaryotic Gene Expression and Signal Transduction LEGEST, 
University of Gent, Gent, Belgium; PPES, Department of Biomedical Sciences, 
University of Antwerp (UA), Wilrijk, Belgium.
(3)INRA, UMR1213 Herbivores, Plate-Forme d'Exploration du Métabolisme, 
Saint-Genès-Champanelle, France.
(4)PPES, Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Antwerp (UA), Wilrijk, 
Belgium.
(5)Laboratory of Eukaryotic Gene Expression and Signal Transduction LEGEST, 
University of Gent, Gent, Belgium.
(6)Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, University of Antwerp, 
Antwerp, Belgium; Biomedical Informatics Research Center Antwerp (Biomina), 
University of Antwerp/Antwerp University Hospital, Edegem, Belgium.
(7)Laboratory of Cancer Epigenetics, Free University of Brussels, Brussels, 
Belgium.
(8)Department of Toxicology, Maastricht University, MD Maastricht, Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: In a recent intervention study, the daily supplementation with 200 
mg monomeric and oligomeric flavanols (MOF) from grape seeds for 8 weeks 
revealed a vascular health benefit in male smokers. The objective of the present 
study was to determine the impact of MOF consumption on the gene expression 
profile of leukocytes and to assess changes in DNA methylation.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Gene expression profiles were determined using 
whole genome microarrays (Agilent) and DNA methylation was assessed using 
HumanMethylation450 BeadChips (Illumina). MOF significantly modulated the 
expression of 864 genes. The majority of the affected genes are involved in 
chemotaxis, cell adhesion, cell infiltration or cytoskeleton organisation, 
suggesting lower immune cell adhesion to endothelial cells. This was 
corroborated by in vitro experiments showing that MOF exposure of monocytes 
attenuates their adhesion to TNF-α-stimulated endothelial cells. Nuclear factor 
kappa B (NF-κB) reporter gene assays confirmed that MOF decrease the activity of 
NF-κB. Strong inter-individual variability in the leukocytes' DNA methylation 
was observed. As a consequence, on group level, changes due to MOF 
supplementation could not be found.
CONCLUSION: Our study revealed that an 8 week daily supplementation with 200 mg 
MOF modulates the expression of genes associated with cardiovascular disease 
pathways without major changes of their DNA methylation state. However, strong 
inter-individual variation in leukocyte DNA methylation may obscure the subtle 
epigenetic response to dietary flavanols. Despite the lack of significant 
changes in DNA methylation, the modulation of gene expression appears to 
contribute to the observed vascular health effect of MOF in humans.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0095527
PMCID: PMC3998980
PMID: 24763279 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: International Nutrition 
Company BV, Loosdrecht, The Netherlands, supplied the MOF containing test 
capsules and placebo capsules. This does not alter the authors' adherence to all 
the PLoS ONE policies on sharing data and materials. The authors declare that no 
other conflict of interest exists.