1. BMC Genomics. 2014 Apr 28;15:318. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-318.

Pseudomonas aeruginosa clinical and environmental isolates constitute a single 
population with high phenotypic diversity.

Grosso-Becerra MV, Santos-Medellín C, González-Valdez A, Méndez JL, Delgado G, 
Morales-Espinosa R, Servín-González L, Alcaraz LD, Soberón-Chávez G(1).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Biología Molecular y Biotecnología, Instituto de 
Investigaciones Biomédicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Ciudad 
Universitaria, 04510 México, DF, México. gloria@biomedicas.unam.mx.

BACKGROUND: Pseudomonas aeruginosa is an opportunistic pathogen with a high 
incidence of hospital infections that represents a threat to immune compromised 
patients. Genomic studies have shown that, in contrast to other pathogenic 
bacteria, clinical and environmental isolates do not show particular genomic 
differences. In addition, genetic variability of all the P. aeruginosa strains 
whose genomes have been sequenced is extremely low. This low genomic variability 
might be explained if clinical strains constitute a subpopulation of this 
bacterial species present in environments that are close to human populations, 
which preferentially produce virulence associated traits.
RESULTS: In this work, we sequenced the genomes and performed phenotypic 
descriptions for four non-human P. aeruginosa isolates collected from a plant, 
the ocean, a water-spring, and from dolphin stomach. We show that the four 
strains are phenotypically diverse and that this is not reflected in genomic 
variability, since their genomes are almost identical. Furthermore, we performed 
a detailed comparative genomic analysis of the four strains studied in this work 
with the thirteen previously reported P. aeruginosa genomes by means of 
describing their core and pan-genomes.
CONCLUSIONS: Contrary to what has been described for other bacteria we have 
found that the P. aeruginosa core genome is constituted by a high proportion of 
genes and that its pan-genome is thus relatively small. Considering the high 
degree of genomic conservation between isolates of P. aeruginosa from diverse 
environments, including human tissues, some implications for the treatment of 
infections are discussed. This work also represents a methodological 
contribution for the genomic study of P. aeruginosa, since we provide a database 
of the comparison of all the proteins encoded by the seventeen strains analyzed.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-318
PMCID: PMC4234422
PMID: 24773920 [Indexed for MEDLINE]