1. PLoS One. 2014 May 5;9(5):e95151. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0095151.
eCollection  2014.

Mammalian TBX1 preferentially binds and regulates downstream targets via a 
tandem T-site repeat.

Castellanos R(1), Xie Q(2), Zheng D(3), Cvekl A(2), Morrow BE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, 
United States of America.
(2)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, 
United States of America; Department of Ophthalmology, Albert Einstein College 
of Medicine, Bronx, New York, United States of America.
(3)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, 
United States of America; Department of Neurology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, New York, United States of America.

Haploinsufficiency or mutation of TBX1 is largely responsible for the etiology 
of physical malformations in individuals with velo-cardio-facial/DiGeorge 
syndrome (VCFS/DGS/22q11.2 deletion syndrome). TBX1 encodes a transcription 
factor protein that contains an evolutionarily conserved DNA binding domain 
termed the T-box that is shared with other family members. All T-box proteins, 
examined so far, bind to similar but not identical consensus DNA sequences, 
indicating that they have specific binding preferences. To identify the TBX1 
specific consensus sequence, Systematic Evolution of Ligands by Exponential 
Enrichment (SELEX) was performed. In contrast to other TBX family members 
recognizing palindrome sequences, we found that TBX1 preferentially binds to a 
tandem repeat of 5'-AGGTGTGAAGGTGTGA-3'. We also identified a second consensus 
sequence comprised of a tandem repeat with a degenerated downstream site. We 
show that three known human disease-causing TBX1 missense mutations (F148Y, 
H194Q and G310S) do not alter nuclear localization, or disrupt binding to the 
tandem repeat consensus sequences, but they reduce transcriptional activity in 
cell culture reporter assays. To identify Tbx1-downstream genes, we performed an 
in silico genome wide analysis of potential cis-acting elements in DNA and found 
strong enrichment of genes required for developmental processes and 
transcriptional regulation. We found that TBX1 binds to 19 different loci in 
vitro, which may correspond to putative cis-acting binding sites. In situ 
hybridization coupled with luciferase gene reporter assays on three gene loci, 
Fgf8, Bmper, Otog-MyoD, show that these motifs are directly regulated by TBX1 in 
vitro. Collectively, the present studies establish new insights into molecular 
aspects of TBX1 binding to DNA. This work lays the groundwork for future in vivo 
studies, including chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by next generation 
sequencing (ChIP-Seq) to further elucidate the molecular pathogenesis of 
VCFS/DGS.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0095151
PMCID: PMC4010391
PMID: 24797903 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.