1. Diabetes. 2014 Oct;63(10):3404-15. doi: 10.2337/db14-0105. Epub 2014 May 16.

Palmitate induces mRNA translation and increases ER protein load in islet 
β-cells via activation of the mammalian target of rapamycin pathway.

Hatanaka M(1), Maier B(1), Sims EK(1), Templin AT(2), Kulkarni RN(3), 
Evans-Molina C(4), Mirmira RG(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Indiana University School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis, IN Herman B Wells Center for Pediatric Research, Indiana 
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN.
(2)Department of Cellular and Integrative Physiology, Indiana University School 
of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN.
(3)Section on Islet Cell and Regenerative Biology, Joslin Diabetes Center, 
Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.
(4)Herman B Wells Center for Pediatric Research, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN Department of Cellular and Integrative Physiology, 
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN Department of Medicine, 
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN Department of 
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis, IN.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Indiana University School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis, IN Herman B Wells Center for Pediatric Research, Indiana 
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN Department of Cellular and 
Integrative Physiology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 
Department of Medicine, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN rmirmira@iu.edu.

Saturated free fatty acids (FFAs) have complex effects on the islet β-cell, 
acutely promoting adaptive hyperplasia but chronically impairing insulin 
release. The acute effects of FFAs remain incompletely defined. To elucidate 
these early molecular events, we incubated mouse β-cells and islets with 
palmitate and then studied mRNA translation by polyribosomal profiling and 
analyzed signaling pathways by immunoblot analysis. We found that palmitate 
acutely increases polyribosome occupancy of total RNA, consistent with an 
increase in mRNA translation. This effect on translation was attributable to 
activation of mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathways via L-type Ca(2+) 
channels but was independent of insulin signaling. Longer incubations led to 
depletion of polyribosome-associated RNA, consistent with activation of the 
unfolded protein response (UPR). Pharmacologic inhibition of mTOR suppressed 
both the acute effects of palmitate on mRNA translation and the chronic effects 
on the UPR. Islets from mice fed a high-fat diet for 7 days showed increases in 
polyribosome-associated RNA and phosphorylation of S6K, both consistent with 
activation of mTOR. Our results suggest that palmitate acutely activates mRNA 
translation and that this increase in protein load contributes to the later UPR.

© 2014 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this article as 
long as the work is properly cited, the use is educational and not for profit, 
and the work is not altered.

DOI: 10.2337/db14-0105
PMCID: PMC4171659
PMID: 24834975 [Indexed for MEDLINE]