1. Front Pharmacol. 2014 May 5;5:94. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2014.00094. eCollection 
2014.

Atherogenesis and iron: from epidemiology to cellular level.

Vinchi F(1), Muckenthaler MU(1), Da Silva MC(1), Balla G(2), Balla J(3), Jeney 
V(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and Immunology, University of 
Heidelberg Heidelberg, Germany ; Molecular Medicine and Partnership Unit, 
University of Heidelberg Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)MTA-DE Vascular Biology, Thrombosis and Hemostasis Research Group, Hungarian 
Academy of Sciences Debrecen, Hungary ; Department of Pediatrics, University of 
Debrecen Debrecen, Hungary.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of Debrecen Debrecen, Hungary.
(4)MTA-DE Vascular Biology, Thrombosis and Hemostasis Research Group, Hungarian 
Academy of Sciences Debrecen, Hungary ; Department of Medicine, University of 
Debrecen Debrecen, Hungary.

Iron accumulates in human atherosclerotic lesions but whether it is a cause or 
simply a downstream consequence of the atheroma formation has been an open 
question for decades. According to the so called "iron hypothesis," iron is 
believed to be detrimental for the cardiovascular system, thus promoting 
atherosclerosis development and progression. Iron, in its catalytically active 
form, can participate in the generation of reactive oxygen species and induce 
lipid-peroxidation, triggering endothelial activation, smooth muscle cell 
proliferation and macrophage activation; all of these processes are considered 
to be proatherogenic. On the other hand, the observation that hemochromatotic 
patients, affected by life-long iron overload, do not show any increased 
incidence of atherosclerosis is perceived as the most convincing evidence 
against the "iron hypothesis." Epidemiological studies and data from animal 
models provided conflicting evidences about the role of iron in atherogenesis. 
Therefore, more careful studies are needed in which issues like the source and 
the compartmentalization of iron will be addressed. This review article 
summarizes what we have learnt about iron and atherosclerosis from 
epidemiological studies, animal models and cellular systems and highlights the 
rather contributory than innocent role of iron in atherogenesis.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2014.00094
PMCID: PMC4017151
PMID: 24847266