1. PLoS Genet. 2014 May 29;10(5):e1004335. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004335. 
eCollection 2014.

Activating transcription factor 6 is necessary and sufficient for alcoholic 
fatty liver disease in zebrafish.

Howarth DL(1), Lindtner C(2), Vacaru AM(1), Sachidanandam R(3), Tsedensodnom 
O(1), Vasilkova T(1), Buettner C(2), Sadler KC(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine - Division of Liver Diseases, Icahn School of Medicine 
at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, United States of America; Department of 
Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, 
New York, New York, United States of America.
(2)Department of Medicine - Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Bone 
Disease, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, United 
States of America; Diabetes and Metabolism Institute, Icahn School of Medicine 
at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, United States of America.
(3)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, New York, United States of America.
(4)Department of Medicine - Division of Liver Diseases, Icahn School of Medicine 
at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, United States of America; Department of 
Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, 
New York, New York, United States of America; Graduate School of Biomedical 
Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, United 
States of America.

Fatty liver disease (FLD) is characterized by lipid accumulation in hepatocytes 
and is accompanied by secretory pathway dysfunction, resulting in induction of 
the unfolded protein response (UPR). Activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6), 
one of three main UPR sensors, functions to both promote FLD during acute stress 
and reduce FLD during chronic stress. There is little mechanistic understanding 
of how ATF6, or any other UPR factor, regulates hepatic lipid metabolism to 
cause disease. We addressed this using zebrafish genetics and biochemical 
analyses and demonstrate that Atf6 is necessary and sufficient for FLD. atf6 
transcription is significantly upregulated in the liver of zebrafish with 
alcoholic FLD and morpholino-mediated atf6 depletion significantly reduced 
steatosis incidence caused by alcohol. Moreover, overexpression of active, 
nuclear Atf6 (nAtf6) in hepatocytes caused FLD in the absence of stress. 
mRNA-Seq and qPCR analyses of livers from five day old nAtf6 transgenic larvae 
revealed upregulation of genes promoting glyceroneogenesis and fatty acid 
elongation, including fatty acid synthase (fasn), and nAtf6 overexpression in 
both zebrafish larvae and human hepatoma cells increased the incorporation of 
14C-acetate into lipids. Srebp transcription factors are key regulators of 
lipogenic enzymes, but reducing Srebp activation by scap morpholino injection 
neither prevented FLD in nAtf6 transgenics nor synergized with atf6 knockdown to 
reduce alcohol-induced FLD. In contrast, fasn morpholino injection reduced FLD 
in nAtf6 transgenic larvae and synergistically interacted with atf6 to reduce 
alcoholic FLD. Thus, our data demonstrate that Atf6 is required for alcoholic 
FLD and epistatically interacts with fasn to cause this disease, suggesting 
triglyceride biogenesis as the mechanism of UPR induced FLD.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004335
PMCID: PMC4038464
PMID: 24874946 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.