1. BMC Med Genomics. 2014 May 13;7:23. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-7-23.

Sequence artefacts in a prospective series of formalin-fixed tumours tested for 
mutations in hotspot regions by massively parallel sequencing.

Wong SQ, Li J, Tan AY, Vedururu R, Pang JM, Do H, Ellul J, Doig K, Bell A, 
MacArthur GA, Fox SB, Thomas DM, Fellowes A, Parisot JP, Dobrovic A(1); CANCER 
2015 Cohort.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, East Melbourne, 
Victoria 3002, Australia. alex.dobrovic@ludwig.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: Clinical specimens undergoing diagnostic molecular pathology testing 
are fixed in formalin due to the necessity for detailed morphological 
assessment. However, formalin fixation can cause major issues with molecular 
testing, as it causes DNA damage such as fragmentation and non-reproducible 
sequencing artefacts after PCR amplification. In the context of massively 
parallel sequencing (MPS), distinguishing true low frequency variants from 
sequencing artefacts remains challenging. The prevalence of formalin-induced DNA 
damage and its impact on molecular testing and clinical genomics remains poorly 
understood.
METHODS: The Cancer 2015 study is a population-based cancer cohort used to 
assess the feasibility of mutational screening using MPS in cancer patients from 
Victoria, Australia. While blocks were formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded in 
different anatomical pathology laboratories, they were centrally extracted for 
DNA utilising the same protocol, and run through the same MPS platform (Illumina 
TruSeq Amplicon Cancer Panel). The sequencing artefacts in the 1-10% and the 
10-25% allele frequency ranges were assessed in 488 formalin-fixed tumours from 
the pilot phase of the Cancer 2015 cohort. All blocks were less than 2.5 years 
of age (mean 93 days).
RESULTS: Consistent with the signature of DNA damage due to formalin fixation, 
many formalin-fixed samples displayed disproportionate levels of C>T/G>A changes 
in the 1-10% allele frequency range. Artefacts were less apparent in the 10-25% 
allele frequency range. Significantly, changes were inversely correlated with 
coverage indicating high levels of sequencing artefacts were associated with 
samples with low amounts of available amplifiable template due to fragmentation. 
The degree of fragmentation and sequencing artefacts differed between blocks 
sourced from different anatomical pathology laboratories. In a limited 
validation of potentially actionable low frequency mutations, a NRAS G12D 
mutation in a melanoma was shown to be a false positive.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings indicate that DNA damage following formalin fixation 
remains a major challenge in laboratories working with MPS. Methodologies that 
assess, minimise or remove formalin-induced DNA damaged templates as part of MPS 
protocols will aid in the interpretation of genomic results leading to better 
patient outcomes.

DOI: 10.1186/1755-8794-7-23
PMCID: PMC4032349
PMID: 24885028 [Indexed for MEDLINE]