1. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2014 Sep;53(3):133-7. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2014.05.002.
Epub  2014 May 28.

Molecular diagnostics of the HBB gene in an Omani cohort using bench-top DNA Ion 
Torrent PGM technology.

Hassan SM(1), Vossen RH(2), Chessa R(3), den Dunnen JT(4), Bakker E(4), Giordano 
PC(4), Harteveld CL(4).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Genetic Laboratory, National Genetic Centre, Muscat, Oman; 
Department of Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Centre, 
Leiden, The Netherlands. Electronic address: suha_85@hotmail.com.
(2)Leiden Genome Technology Center (LGTC), Human and Clincal Genetics, Leiden 
University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(3)Dipartimento di Sanità Pubblica, medicina clinica e molecolare, Università di 
Cagliari, Italy; Department of Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University 
Medical Centre, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Centre, 
Leiden, The Netherlands.

Hemoglobinopathies, such as sickle cell disease (SCD) and beta-thalassemia major 
(TM), are severe diseases and the most common autosomal recessive condition 
worldwide and in particular in Oman. Early screening and diagnosis of carriers 
are the key for primary prevention. Once a country-wide population screening 
program is mandated by law, a sequencing technology that can rapidly confirm or 
identify disease-causing mutations for a large number of patients in a short 
period of time will be necessary. While Sanger sequencing is the standard 
protocol for molecular diagnosis, next generation sequencing starts to become 
available to reference laboratories. Using the Ion Torrent PGM sequencer, we 
have analyzed a cohort of 297 unrelated Omani cases and reliably identified 
mutations in the beta-globin (HBB) gene. Our model study has shown that Ion 
Torrent PGM can rapidly sequence such a small gene in a large number of samples 
using a barcoded uni-directional or bi-directional sequence methodology, 
reducing cost, workload and providing accurate diagnosis. Based on our results 
we believe that the Ion Torrent PGM sequencing platform, able to analyze 
hundreds of patients simultaneously for a single disease gene can be a valid 
molecular screening alternative to ABI sequencing in the diagnosis of 
hemoglobinopathies and other genetic disorders in the near future.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2014.05.002
PMID: 24880717 [Indexed for MEDLINE]