1. Neurobiol Dis. 2014 Sep;69:206-14. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2014.05.030. Epub 2014
Jun  2.

Increased striatal adenosine A2A receptor levels is an early event in 
Parkinson's disease-related pathology and it is potentially regulated by 
miR-34b.

Villar-Menéndez I(1), Porta S(1), Buira SP(1), Pereira-Veiga T(1), Díaz-Sánchez 
S(2), Albasanz JL(2), Ferrer I(3), Martín M(2), Barrachina M(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neuropathology, Bellvitge University Hospital-ICS, [Bellvitge 
Biomedical Research Institute-] IDIBELL, L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain.
(2)Departamento de Química Inorgánica, Orgánica y Bioquímica, Facultad de 
Ciencias y Tecnologías Químicas, Centro Regional de Investigaciones Biomédicas 
(CRIB), Universidad de Castilla-La Mancha, Ciudad Real, Spain; Departamento de 
Química Inorgánica, Orgánica y Bioquímica, Facultad de Medicina de Ciudad Real, 
CRIB, Universidad de Castilla-La Mancha, Ciudad Real, Spain.
(3)Institute of Neuropathology, Bellvitge University Hospital-ICS, [Bellvitge 
Biomedical Research Institute-] IDIBELL, L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain; 
Departament de Patologia i Terapèutica Experimental, Universitat de Barcelona, 
L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain; Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red sobre 
Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas, CIBERNED, Spain.
(4)Institute of Neuropathology, Bellvitge University Hospital-ICS, [Bellvitge 
Biomedical Research Institute-] IDIBELL, L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain; 
Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red sobre Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas, 
CIBERNED, Spain. Electronic address: mbarrachina@idibell.cat.

Adenosine A2A receptor (A2AR) is a G-protein coupled receptor that stimulates 
adenylyl cyclase activity. In the brain, A2ARs are found highly enriched in 
striatal GABAergic medium spiny neurons, related to the control of voluntary 
movement. Pharmacological modulation of A2ARs is particularly useful in 
Parkinson's disease (PD) due to their property of antagonizing dopamine D2 
receptor activity. Increases in A2AR levels have been described in PD patients 
showing an important loss of dopaminergic denervation markers, but no data have 
been reported about A2AR levels in incidental PD brains. In the present report, 
we show that increased A2ARs protein levels were also detected in the putamen of 
incidental PD cases (Braak PD stages 1-2) with respect to age-matched controls. 
By contrast, A2ARs mRNA levels remained unchanged, suggesting that 
posttranslational mechanisms could be involved in the regulation of A2ARs. It 
has been described how miR-34b/c downregulation is an early event in PD cases. 
We found that miR-34b levels are also significantly reduced in the putamen of 
incidental PD cases and along disease progression. Given that 3'UTR of A2AR 
contains a predicted target site for miR-34b, the potential role of this miRNA 
in protein A2AR levels was assessed. In vitro studies revealed that endogenous 
A2AR protein levels increased when miR-34b function was blocked using a specific 
anti-miR-34b. Moreover, using a luciferase reporter assay with point mutations 
in a miR-34b predicted binding site within the 3'UTR region of A2AR mRNA 
abolished the effect of the miRNA using a miR-34b mimic. In addition, we showed 
a reduced percentage of DNA methylation in the 5'UTR region of ADORA2A in 
advanced PD cases. Overall, these findings reveal that increased A2AR protein 
levels occur in asymptomatic PD patients and provide new insights into the 
molecular mechanisms underlying A2AR expression levels along the progression of 
this neurodegenerative disease.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2014.05.030
PMID: 24892887 [Indexed for MEDLINE]