1. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Nov 1;23(21):5579-96. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu273. Epub 2014
Jun  3.

Role of OVCA1/DPH1 in craniofacial abnormalities of Miller-Dieker syndrome.

Yu YR(1), You LR(2), Yan YT(3), Chen CM(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Sciences and Institute of Genome Sciences.
(2)Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, and VYM Genome Research 
Center, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, and Institute of Biomedical 
Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Life Sciences and Institute of Genome Sciences, VYM Genome 
Research Center, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan, Taiwan Mouse 
Clinic-National Phenotyping Center, Taipei, Taiwan cmchen@ym.edu.tw.

OVCA1/DPH1 (OVCA1) encodes a component of the diphthamide biosynthesis pathway 
and is located on chromosome 17p13.3. Deletions in this region are associated 
with Miller-Dieker syndrome (MDS). Ovca1/Dph1 (Ovca1)-null mice exhibit multiple 
developmental defects, including cleft palate, growth restriction and perinatal 
lethality, suggesting a role in the craniofacial abnormalities associated with 
MDS. Conditional ablation of Ovca1 in neural crest cells, but not in cranial 
paraxial mesoderm, also results in cleft palate and shortened lower jaw 
phenotypes, similar to Ovca1-null embryos. Expression of transgenic myc-tagged 
Ovca1 in craniofacial structures can partially rescue the cleft palate and 
shortened mandible of Ovca1-null embryos. Interestingly, Ovca1-null mutants are 
resistant to conditional expression of diphtheria toxin subunit A in both neural 
crest cell and paraxial mesoderm derivatives. However, OVCA1-dependent 
diphthamide biosynthesis is essential for neural crest cell-derived craniofacial 
development but that is dispensable for paraxial mesodermal-derived craniofacial 
structures in mammals. These findings suggest that OVCA1 deficiency in the 
neural crest contributes to the craniofacial abnormalities in patients with MDS. 
Also, our findings provide new insights into the molecular and cellular 
mechanisms that lead to the craniofacial defects of MDS.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddu273
PMID: 24895408 [Indexed for MEDLINE]