1. BMC Genomics. 2014 Jun 10;15(1):456. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-456.

Transcriptomic analysis of Sorghum bicolor responding to combined heat and 
drought stress.

Johnson SM(1), Lim FL, Finkler A, Fromm H, Slabas AR, Knight MR.

Author information:
(1)Durham Centre for Crop Improvement Technology, School of Biological and 
Biomedical Sciences, Durham University, South Road, DH1 3LE Durham, UK. 
Stephanie.johnson@durham.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Abiotic stresses which include drought and heat are amongst the main 
limiting factors for plant growth and crop productivity. In the field, these 
stress types are rarely presented individually and plants are often subjected to 
a combination of stress types. Sorghum bicolor is a cereal crop which is grown 
in arid and semi-arid regions and is particularly well adapted to the hot and 
dry conditions in which it originates and is now grown as a crop. In order to 
better understand the mechanisms underlying combined stress tolerance in this 
important crop, we have used microarrays to investigate the transcriptional 
response of Sorghum subjected to heat and drought stresses imposed both 
individually and in combination.
RESULTS: Microarrays consisting of 28585 gene probes identified gene expression 
changes equating to ~4% and 18% of genes on the chip following drought and heat 
stresses respectively. In response to combined stress ~20% of probes were 
differentially expressed. Whilst many of these transcript changes were in common 
with those changed in response to heat or drought alone, the levels of 2043 
specific transcripts (representing 7% of all gene probes) were found to only be 
changed following the combined stress treatment. Ontological analysis of these 
'unique' transcripts identified a potential role for specific transcription 
factors including MYB78 and ATAF1, chaperones including unique heat shock 
proteins (HSPs) and metabolic pathways including polyamine biosynthesis in the 
Sorghum combined stress response.
CONCLUSIONS: These results show evidence for both cross-talk and specificity in 
the Sorghum response to combined heat and drought stress. It is clear that some 
aspects of the combined stress response are unique compared to those of 
individual stresses. A functional characterization of the genes and pathways 
identified here could lead to new targets for the enhancement of plant stress 
tolerance, which will be particularly important in the face of climate change 
and the increasing prevalence of these abiotic stress types.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-456
PMCID: PMC4070570
PMID: 24916767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]