1. Front Pharmacol. 2014 Jun 5;5:134. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2014.00134. eCollection 
2014.

Impaired adenosine-mediated angiogenesis in preeclampsia: potential implications 
for fetal programming.

Escudero C(1), Roberts JM(2), Myatt L(3), Feoktistov I(4).

Author information:
(1)Vascular Physiology Laboratory, Group of Investigation in Tumor Angiogenesis, 
Group of Research and Innovation in Vascular Health, Department of Basic 
Sciences, Faculty of Sciences, Universidad del Bío-Bío Chillán, Chile.
(2)Magee-Womens Research Institute, Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and 
Reproductive Sciences, Department of Epidemiology and Clinical and Translational 
Science Institute, University of Pittsburgh Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(3)Center for Pregnancy and Newborn Research, University of Texas Health Science 
Center San Antonio, TX, USA.
(4)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt 
University Nashville, TN, USA ; Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, 
Vanderbilt University Nashville, TN, USA.

Preeclampsia is a pregnancy-specific syndrome, defined by such clinical 
hallmarks as the onset of maternal hypertension and proteinuria after 20 weeks 
of gestation. The syndrome is also characterized by impaired blood flow through 
the utero-placental circulation and relative placental ischemia, which in turn, 
may generate feto-placental endothelial dysfunction. Endothelial dysfunction in 
offspring born from preeclamptic pregnancies has been associated with an 
increased risk of cardiovascular disease, including hypertension, later in life. 
Interestingly, diminished endothelial function, manifested by low angiogenic 
capacity, leads to hypertension in animal studies. Recently, we have shown that 
the adenosine receptor A2A/nitric oxide/vascular endothelial growth factor axis 
is reduced in human umbilical vein endothelial cells derived from preeclamptic 
pregnancies, an effect correlated with gestational age at onset of preeclampsia. 
We and others suggested that impaired vascular function might be associated with 
high cardiovascular risk in offspring exposed to pregnancy diseases. However, we 
are not aware of any studies that examine impaired adenosine-mediated 
angiogenesis as a possible link to hypertension in offspring born from 
preeclamptic pregnancies. In this review, we present evidence supporting the 
hypothesis that reduced adenosine-mediated angiogenesis during preeclamptic 
pregnancies might be associated with development of hypertension in the 
offspring.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2014.00134
PMCID: PMC4046493
PMID: 24926270