1. Front Pediatr. 2014 Jun 5;2:53. doi: 10.3389/fped.2014.00053. eCollection
2014.

The role of adipose tissue and obesity in causing treatment resistance of acute 
lymphoblastic leukemia.

Sheng X(1), Mittelman SD(2).

Author information:
(1)Diabetes and Obesity Program, Center for Endocrinology, Diabetes and 
Metabolism, Children's Hospital Los Angeles , Los Angeles, CA , USA ; Keck 
School of Medicine, University of Southern California , Los Angeles, CA , USA.
(2)Diabetes and Obesity Program, Center for Endocrinology, Diabetes and 
Metabolism, Children's Hospital Los Angeles , Los Angeles, CA , USA ; Department 
of Pediatrics, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California , Los 
Angeles, CA , USA ; Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Keck School of 
Medicine, University of Southern California , Los Angeles, CA , USA.

Obesity is responsible for ~90,000 cancer deaths/year, increasing cancer 
incidence and impairing its treatment. Obesity has also been shown to impact 
hematological malignancies, through as yet unknown mechanisms. Adipocytes are 
present in bone marrow and the microenvironments of many types of cancer, and 
have been found to promote cancer cell survival. In this review, we explore 
several ways in which obesity might cause leukemia treatment resistance. Obese 
patients may be at a treatment disadvantage due to altered pharmacokinetics of 
chemotherapy and dosage "capping" based on ideal body weight. The adipose tissue 
provides fuel to cancer cells in the form of amino acids and free fatty acids. 
Adipocytes have been shown to cause cancer cells to resist chemotherapy-induced 
apoptosis. In addition, obese adipose tissue is phenotypically altered, 
producing a milieu of pro-inflammatory adipokines and cytokines, some of which 
have been linked to cancer progression. Given the prevalence of obesity, 
understanding its role and adipose tissue in acute lymphoblastic leukemia 
treatment is necessary for evaluating current treatment regimen and revealing 
new therapeutic targets.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2014.00053
PMCID: PMC4046266
PMID: 24926474