1. Drug Des Devel Ther. 2014 Jun 3;8:677-88. doi: 10.2147/DDDT.S35723.
eCollection  2014.

GLP-1(28-36)amide, the Glucagon-like peptide-1 metabolite: friend, foe, or 
pharmacological folly?

Taing MW(1), Rose FJ(2), Whitehead JP(3).

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Medicine, Mater Research Institute, University of Queensland, 
Australia ; School of Pharmacy, University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, 
Australia.
(2)Metabolic Medicine, Mater Research Institute, University of Queensland, 
Australia ; University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, Translational 
Research Institute, Brisbane, QLD, Australia.
(3)Metabolic Medicine, Mater Research Institute, University of Queensland, 
Australia.

The glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) axis has emerged as a major therapeutic 
target for the treatment of type 2 diabetes. GLP-1 mediates its key 
insulinotropic effects via a G-protein coupled receptor expressed on β-cells and 
other pancreatic cell types. The insulinotropic activity of GLP-1 is terminated 
via enzymatic cleavage by dipeptidyl peptidase-4. Until recently, GLP-1-derived 
metabolites were generally considered metabolically inactive; however, 
accumulating evidence indicates some have biological activity that may 
contribute to the pleiotropic effects of GLP-1 independent of the GLP-1 
receptor. Recent reports describing the putative effects of one such metabolite, 
the GLP-1-derived nonapeptide GLP-1(28-36) amide, are the focus of this review. 
Administration of the nonapeptide elevates cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) 
and activates protein kinase A, β-catenin, and cAMP response-element binding 
protein in pancreatic β-cells and hepatocytes. In stressed cells, the 
nonapeptide targets the mitochondria and, via poorly defined mechanisms, helps 
to maintain mitochondrial membrane potential and cellular adenosine triphosphate 
levels and to reduce cytotoxicity and apoptosis. In mouse models of diet-induced 
obesity, treatment with the nonapeptide reduces weight gain and ameliorates 
associated pathophysiology, including hyperglycemia, hyperinsulinemia, and 
hepatic steatosis. Nonapeptide administration in a streptozotocin-induced model 
of type 1 diabetes also improves glucose disposal concomitant with elevated 
insulin levels and increased β-cell mass and proliferation. Collectively, these 
results suggest some of the beneficial effects of GLP-1 receptor analogs may be 
mediated by the nonapeptide. However, the concentrations required to elicit some 
of these effects are in the micromolar range, leading to reservations about 
potentially related therapeutic benefits. Moreover, although controversial, 
concerns have been raised about the potential for incretin-based therapies to 
promote pancreatitis and pancreatic and thyroid cancers. The effects ascribed to 
the nonapeptide make it a potential contributor to such outcomes, raising 
additional questions about its therapeutic suitability. Notwithstanding, the 
nonapeptide, like other GLP-1 metabolites, appears to be biologically active. 
Increasing understanding of such noncanonical GLP-1 activities should help to 
improve future incretin-based therapeutics.

DOI: 10.2147/DDDT.S35723
PMCID: PMC4051623
PMID: 24940046 [Indexed for MEDLINE]