1. Cancer Treat Rev. 2014 Sep;40(8):990-1004. doi: 10.1016/j.ctrv.2014.05.009.
Epub  2014 Jun 6.

Novel therapeutic strategies for patients with NSCLC that do not respond to 
treatment with EGFR inhibitors.

Rolfo C(1), Giovannetti E(2), Hong DS(3), Bivona T(4), Raez LE(5), Bronte G(6), 
Buffoni L(7), Reguart N(8), Santos ES(9), Germonpre P(10), Taron M(11), 
Passiglia F(12), Van Meerbeeck JP(13), Russo A(6), Peeters M(14), Gil-Bazo 
I(15), Pauwels P(16), Rosell R(11).

Author information:
(1)Phase I - Early Clinical Trials Unit, Oncology Department and 
Multidisciplinary Oncology Center Antwerp (MOCA) Antwerp University Hospital, 
Edegem, Belgium. Electronic address: christian.rolfo@uza.be.
(2)Department Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(3)Department of Investigational Cancer Therapeutics, The University of Texas MD 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(4)Hematology and Oncology Department, Hellen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(5)Memorial Cancer Institute, Memorial Health Care System, Florida International 
University, Miami, FL, USA.
(6)Department of Surgical, Oncological and Oral Sciences, Section of Medical 
Oncology, University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.
(7)San Giovanni Battista Molinette Hospital, Department of Medical Oncology, 
Turin, Italy.
(8)Medical Oncology Department, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain.
(9)Lynn Cancer Institute, Thoracic Oncology, Boca Raton, FL, USA.
(10)Department of Respiratory Medicine, AZ Maria Middelares, Kortrijksesteenweg 
1026, 9000 Ghent, Belgium.
(11)Catalan Institute of Oncology, Hospital Germans Trias i Pujol, Badalona, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(12)Phase I - Early Clinical Trials Unit, Oncology Department and 
Multidisciplinary Oncology Center Antwerp (MOCA) Antwerp University Hospital, 
Edegem, Belgium; Department of Surgical, Oncological and Oral Sciences, Section 
of Medical Oncology, University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.
(13)Thoracic Oncology, Multidisciplinary Oncology Center Antwerp (MOCA) Antwerp 
University Hospital, Edegem, Belgium.
(14)Department of Medical Oncology, University Hospital Antwerpen, Wilrijkstraat 
10, 2650 Edegem, Belgium.
(15)Department of Oncology, Clinica Universidad de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.
(16)Molecular Pathology Unit, Pathology Department and Multidisciplinary 
Oncology Center Antwerp (MOCA) Antwerp University Hospital, Edegem, Belgium.

INTRODUCTION: Treatment with epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine 
kinase inhibitors (TKIs) yields tumour responses in non-small cell lung cancer 
(NSCLC) patients harbouring activating EGFR mutations. However, even in 
long-lasting responses, resistance to EGFR TKIs invariably occurs.
AREAS COVERED: This review examines resistance mechanisms to EGFR TKI treatment, 
which mainly arise from secondary EGFR mutations. Other resistance-inducing 
processes include mesenchymal-epithelial transition factor (MET) amplification, 
epithelial-mesenchymal transformation, phenotypic change from NSCLC to 
small-cell lung carcinoma, and modifications in parallel signalling pathways. 
Current therapeutic strategies to overcome these EGFR TKI resistance mechanisms 
focus on the inhibition or blocking of multiple members of the ErbB family. 
Several molecules which target multiple ErbB receptors are being investigated in 
NSCLC and other indications including afatinib, an ErbB Family Blocker, as well 
as dacomitinib and lapatinib. Novel, non-quinazoline, EGFR inhibitors, that also 
target EGFR activating and resistance (T790M) mutations, are currently under 
clinical development. Other therapeutic strategies include inhibition of 
parallel and downstream pathways, using agents which target heat shock protein 
(HSP)90 or poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase in addition to mammalian target of 
rapamycin (mTOR), monoclonal antibodies against the insulin-like growth factor-1 
receptor, and fulvestrant-mediated oestrogen receptor regulation.
CONCLUSION: Improved understanding of mechanisms underlying resistance to EGFR 
TKIs emphasises the importance of a genotype-guided approach to therapy. 
Elucidation of resistance mechanisms is indeed crucial to target innovative 
therapeutic approaches and to improve the efficacy of anticancer regimes in 
NSCLC.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ctrv.2014.05.009
PMID: 24953979 [Indexed for MEDLINE]