1. PLoS Genet. 2014 Jun 26;10(6):e1004430. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004430. 
eCollection 2014 Jun.

Ex uno plures: clonal reinforcement drives evolution of a simple microbial 
community.

Kinnersley M(1), Wenger J(2), Kroll E(1), Adams J(3), Sherlock G(2), Rosenzweig 
F(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, The University of Montana, Missoula, 
Montana, United States of America.
(2)Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, 
California, United States of America.
(3)Departments of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology and Ecology and 
Evolutionary Biology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States 
of America.

A major goal of genetics is to define the relationship between phenotype and 
genotype, while a major goal of ecology is to identify the rules that govern 
community assembly. Achieving these goals by analyzing natural systems can be 
difficult, as selective pressures create dynamic fitness landscapes that vary in 
both space and time. Laboratory experimental evolution offers the benefit of 
controlling variables that shape fitness landscapes, helping to achieve both 
goals. We previously showed that a clonal population of E. coli experimentally 
evolved under continuous glucose limitation gives rise to a genetically diverse 
community consisting of one clone, CV103, that best scavenges but incompletely 
utilizes the limiting resource, and others, CV101 and CV116, that consume its 
overflow metabolites. Because this community can be disassembled and 
reassembled, and involves cooperative interactions that are stable over time, 
its genetic diversity is sustained by clonal reinforcement rather than by clonal 
interference. To understand the genetic factors that produce this outcome, and 
to illuminate the community's underlying physiology, we sequenced the genomes of 
ancestral and evolved clones. We identified ancestral mutations in intermediary 
metabolism that may have predisposed the evolution of metabolic interdependence. 
Phylogenetic reconstruction indicates that the lineages that gave rise to this 
community diverged early, as CV103 shares only one Single Nucleotide 
Polymorphism with the other evolved clones. Underlying CV103's phenotype we 
identified a set of mutations that likely enhance glucose scavenging and 
maintain redox balance, but may do so at the expense of carbon excreted in 
overflow metabolites. Because these overflow metabolites serve as growth 
substrates that are differentially accessible to the other community members, 
and because the scavenging lineage shares only one SNP with these other clones, 
we conclude that this lineage likely served as an "engine" generating diversity 
by creating new metabolic niches, but not the occupants themselves.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004430
PMCID: PMC4072538
PMID: 24968217 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.