1. Immune Netw. 2014 Jun;14(3):138-48. doi: 10.4110/in.2014.14.3.138. Epub 2014
Jun  19.

MicroRNA Regulation in Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Pathogenesis.

Yan S(1), Yim LY(1), Lu L(2), Lau CS(1), Chan VS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of 
Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
(2)Department of Pathology, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of 
Hong Kong, Hong Kong.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are endogenous small RNA molecules best known for their 
function in post-transcriptional gene regulation. Immunologically, miRNA 
regulates the differentiation and function of immune cells and its malfunction 
contributes to the development of various autoimmune diseases including systemic 
lupus erythematosus (SLE). Over the last decade, accumulating researches provide 
evidence for the connection between dysregulated miRNA network and autoimmunity. 
Interruption of miRNA biogenesis machinery contributes to the abnormal T and B 
cell development and particularly a reduced suppressive function of regulatory T 
cells, leading to systemic autoimmune diseases. Additionally, multiple factors 
under autoimmune conditions interfere with miRNA generation via key miRNA 
processing enzymes, thus further skewing the miRNA expression profile. Indeed, 
several independent miRNA profiling studies reported significant differences 
between SLE patients and healthy controls. Despite the lack of a consistent 
expression pattern on individual dysregulated miRNAs in SLE among these studies, 
the aberrant expression of distinct groups of miRNAs causes overlapping 
functional outcomes including perturbed type I interferon signalling cascade, 
DNA hypomethylation and hyperactivation of T and B cells. The impact of specific 
miRNA-mediated regulation on function of major immune cells in lupus is also 
discussed. Although research on the clinical application of miRNAs is still 
immature, through an integrated approach with advances in next generation 
sequencing, novel tools in bioinformatics database analysis and new in vitro and 
in vivo models for functional evaluation, the diagnostic and therapeutic 
potentials of miRNAs may bring to fruition in the future.

DOI: 10.4110/in.2014.14.3.138
PMCID: PMC4079820
PMID: 24999310

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no financial conflict of 
interest.