1. Pulm Circ. 2014 Jun;4(2):250-9. doi: 10.1086/675988.

Pentraxin-3 and the right ventricle: the Multi-Ethnic Study of 
Atherosclerosis-Right Ventricle Study.

Leary PJ(1), Jenny NS(2), Barr RG(3), Bluemke DA(4), Harhay MO(5), Heckbert 
SR(6), Kronmal RA(7), Lima JA(8), Mikacenic C(1), Tracy RP(2), Kawut SM(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of Washington, 
Seattle, Washington, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Vermont, 
Burlington, Vermont, USA.
(3)Departments of Medicine and Epidemiology, Columbia University, New York, New 
York, USA.
(4)Radiology and Imaging Sciences, National Institutes of Health Clinical 
Center, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(5)Department of Medicine, Center for Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, 
and the Penn Cardiovascular Institute, Perelman School of Medicine at the 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(6)Departments of Epidemiology and Pharmacy, University of Washington, Seattle, 
Washington, USA.
(7)Department of Biostatistics, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, 
USA.
(8)Departments of Medicine and Radiology, Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, 
Maryland, USA.

Pentraxin-3 (PTX3) is a protein mediator of innate immunity that is elevated in 
the setting of left heart disease and pulmonary arterial hypertension. The 
relationship between PTX3 and right ventricular (RV) structure and function is 
not known. We included men and women with magnetic resonance imaging assessment 
of RV structure and function and measurement of PTX3 from the Multi-Ethnic Study 
of Atherosclerosis, a study of individuals free of clinical cardiovascular 
disease. Multivariable linear regression estimated associations between PTX3 
protein levels and RV measures after adjusting for demographic characteristics, 
anthropometrics, smoking status, diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and 
corresponding left ventricular (LV) parameters. Instrumental variable analysis 
exploiting Mendelian randomization was attempted using two-stage least squares 
regression. The study sample included 1,779 participants with available PTX3 
levels, RV measures, and all covariables. Mean PTX3 level was 2.1 ng/mL. Higher 
PTX3 was independently associated with greater RV mass and larger RV 
end-diastolic volume with and without adjustment for the corresponding LV 
parameters or C-reactive protein (all P < .05). There was no association between 
PTX3 and RV ejection fraction or stroke volume. Single-nucleotide polymorphisms 
were not associated with PTX3 protein levels or RV measures after accounting for 
race. Instrumental variable analysis could not be reliably performed. Higher 
PTX3 protein levels were associated with greater RV mass and larger RV 
end-diastolic volume. These associations were independent of common 
cardiovascular risk factors and LV morphologic changes. Inflammation is 
associated with differences in the pulmonary circulation-RV axis in adults 
without clinical cardiovascular disease.

DOI: 10.1086/675988
PMCID: PMC4070771
PMID: 25006444