1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2014 Jul 31;10(7):e1003763. doi:
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003763.  eCollection 2014 Jul.

Robustness and evolvability of the human signaling network.

Kim J(1), Vandamme D(2), Kim JR(3), Munoz AG(2), Kolch W(4), Cho KH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Bio and Brain Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science 
and Technology (KAIST), Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, Republic of Korea.
(2)Systems Biology Ireland, University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.
(3)Department of Bio and Brain Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science 
and Technology (KAIST), Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, Republic of Korea; Department of 
Mathematics, University of Seoul, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(4)Systems Biology Ireland, University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland; Conway 
Institute of Biomolecular and Biomedical Research, University College Dublin, 
Dublin, Ireland; School of Medicine and Medical Science, University College 
Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.

Biological systems are known to be both robust and evolvable to internal and 
external perturbations, but what causes these apparently contradictory 
properties? We used Boolean network modeling and attractor landscape analysis to 
investigate the evolvability and robustness of the human signaling network. Our 
results show that the human signaling network can be divided into an evolvable 
core where perturbations change the attractor landscape in state space, and a 
robust neighbor where perturbations have no effect on the attractor landscape. 
Using chemical inhibition and overexpression of nodes, we validated that 
perturbations affect the evolvable core more strongly than the robust neighbor. 
We also found that the evolvable core has a distinct network structure, which is 
enriched in feedback loops, and features a higher degree of scale-freeness and 
longer path lengths connecting the nodes. In addition, the genes with high 
evolvability scores are associated with evolvability-related properties such as 
rapid evolvability, low species broadness, and immunity whereas the genes with 
high robustness scores are associated with robustness-related properties such as 
slow evolvability, high species broadness, and oncogenes. Intriguingly, US Food 
and Drug Administration-approved drug targets have high evolvability scores 
whereas experimental drug targets have high robustness scores.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003763
PMCID: PMC4117429
PMID: 25077791 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.