1. Trials. 2014 Aug 7;15:314. doi: 10.1186/1745-6215-15-314.

An approach to trial design and analysis in the era of non-proportional hazards 
of the treatment effect.

Royston P(1), Parmar MK.

Author information:
(1)MRC Clinical Trials Unit at UCL, Aviation House, 125 Kingsway, London WC2B 
6NH, UK. j.royston@ucl.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Most randomized controlled trials with a time-to-event outcome are 
designed and analysed under the proportional hazards assumption, with a target 
hazard ratio for the treatment effect in mind. However, the hazards may be 
non-proportional. We address how to design a trial under such conditions, and 
how to analyse the results.
METHODS: We propose to extend the usual approach, a logrank test, to also 
include the Grambsch-Therneau test of proportional hazards. We test the 
resulting composite null hypothesis using a joint test for the hazard ratio and 
for time-dependent behaviour of the hazard ratio. We compute the power and 
sample size for the logrank test under proportional hazards, and from that we 
compute the power of the joint test. For the estimation of relevant quantities 
from the trial data, various models could be used; we advocate adopting a 
pre-specified flexible parametric survival model that supports time-dependent 
behaviour of the hazard ratio.
RESULTS: We present the mathematics for calculating the power and sample size 
for the joint test. We illustrate the methodology in real data from two 
randomized trials, one in ovarian cancer and the other in treating cellulitis. 
We show selected estimates and their uncertainty derived from the advocated 
flexible parametric model. We demonstrate in a small simulation study that when 
a treatment effect either increases or decreases over time, the joint test can 
outperform the logrank test in the presence of both patterns of non-proportional 
hazards.
CONCLUSIONS: Those designing and analysing trials in the era of non-proportional 
hazards need to acknowledge that a more complex type of treatment effect is 
becoming more common. Our method for the design of the trial retains the tools 
familiar in the standard methodology based on the logrank test, and extends it 
to incorporate a joint test of the null hypothesis with power against 
non-proportional hazards. For the analysis of trial data, we propose the use of 
a pre-specified flexible parametric model that can represent a time-dependent 
hazard ratio if one is present.

DOI: 10.1186/1745-6215-15-314
PMCID: PMC4133607
PMID: 25098243 [Indexed for MEDLINE]