1. Front Psychiatry. 2014 Jul 21;5:88. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2014.00088. eCollection
 2014.

Conditioned fear associated phenotypes as robust, translational indices of 
trauma-, stressor-, and anxiety-related behaviors.

Briscione MA(1), Jovanovic T(2), Norrholm SD(1).

Author information:
(1)Trauma Recovery Program, Mental Health Service Line, Atlanta Veterans Affairs 
Medical Center , Decatur, GA , USA ; Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral 
Sciences, Emory University School of Medicine , Atlanta, GA , USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Emory University School of 
Medicine , Atlanta, GA , USA.

Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is a heterogeneous disorder that affects 
individuals exposed to trauma (e.g., combat, interpersonal violence, and natural 
disasters). It is characterized by hyperarousal, intrusive reminders of the 
trauma, avoidance of trauma-related cues, and negative cognition and mood. This 
heterogeneity indicates the presence of multiple neurobiological mechanisms 
underlying the development and maintenance of PTSD. Fear conditioning is a 
robust, translational experimental paradigm that can be employed to elucidate 
these mechanisms by allowing for the study of fear-related dimensions of PTSD 
(e.g., fear extinction, fear inhibition, and generalization of fear) across 
multiple units of analysis. Fear conditioning experiments have identified 
varying trajectories of the dimensions described, highlighting exciting new 
avenues of targeted, focused study. Additionally, fear conditioning studies 
provide a translational platform to develop novel interventions. The current 
review highlights the versatility of fear conditioning paradigms, the 
implications for pharmacological and non-pharmacological treatments, the 
robustness of these paradigms to span an array of neuroscientific measures 
(e.g., genetic studies), and finally the need to understand the boundary 
conditions under which these paradigms are effective. Further understanding 
these paradigms will ultimately allow for optimization of fear conditioning 
paradigms, a necessary step towards the advancement of PTSD treatment methods.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyt.2014.00088
PMCID: PMC4104832
PMID: 25101010