1. Heart Views. 2014 Apr;15(2):37-45. doi: 10.4103/1995-705X.137493.

Oxytocin ameliorates the immediate myocardial injury in heart transplant through 
down regulation of the neutrophil dependent myocardial apoptosis.

Al-Amran FF(1), Shahkolahi M(2).

Author information:
(1)Surgical Department, Medical College, Kufa University, Najaf, Iraq.
(2)Howard University College of Medicine, Medical Department, Washington DC, 
USA.

Cardiac oxytocin (OT) is structurally identical to that found in the 
hypothalamus, which thereby indicates that cardiac OT is derived from the same 
gene and is an active form of OT. The abundance of OT and OT receptors in atrial 
myocytes shows that, directly and/or via the release of the cardiac hormone 
atrial natriuretic peptide, OT can regulate the force of cardiac contractions. 
Previous studies have demonstrated the role of OT in the myocardial inflammatory 
response. The mechanism by which OT elicits protective myocardial effects in the 
immediate post-transplantation period is not yet clear, and the role of the 
early phase inflammatory elements in this mechanism has not yet been studied. As 
a result, in this study, we have investigated the anti-inflammatory effects of 
OT on myocardial protection in the immediate post-transplantation period.
METHODS: ADULT MALE ALBINO RATS WERE GROUPED INTO: Sham, Control, and OT-treated 
groups. The control and treated groups sustained cervical heterotopic heart 
transplant. Myocardial injury was assessed by measuring: Plasma cardiac troponin 
I, myocardial proinflammatory cytokines, and histopathological assessment for 
score of injury, and degree of apoptosis. Myocardial myeloperoxidase, neutrophil 
infiltration, and neutrophil chemotactant agents, reactive oxygen species, and 
reactive nitrogen species formation all were measured in the myocardium after 3 
hour of reperfusion to assess the neutrophil-dependant myocardial injury and the 
mechanism involved.
RESULTS: Oxytocin down-regulates the neutrophil chemotactant agents the KC/CXCL1 
and MIP-2/CXCL2 which recruit less neutrophil into myocardium, this decrement in 
myocardial PMN infiltration is associated with less reactive oxygen species and 
reactive nitrogen species formation in the myocardium after 3 hours of global 
ischemia reperfusion. These oxytocin-induced down-regulation inflammatory and 
oxidative processes will end in less myocardial injury through impedance in the 
post-myocardial ischemia/reperfusion apoptotic process.
CONCLUSION: Oxytocin ameliorates myocardial injury in heart transplant through 
down-regulation the myocardial inflammatory response, reactive oxygen species, 
and neutrophil-dependant myocardial apoptosis.

DOI: 10.4103/1995-705X.137493
PMCID: PMC4124664
PMID: 25104981

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: None declared.