1. J Biol Eng. 2014 Aug 1;8:19. doi: 10.1186/1754-1611-8-19. eCollection 2014.

"NiCo Buster": engineering E. coli for fast and efficient capture of cobalt and 
nickel.

Duprey A(1)(2), Chansavang V(1), Frémion F(1), Gonthier C(1), Louis Y(3), 
Lejeune P(2), Springer F(3), Desjardin V(3), Rodrigue A(#)(2), Dorel C(#)(3).

Author information:
(1)iGEM team INSA Lyon, Plateforme de Biologie de Synthèse, Département 
Biosciences, INSA Lyon, 69621 Villeurbanne Cedex, France.
(2)Université de Lyon, INSA-Lyon, Université Claude Bernard Lyon I, CNRS, MAP, 
UMR5240, Villeurbanne F-69621, France.
(3)Université de Lyon, INSA-Lyon, LGCIE, Villeurbanne F-69621, France.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Metal contamination is widespread and results from natural geogenic 
and constantly increasing anthropogenic sources (mainly mining and extraction 
activities, electroplating, battery and steel manufacturing or metal finishing). 
Consequently, there is a growing need for methods to detoxify polluted 
ecosystems. Industrial wastewater, surface water and ground water need to be 
decontaminated to alleviate the contamination of soils and sediments and, 
ultimately, the human food chain. In nuclear power plants, radioactive metals 
are produced; these metals need to be removed from effluents before they are 
released into the environment, not only for pollution prevention but also for 
waste minimization. Many physicochemical methods have been developed for metal 
removal from aqueous solutions, including chemical coagulation, adsorption, 
extraction, ion exchange and membrane separation; however, these methods are 
generally not metal selective. Bacteria, because they contain metal 
transporters, provide a potentially competitive alternative to the current use 
of expensive and high-volume ion-exchange resins.
RESULTS: The feasibility of using bacterial biofilters as efficient tools for 
nickel and cobalt ions specific remediation was investigated. Among the factors 
susceptible to genetic modification in Escherichia coli, specific efflux and 
sequestration systems were engineered to improve its metal sequestration 
abilities. Genomic suppression of the RcnA nickel (Ni) and cobalt (Co) efflux 
system was combined with the plasmid-controlled expression of a genetically 
improved version of a specific metallic transporter, NiCoT, which originates 
from Novosphingobium aromaticivorans. The resulting strain exhibited enhanced 
nickel (II) and cobalt (II) uptake, with a maximum metal ion accumulation of 
6 mg/g bacterial dry weight during 10 min of treatment. A synthetic adherence 
operon was successfully introduced into the plasmid carrying the improved NiCoT 
transporter, conferring the ability to form thick biofilm structures, especially 
when exposed to nickel and cobalt metallic compounds.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates the efficient use of genetic engineering to 
increase metal sequestration and biofilm formation by E. coli. This method 
allows Co and Ni contaminants to be sequestered while spatially confining the 
bacteria to an abiotic support. Biofiltration of nickel (II) and cobalt (II) by 
immobilized cells is therefore a promising option for treating these 
contaminants at an industrial scale.

DOI: 10.1186/1754-1611-8-19
PMCID: PMC4124493
PMID: 25104972