1. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 12;9(8):e104912. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0104912. 
eCollection 2014.

Moderate hypoxia influences potassium outward currents in adipose-derived stem 
cells.

Prasad M(1), Zachar V(1), Fink T(1), Pennisi CP(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Stem Cell Research, Department of Health Science and 
Technology, Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark.

Moderate hypoxic preconditioning of adipose-derived stem cells (ASCs) enhances 
properties such as proliferation and secretion of growth factors, representing a 
valuable strategy to increase the efficiency of cell-based therapies. In a wide 
variety of cells potassium (K+) channels are key elements involved in the 
cellular responses to hypoxia, suggesting that ASCs cultured under low oxygen 
conditions may display altered electrophysiological properties. Here, the 
effects of moderate hypoxic culture on proliferation, whole-cell currents, and 
ion channel expression were investigated using human ASCs cultured at 5% and 20% 
oxygen. Although cell proliferation was greatly enhanced, the dose-dependent 
growth inhibition by the K+ channel blocker tetraethylammonium (TEA) was not 
significantly affected by hypoxia. Under both normoxic and hypoxic conditions, 
ASCs displayed outward K+ currents composed by Ca2+-activated, delayed 
rectifier, and transient components. Hypoxic culture reduced the slope of the 
current-voltage curves and caused a negative shift in the voltage activation 
threshold of the whole-cell currents. However, the TEA-mediated shift of voltage 
activation threshold was not affected by hypoxia. Semiquantitative real-time 
RT-PCR revealed that expression of genes encoding for various ion channels 
subunits related to oxygen sensing and proliferation remained unchanged after 
hypoxic culture. In conclusion, outward currents are influenced by moderate 
hypoxia in ASCs through a mechanism that is not likely the result of modulation 
of TEA-sensitive K+ channels.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0104912
PMCID: PMC4130641
PMID: 25115627 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.