1. Oncotarget. 2014 Sep 15;5(17):7498-511. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.2241.

Aurora kinase a suppresses metabolic stress-induced autophagic cell death by 
activating mTOR signaling in breast cancer cells.

Xu LZ(1), Long ZJ(2), Peng F(1), Liu Y(1), Xu J(1), Wang C(1), Jiang L(1), Guo 
T(1), Kamran M(1), Li SS(1), Wang CL(1), Wang HJ(3), Zhao YF(4), Wan XY(5), Liu 
Q(6).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cancer Stem Cell, Dalian Medical University, Dalian, China; 
State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Cancer Center, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Hematology, the Third Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China. Institute of Hematology, Sun Yat-sen University, 
Guangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Breast Surgery, the First Affiliated Hospital, Dalian Medical 
University, Dalian, China.
(4)Department of Thyroid Surgery, the Second Affiliated Hospital, Dalian Medical 
University, Dalian, China.
(5)Department of Critical Care Medicine, the First Affiliated Hospital, Dalian 
Medical University, Dalian, China.
(6)Institute of Cancer Stem Cell, Dalian Medical University, Dalian, China; 
State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Cancer Center, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China. Department of Hematology, the Third Affiliated 
Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China. Institute of Hematology, Sun 
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.

Aberrant Aur-A signaling is associated with tumor malignant behaviors. However, 
its involvement in tumor metabolic stress is not fully elucidated. In the 
present study, prolonged nutrient deprivation was conducted into breast cancer 
cells to mimic metabolic stress in tumors. In these cells, autophagy was 
induced, leading to caspase-independent cell death, which was blocked by either 
targeted knockdown of autophagic gene ATG5 or autophagy inhibitor 
3-Methyladenine (3-MA). Aur-A overexpression mediated resistance to autophagic 
cell death and promoted breast cancer cells survival when exposed to metabolic 
stress. Moreover, we provided evidence that Aur-A suppressed autophagy in a 
kinase-dependent manner. Furthermore, we revealed that Aur-A overexpression 
enhanced the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) activity under metabolic 
stress by inhibiting glycogen synthase kinase 3β (GSK3β). Inhibition of mTOR 
activity by rapamycin sensitized Aur-A-overexpressed breast cancer cells to 
metabolic stress-induced cell death. Consistently, we presented an inverse 
correlation between Aur-A expression (high) and autophagic levels (low) in 
clinical breast cancer samples. In conclusion, our data provided a novel insight 
into the cyto-protective role of Aur-A against metabolic stress by suppressing 
autophagic cell death, which might help to develop alternative cell death 
avenues for breast cancer therapy.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.2241
PMCID: PMC4202139
PMID: 25115395 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest No potential conflicts of 
interest were disclosed.