1. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 14;9(8):e105323. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0105323. 
eCollection 2014.

In vitro and in vivo studies for assessing the immune response and 
protection-inducing ability conferred by Fasciola hepatica-derived synthetic 
peptides containing B- and T-cell epitopes.

Rojas-Caraballo J(1), López-Abán J(2), Pérez del Villar L(2), Vizcaíno C(3), 
Vicente B(2), Fernández-Soto P(2), del Olmo E(4), Patarroyo MA(5), Muro A(2).

Author information:
(1)Parasite and Molecular Immunology Laboratory, Tropical Disease Research 
Centre, Universidad de Salamanca (IBSAL-CIETUS), Salamanca, Spain; Molecular 
Biology and Immunology Department, Fundación Instituto de Inmunología de 
Colombia (FIDIC), Bogotá, Colombia.
(2)Parasite and Molecular Immunology Laboratory, Tropical Disease Research 
Centre, Universidad de Salamanca (IBSAL-CIETUS), Salamanca, Spain.
(3)Molecular Biology and Immunology Department, Fundación Instituto de 
Inmunología de Colombia (FIDIC), Bogotá, Colombia.
(4)Pharmaceutical Chemistry Department, Tropical Disease Research Centre, 
Universidad de Salamanca (IBSAL-CIETUS), Salamanca, Spain.
(5)Molecular Biology and Immunology Department, Fundación Instituto de 
Inmunología de Colombia (FIDIC), Bogotá, Colombia; Basic Sciences Department, 
School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Universidad del Rosario, Bogotá, 
Colombia.

Fasciolosis is considered the most widespread trematode disease affecting 
grazing animals around the world; it is currently recognised by the World Health 
Organisation as an emergent human pathogen. Triclabendazole is still the most 
effective drug against this disease; however, resistant strains have appeared 
and developing an effective vaccine against this disease has increasingly become 
a priority. Several bioinformatics tools were here used for predicting B- and 
T-cell epitopes according to the available data for Fasciola hepatica protein 
amino acid sequences. BALB/c mice were immunised with the synthetic peptides by 
using the ADAD vaccination system and several immune response parameters were 
measured (antibody titres, cytokine levels, T-cell populations) to evaluate 
their ability to elicit an immune response. Based on the immunogenicity results 
so obtained, seven peptides were selected to assess their protection-inducing 
ability against experimental infection with F. hepatica metacercariae. 
Twenty-four B- or T-epitope-containing peptides were predicted and chemically 
synthesised. Immunisation of mice with peptides so-called B1, B2, B5, B6, T14, 
T15 and T16 induced high levels of total IgG, IgG1 and IgG2a (p<0.05) and a 
mixed Th1/Th2/Th17/Treg immune response, according to IFN-γ, IL-4, IL-17 and 
IL-10 levels, accompanied by increased CD62L+ T-cell populations. A high level 
of protection was obtained in mice vaccinated with peptides B2, B5, B6 and T15 
formulated in the ADAD vaccination system with the AA0029 immunomodulator. The 
bioinformatics approach used in the present study led to the identification of 
seven peptides as vaccine candidates against the infection caused by Fasciola 
hepatica (a liver-fluke trematode). However, vaccine efficacy must be evaluated 
in other host species, including those having veterinary importance.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0105323
PMCID: PMC4133369
PMID: 25122166 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.