1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2014 Aug 14;55(9):5482-96. doi: 
10.1167/iovs.14-14886.

Wnt and extraocular muscle sparing in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

McLoon LK(1), Harandi VM(2), Brännström T(3), Andersen PM(4), Liu JX(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Neurosciences, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, United States Department of Integrative 
Medical Biology, Section for Anatomy, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden.
(2)Department of Integrative Medical Biology, Section for Anatomy, Umeå 
University, Umeå, Sweden.
(3)Department of Medical Biosciences, Pathology, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden.
(4)Department of Pharmacology and Clinical Neuroscience, Umeå University, Umeå, 
Sweden.

PURPOSE: The extraocular muscles (EOM) and their motor neurons are spared in 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). In limb muscle, axon retraction from the 
neuromuscular junctions occurs early in the disease. Wnts, a conserved family of 
secreted signaling molecules, play a critical role in neuromuscular junction 
formation. This is the first study to examine Wnt signaling for its potential 
involvement in maintenance of normal morphology in EOM in ALS.
METHODS: Extraocular muscle and limb muscle axons, neuromuscular junctions, and 
myofibers from control, aging, and ALS subjects and the SOD1(G93A) mouse model 
of ALS were quantified for their expression of Wnt1, Wnt3a, Wnt5a, Wnt7a, and 
β-catenin.
RESULTS: All four Wnt isoforms were expressed in most axon profiles in all human 
EOM. Significantly fewer were positive for Wnt1, Wnt3a, and Wnt7a in the human 
limb muscles. Similar differential patterns in Wnt myofiber expression were also 
seen except in the case of Wnt7a, where expression was elevated. In the 
SOD1(G93A) mouse, all four Wnt isoforms were significantly decreased in the 
neuromuscular junctions at the terminal stage compared to values in age-matched 
controls. β-Catenin was activated in a subset of myofibers in EOM and limb 
muscle in all subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: The differences in expression of Wnts in EOM and limb muscle, 
particularly at the neuromuscular junction level, suggest that they play a role 
in the pathophysiology of ALS. Collectively, the data support a role for 
signaling of Wnts in the preservation of the EOM in ALS and their dysregulation 
and the subsequent development of pathology in the ALS limb muscles.

Copyright 2014 The Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.14-14886
PMCID: PMC4580151
PMID: 25125606 [Indexed for MEDLINE]