1. Int J Nanomedicine. 2014 Aug 5;9:3659-76. doi: 10.2147/IJN.S63433. eCollection
 2014.

Development and characterization of magnetic iron oxide nanoparticles with a 
cisplatin-bearing polymer coating for targeted drug delivery.

Unterweger H(1), Tietze R(1), Janko C(1), Zaloga J(1), Lyer S(1), Dürr S(1), 
Taccardi N(2), Goudouri OM(3), Hoppe A(3), Eberbeck D(4), Schubert DW(5), 
Boccaccini AR(3), Alexiou C(1).

Author information:
(1)ENT Department, Section of Experimental Oncology and Nanomedicine (SEON), 
Else Kroener-Fresenius-Stiftung-Professorship, University Hospital Erlangen, 
Germany.
(2)Chair of Chemical Engineering I (Reaction Engineering), University 
Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany.
(3)Institute of Biomaterials, Department of Materials Science and Engineering, 
University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany.
(4)Physikalisch-Technische Bundesanstalt, Berlin, Germany.
(5)Institute of Polymer Materials, Department of Materials Science and 
Engineering, University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany.

A highly selective and efficient cancer therapy can be achieved using 
magnetically directed superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles (SPIONs) 
bearing a sufficient amount of the therapeutic agent. In this project, SPIONs 
with a dextran and cisplatin-bearing hyaluronic acid coating were successfully 
synthesized as a novel cisplatin drug delivery system. Transmission electron 
microscopy images as well as X-ray diffraction analysis showed that the 
individual magnetite particles were around 4.5 nm in size and monocrystalline. 
The small crystallite sizes led to the superparamagnetic behavior of the 
particles, which was exemplified in their magnetization curves, acquired using 
superconducting quantum interference device measurements. Hyaluronic acid was 
bound to the initially dextran-coated SPIONs by esterification. The resulting 
amide bond linkage was verified using Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy. 
The additional polymer layer increased the vehicle size from 22 nm to 56 nm, 
with a hyaluronic acid to dextran to magnetite weight ratio of 51:29:20. A 
maximum payload of 330 μg cisplatin/mL nanoparticle suspension was achieved, 
thus the particle size was further increased to around 77 nm with a zeta 
potential of -45 mV. No signs of particle precipitation were observed over a 
period of at least 8 weeks. Analysis of drug-release kinetics using the dialysis 
tube method revealed that these were driven by inverse ligand substitution and 
diffusion through the polymer shell as well as enzymatic degradation of 
hyaluronic acid. The biological activity of the particles was investigated in a 
nonadherent Jurkat cell line using flow cytometry. Further, cell viability and 
proliferation was examined in an adherent PC-3 cell line using xCELLigence 
analysis. Both tests demonstrated that particles without cisplatin were 
biocompatible with these cells, whereas particles with the drug induced 
apoptosis in a dose-dependent manner, with secondary necrosis after prolonged 
incubation. In conclusion, combination of dextran-coated SPIONs with hyaluronic 
acid and cisplatin represents a promising approach for magnetic drug targeting 
in the treatment of cancer.

DOI: 10.2147/IJN.S63433
PMCID: PMC4128796
PMID: 25120363 [Indexed for MEDLINE]