1. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 15;9(8):e104973. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0104973. 
eCollection 2014.

Neuronal cellular responses to extremely low frequency electromagnetic field 
exposure: implications regarding oxidative stress and neurodegeneration.

Reale M(1), Kamal MA(2), Patruno A(3), Costantini E(1), D'Angelo C(1), Pesce 
M(3), Greig NH(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental and Clinical Sciences, University "G. d'Annunzio, 
Chieti, Italy.
(2)King Fahd Medical Research Center, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Kingdom 
of Saudi Arabia.
(3)Department of Medicine and Aging Science, University 'G. d'Annunzio' of 
Chieti-Pescara, Chieti, Italy.
(4)Drug Design and Development Section, Translational Gerontology Branch, 
Intramural Research Program, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of 
Health, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.

Neurodegenerative diseases comprise both hereditary and sporadic conditions 
characterized by an identifying progressive nervous system dysfunction and 
distinctive neuopathophysiology. The majority are of non-familial etiology and 
hence environmental factors and lifestyle play key roles in their pathogenesis. 
The extensive use of and ever increasing worldwide demand for electricity has 
stimulated societal and scientific interest on the environmental exposure to low 
frequency electromagnetic fields (EMFs) on human health. Epidemiological studies 
suggest a positive association between 50/60-Hz power transmission fields and 
leukemia or lymphoma development. Consequent to the association between EMFs and 
induction of oxidative stress, concerns relating to development of 
neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer disease (AD), have been voiced as 
the brain consumes the greatest fraction of oxygen and is particularly 
vulnerable to oxidative stress. Exposure to extremely low frequency (ELF)-EMFs 
are reported to alter animal behavior and modulate biological variables, 
including gene expression, regulation of cell survival, promotion of cellular 
differentiation, and changes in cerebral blood flow in aged AD transgenic mice. 
Alterations in inflammatory responses have also been reported, but how these 
actions impact human health remains unknown. We hence evaluated the effects of 
an electromagnetic wave (magnetic field intensity 1 mT; frequency, 50-Hz) on a 
well-characterized immortalized neuronal cell model, human SH-SY5Y cells. 
ELF-EMF exposure elevated the expession of NOS and O2(-), which were countered 
by compensatory changes in antioxidant catylase (CAT) activity and enzymatic 
kinetic parameters related to CYP-450 and CAT activity. Actions of ELF-EMFs on 
cytokine gene expression were additionally evaluated and found rapidly modified. 
Confronted with co-exposure to H2O2-induced oxidative stress, ELF-EMF proved not 
as well counteracted and resulted in a decline in CAT activity and a rise in 
O2(-) levels. Together these studies support the further evaluation of ELF-EMF 
exposure in cellular and in vivo preclinical models to define mechanisms 
potentially impacted in humans.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0104973
PMCID: PMC4134243
PMID: 25127118 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.