1. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 18;9(8):e104997. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0104997. 
eCollection 2014.

HPLC-MS/MS analyses show that the near-Starchless aps1 and pgm leaves accumulate 
wild type levels of ADPglucose: further evidence for the occurrence of important 
ADPglucose biosynthetic pathway(s) alternative to the pPGI-pPGM-AGP pathway.

Bahaji A(1), Baroja-Fernández E(1), Sánchez-López AM(1), Muñoz FJ(1), Li J(1), 
Almagro G(1), Montero M(1), Pujol P(2), Galarza R(2), Kaneko K(3), Oikawa K(3), 
Wada K(3), Mitsui T(3), Pozueta-Romero J(1).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Agrobiotecnología, Universidad Pública de Navarra/Consejo 
Superior de Investigaciones Científicas/Gobierno de Navarra, Mutiloabeti, 
Nafarroa, Spain.
(2)Servicio de Apoyo a la Investigación, Universidad Pública de Navarra, Campus 
de Arrosadia, Iruña, Nafarroa, Spain.
(3)Department of Applied Biological Chemistry, Niigata University, Niigata, 
Japan.

In leaves, it is widely assumed that starch is the end-product of a metabolic 
pathway exclusively taking place in the chloroplast that (a) involves plastidic 
phosphoglucomutase (pPGM), ADPglucose (ADPG) pyrophosphorylase (AGP) and starch 
synthase (SS), and (b) is linked to the Calvin-Benson cycle by means of the 
plastidic phosphoglucose isomerase (pPGI). This view also implies that AGP is 
the sole enzyme producing the starch precursor molecule, ADPG. However, mounting 
evidence has been compiled pointing to the occurrence of important sources, 
other than the pPGI-pPGM-AGP pathway, of ADPG. To further explore this 
possibility, in this work two independent laboratories have carried out 
HPLC-MS/MS analyses of ADPG content in leaves of the near-starchless pgm and 
aps1 mutants impaired in pPGM and AGP, respectively, and in leaves of double 
aps1/pgm mutants grown under two different culture conditions. We also measured 
the ADPG content in wild type (WT) and aps1 leaves expressing in the plastid two 
different ADPG cleaving enzymes, and in aps1 leaves expressing in the plastid 
GlgC, a bacterial AGP. Furthermore, we measured the ADPG content in ss3/ss4/aps1 
mutants impaired in starch granule initiation and chloroplastic ADPG synthesis. 
We found that, irrespective of their starch contents, pgm and aps1 leaves, WT 
and aps1 leaves expressing in the plastid ADPG cleaving enzymes, and aps1 leaves 
expressing in the plastid GlgC accumulate WT ADPG content. In clear contrast, 
ss3/ss4/aps1 leaves accumulated ca. 300 fold-more ADPG than WT leaves. The 
overall data showed that, in Arabidopsis leaves, (a) there are important ADPG 
biosynthetic pathways, other than the pPGI-pPGM-AGP pathway, (b) pPGM and AGP 
are not major determinants of intracellular ADPG content, and (c) the 
contribution of the chloroplastic ADPG pool to the total ADPG pool is low.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0104997
PMCID: PMC4136846
PMID: 25133777 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: This research was partially 
supported by the grants BIO2010-18239 from the Comisión Interministerial de 
Ciencia y Tecnología and Fondo Europeo de Desarrollo Regional (Spain), 
IIM010491.RI1 from the Government of Navarra, and by the Scientific Research on 
Innovative Areas [22114507] and Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research (B) 
[22380186] from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and 
Technology, Japan. This research was also supported by Iden Biotechnology S.L. 
This does not alter the authors' adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data 
and materials, and there are no restrictions on the sharing of data and/or 
materials. A-M.S.-L. acknowledges a predoctoral fellowship from the Spanish 
Ministry of Science and Innovation.