1. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 19;9(8):e104902. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0104902. 
eCollection 2014.

KRAS genotypic changes of circulating tumor cells during treatment of patients 
with metastatic colorectal cancer.

Kalikaki A(1), Politaki H(1), Souglakos J(2), Apostolaki S(1), Papadimitraki 
E(3), Georgoulia N(1), Tzardi M(4), Mavroudis D(2), Georgoulias V(2), Voutsina 
A(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Tumor Cell Biology, University of Crete, School of Medicine, 
Heraklion, Crete, Greece.
(2)Laboratory of Tumor Cell Biology, University of Crete, School of Medicine, 
Heraklion, Crete, Greece; Department of Medical Oncology, University General 
Hospital of Heraklion, Heraklion, Crete, Greece.
(3)Department of Medical Oncology, University General Hospital of Heraklion, 
Heraklion, Crete, Greece.
(4)Department of Pathology, University General Hospital of Heraklion, Heraklion, 
Crete, Greece.

INTRODUCTION: Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) could represent a non-invasive 
source of cancer cells used for longitudinal monitoring of the tumoral mutation 
status throughout the course of the disease. The aims of the present study were 
to investigate the detection of KRAS mutations in CTCs from patients with 
metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC) and to compare their mutation status during 
treatment or disease progression with that of the corresponding primary tumors.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Identification of the seven most common KRAS mutations on 
codons 12 and 13 was performed by Peptide Nucleic Acid (PNA)-based qPCR method. 
The sensitivity of the assay was determined after isolation of KRAS mutant 
cancer cells spiked into healthy donors' blood, using the CellSearch Epithelial 
Cell kit. Consistent detection of KRAS mutations was achieved in samples 
containing at least 10 tumor cells/7.5 ml of blood.
RESULTS: The clinical utility of the assay was assessed in 48 blood samples 
drawn from 31 patients with mCRC. All patients had PIK3CA and BRAF wild type 
primary tumors and 14 KRAS mutant tumors. CTCs were detected in 65% of specimens 
obtained from 74% of patients. KRAS mutation analysis in CTC-enriched specimens 
showed that 45% and 16.7% of patients with mutant and wild type primary tumors, 
respectively, had detectable mutations in their CTCs. Assessing KRAS mutations 
in serial blood samples revealed that individual patient's CTCs exhibited 
different mutational status of KRAS during treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: The current findings support the rationale for using the CTCs as a 
dynamic source of tumor cells which, by re-evaluating their KRAS mutation 
status, could predict, perhaps more accurately, the response of mCRC patients to 
targeted therapy.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0104902
PMCID: PMC4138105
PMID: 25137394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Assistant Professor John 
Souglakos currently serves as an academic editor. This does not alter the 
authors' adherence to all PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.