1. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 19;9(8):e104694. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0104694. 
eCollection 2014.

Mitochondriome and cholangiocellular carcinoma.

Bahitham W(1), Liao X(2), Peng F(2), Bamforth F(1), Chan A(3), Mason A(4), Stone 
B(5), Stothard P(2), Sergi C(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Alberta, 
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(2)Department of Agricultural, Food, and Nutritional Science, University of 
Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(3)Department of Genetics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(4)Department of Medicine, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(5)Benaroya Research Institute, Seattle, Washington, United States of America.
(6)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Alberta, 
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada; Department of Pediatrics, University of Alberta, 
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.

Cholangiocellular carcinoma (CCA) of the liver was the target of more interest, 
recently, due mainly to its increased incidence and possible association to new 
environmental factors. Somatic mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutations have been 
found in several cancers. Some of these malignancies contain changes of mtDNA, 
which are not or, very rarely, found in the mtDNA databases. In terms of 
evolutionary genetics and oncology, these data are extremely interesting and may 
be considered a sign of poor fitness, which may conduct in some way to different 
cellular processes, including carcinogenesis. MitoChip analysis is a strong tool 
for investigations in experimental oncology and was carried out on three CCA 
cell lines (HuCCT1, Huh-28 and OZ) with different outcome in human and a 
Papova-immortalized normal hepatocyte cell line (THLE-3). Real time quantitative 
PCR, western blot analysis, transmission electron microscopy, confocal laser 
microscopy, and metabolic assays including L-Lactate and NAD+/NADH assays were 
meticulously used to identify mtDNA copy number, oxidative phosphorylation 
(OXPHOS) content, ultrastructural morphology, mitochondrial membrane potential 
(ΔΨm), and differential composition of metabolites, respectively. Among 102 
mtDNA changes observed in the CCA cell lines, 28 were non-synonymous coding 
region alterations resulting in an amino acid change. Thirty-eight were 
synonymous and 30 involved ribosomal RNA (rRNA) and transfer RNA (tRNA) regions. 
We found three new heteroplasmic mutations in two CCA cell lines (HuCCT1 and 
Huh-28). Interestingly, mtDNA copy number was decreased in all three CCA cell 
lines, while complexes I and III were decreased with depolarization of 
mitochondria. L-Lactate and NAD+/NADH assays were increased in all three CCA 
cell lines. MtDNA alterations seem to be a common event in CCA. This is the 
first study using MitoChip analysis with comprehensive metabolic studies in CCA 
cell lines potentially creating a platform for future studies on the 
interactions between normal and neoplastic cells.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0104694
PMCID: PMC4138114
PMID: 25137133 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.