1. Mol Biol Evol. 2014 Dec;31(12):3164-83. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msu249. Epub 2014 
Aug 25.

Purifying selection on splice-related motifs, not expression level nor RNA 
folding, explains nearly all constraint on human lincRNAs.

Schüler A(1), Ghanbarian AT(2), Hurst LD(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Evolution and Biodiversity, University of Münster, Münster, 
Germany.
(2)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Bath, Bath, United 
Kingdom.
(3)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Bath, Bath, United 
Kingdom l.d.hurst@bath.ac.uk.

There are two strong and equally important predictors of rates of human protein 
evolution: The amount the gene is expressed and the proportion of exonic 
sequence devoted to control splicing, mediated largely by selection on exonic 
splice enhancer (ESE) motifs. Is the same true for noncoding RNAs, known to be 
under very weak purifying selection? Prior evidence suggests that selection at 
splice sites in long intergenic noncoding RNAs (lincRNAs) is important. We now 
report multiple lines of evidence indicating that the great majority of 
purifying selection operating on lincRNAs in humans is splice related. 
Splice-related parameters explain much of the between-gene variation in 
evolutionary rate in humans. Expression rate is not a relevant predictor, 
although expression breadth is weakly so. In contrast to protein-coding RNAs, we 
observe no relationship between evolutionary rate and lincRNA stability. As in 
protein-coding genes, ESEs are especially abundant near splice junctions and 
evolve slower than non-ESE sequence equidistant from boundaries. Nearly all 
constraint in lincRNAs is at exon ends (N.B. the same is not witnessed in 
Drosophila). Although we cannot definitely answer the question as to why 
splice-related selection is so important, we find no evidence that splicing 
might enable the nonsense-mediated decay pathway to capture transcripts 
incorrectly processed by ribosomes. We find evidence consistent with the notion 
that splicing modifies the underlying chromatin through recruitment of 
splice-coupled chromatin modifiers, such as CHD1, which in turn might modulate 
neighbor gene activity. We conclude that most selection on human lincRNAs is 
splice mediated and suggest that the possibility of splice-chromatin coupling is 
worthy of further scrutiny.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msu249
PMCID: PMC4245815
PMID: 25158797 [Indexed for MEDLINE]