1. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 28;9(8):e105513. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0105513. 
eCollection 2014.

Balanced trade-offs between alternative strategies shape the response of C. 
elegans reproduction to chronic heat stress.

Aprison EZ(1), Ruvinsky I(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolution and Institute for Genomics and Systems 
Biology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, United States of America.
(2)Department of Ecology and Evolution and Institute for Genomics and Systems 
Biology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, United States of America; 
Department of Organismal Biology and Anatomy, The University of Chicago, 
Chicago, Illinois, United States of America.

To ensure long-term reproductive success organisms have to cope with harsh 
environmental extremes. A reproductive strategy that simply maximizes offspring 
production is likely to be disadvantageous because it could lead to a 
catastrophic loss of fecundity under unfavorable conditions. To understand how 
an appropriate balance is achieved, we investigated reproductive performance of 
C. elegans under conditions of chronic heat stress. We found that following even 
prolonged exposure to temperatures at which none of the offspring survive, worms 
could recover and resume reproduction. The likelihood of producing viable 
offspring falls precipitously after exposure to temperatures greater than 28°C 
primarily due to sperm damage. Surprisingly, we found that worms that 
experienced higher temperatures can recover considerably better, provided they 
did not initiate ovulation. Therefore mechanisms controlling this process must 
play a crucial role in determining the probability of recovery. We show, 
however, that suppressing ovulation is only beneficial under relatively long 
stresses, whereas it is a disadvantageous strategy under shorter stresses of the 
same intensity. This is because the benefit of shutting down egg laying, and 
thus protecting the reproductive system, is negated by the cost associated with 
implementing this strategy--it takes considerable time to recover and produce 
offspring. We interpret these balanced trade-offs as a dynamic response of the 
C. elegans reproductive system to stress and an adaptation to life in variable 
and unpredictable conditions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0105513
PMCID: PMC4148340
PMID: 25165831 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: IR is an Academic Editor 
for PLOS ONE. Otherwise, the authors have declared that no competing interests 
exist. This does not alter the authors’ adherence to all Plos ONE policies on 
sharing data and materials.