1. N Engl J Med. 2014 Aug 28;371(9):808-17. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1403141.

Two clinical phenotypes in polycythemia vera.

Spivak JL(1), Considine M, Williams DM, Talbot CC Jr, Rogers O, Moliterno AR, 
Jie C, Ochs MF.

Author information:
(1)From the Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine (J.L.S., D.M.W., 
O.R., A.R.M.), Division of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Sidney Kimmel 
Comprehensive Cancer Center (M.C.), and the Basic Science Institute (C.C.T.), 
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore; the Department of 
Surgery, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago (C.J.); 
and the Department of Mathematics and Statistics, College of New Jersey, Ewing 
(M.F.O.).

BACKGROUND: Polycythemia vera is the ultimate phenotypic consequence of the 
V617F mutation in Janus kinase 2 (encoded by JAK2), but the extent to which this 
mutation influences the behavior of the involved CD34+ hematopoietic stem cells 
is unknown.
METHODS: We analyzed gene expression in CD34+ peripheral-blood cells from 19 
patients with polycythemia vera, using oligonucleotide microarray technology 
after correcting for potential confounding by sex, since the phenotypic features 
of the disease differ between men and women.
RESULTS: Men with polycythemia vera had twice as many up-regulated or 
down-regulated genes as women with polycythemia vera, in a comparison of gene 
expression in the patients and in healthy persons of the same sex, but there 
were 102 genes with differential regulation that was concordant in men and 
women. When these genes were used for class discovery by means of unsupervised 
hierarchical clustering, the 19 patients could be divided into two groups that 
did not differ significantly with respect to age, neutrophil JAK2 V617F allele 
burden, white-cell count, platelet count, or clonal dominance. However, they did 
differ significantly with respect to disease duration; hemoglobin level; 
frequency of thromboembolic events, palpable splenomegaly, and splenectomy; 
chemotherapy exposure; leukemic transformation; and survival. The unsupervised 
clustering was confirmed by a supervised approach with the use of a 
top-scoring-pair classifier that segregated the 19 patients into the same two 
phenotypic groups with 100% accuracy.
CONCLUSIONS: Removing sex as a potential confounder, we identified an accurate 
molecular method for classifying patients with polycythemia vera according to 
disease behavior, independently of their JAK2 V617F allele burden, and 
identified previously unrecognized molecular pathways in polycythemia vera 
outside the canonical JAK2 pathway that may be amenable to targeted therapy. 
(Funded by the Department of Defense and the National Institutes of Health.).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1403141
PMCID: PMC4211877
PMID: 25162887 [Indexed for MEDLINE]