1. Int Rev Neurobiol. 2014;118:231-313. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-801284-0.00009-9.

Interactions of HIV and drugs of abuse: the importance of glia, neural 
progenitors, and host genetic factors.

Hauser KF(1), Knapp PE(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology & Toxicology, Institute for Drug and Alcohol 
Studies, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia, USA. Electronic 
address: kfhauser@vcu.edu.
(2)Department of Pharmacology & Toxicology, Institute for Drug and Alcohol 
Studies, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia, USA; Department 
of Anatomy & Neurobiology, Institute for Drug and Alcohol Studies, Virginia 
Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia, USA.

Considerable insight has been gained into the comorbid, interactive effects of 
HIV and drug abuse in the brain using experimental models. This review, which 
considers opiates, methamphetamine, and cocaine, emphasizes the importance of 
host genetics and glial plasticity in driving the pathogenic neuron remodeling 
underlying neuro-acquired immunodeficiency syndrome and drug abuse comorbidity. 
Clinical findings are less concordant than experimental work, and the response 
of individuals to HIV and to drug abuse can vary tremendously. Host-genetic 
variability is important in determining viral tropism, neuropathogenesis, drug 
responses, and addictive behavior. However, genetic differences alone cannot 
account for individual variability in the brain "connectome." Environment and 
experience are critical determinants in the evolution of synaptic circuitry 
throughout life. Neurons and glia both exercise control over determinants of 
synaptic plasticity that are disrupted by HIV and drug abuse. Perivascular 
macrophages, microglia, and to a lesser extent astroglia can harbor the 
infection. Uninfected bystanders, especially astroglia, propagate and amplify 
inflammatory signals. Drug abuse by itself derails neuronal and glial function, 
and the outcome of chronic exposure is maladaptive plasticity. The negative 
consequences of coexposure to HIV and drug abuse are determined by numerous 
factors including genetics, sex, age, and multidrug exposure. Glia and some 
neurons are generated throughout life, and their progenitors appear to be 
targets of HIV and opiates/psychostimulants. The chronic nature of HIV and drug 
abuse appears to result in sustained alterations in the maturation and fate of 
neural progenitors, which may affect the balance of glial populations within 
multiple brain regions.

© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-801284-0.00009-9
PMCID: PMC4304845
PMID: 25175867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors have 
no conflicts of interest to declare.