1. Front Neurol. 2014 Aug 18;5:157. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2014.00157. eCollection 
2014.

Cerebellum in levodopa-induced dyskinesias: the unusual suspect in the motor 
network.

Kishore A(1), Popa T(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Comprehensive Care Centre for Movement Disorders, 
Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences and Technology , Kerala , 
India.
(2)Centre de Neuroimagerie de Recherche (CENIR), Institut du Cerveau et de la 
Moelleepiniere (ICM) , Paris , France.

The exact mechanisms that generate levodopa-induced dyskinesias (LID) during 
chronic levodopa therapy for Parkinson's disease (PD) are not yet fully 
established. The most widely accepted theories incriminate the non-physiological 
synthesis, release and reuptake of dopamine generated by exogenously 
administered levodopa in the striatum, and the aberrant plasticity in the 
cortico-striatal loops. However, normal motor performance requires the correct 
recruitment of motor maps. This depends on a high level of synergy within the 
primary motor cortex (M1) as well as between M1 and other cortical and 
subcortical areas, for which dopamine is necessary. The plastic mechanisms 
within M1, which are crucial for the maintenance of this synergy, are disrupted 
both during "OFF" and dyskinetic states in PD. When tested without levodopa, 
dyskinetic patients show loss of treatment benefits on long-term potentiation 
and long-term depression-like plasticity of the intracortical circuits. When 
tested with the regular pulsatile levodopa doses, they show further impairment 
of the M1 plasticity, such as inability to depotentiate an already facilitated 
synapse and paradoxical facilitation in response to afferent input aimed at 
synaptic inhibition. Dyskinetic patients have also severe impairment of the 
associative, sensorimotor plasticity of M1 attributed to deficient cerebellar 
modulation of sensory afferents to M1. Here, we review the anatomical and 
functional studies, including the recently described bidirectional connections 
between the cerebellum and the basal ganglia that support a key role of the 
cerebellum in the generation of LID. This model stipulates that aberrant 
neuronal synchrony in PD with LID may propagate from the subthalamic nucleus to 
the cerebellum and "lock" the cerebellar cortex in a hyperactive state. This 
could affect critical cerebellar functions such as the dynamic and discrete 
modulation of M1 plasticity and the matching of motor commands with sensory 
information from the environment during motor performance. We propose that in 
dyskinesias, M1 neurons have lost the ability to depotentiate an activated 
synapse when exposed to acute pulsatile, non-physiological, dopaminergic surges 
and become abnormally receptive to unfiltered, aberrant, and non-salient 
afferent inputs from the environment. The motor program selection in response to 
such non-salient and behaviorally irrelevant afferent inputs would be abnormal 
and involuntary. The motor responses are worsened by the lack of normal 
subcortico-cortical inputs from cerebellum and basal ganglia, because of the 
aberrant plasticity at their own synapses. Artificial cerebellar stimulation 
might help re-establish the cerebellar and basal ganglia control over the 
non-salient inputs to the motor areas during synaptic dopaminergic surges.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2014.00157
PMCID: PMC4135237
PMID: 25183959