1. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 12;9(9):e107639. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107639. 
eCollection 2014.

Cardiac fibroblasts contribute to myocardial dysfunction in mice with sepsis: 
the role of NLRP3 inflammasome activation.

Zhang W(1), Xu X(2), Kao R(2), Mele T(2), Kvietys P(3), Martin CM(2), Rui T(4).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Medicine and Surgery, the Affiliated People's Hospital of 
Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, Jiangsu Province, China; Critical Illness 
Research, Lawson Health Research Institute, London, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Critical Illness Research, Lawson Health Research Institute, London, Ontario, 
Canada; Critical Care Western, Department of Medicine, Schulich School of 
Medicine and Dentistry, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Department of Physiology & Biochemistry, College of Medicine, Alfaisal 
University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Departments of Medicine and Surgery, the Affiliated People's Hospital of 
Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, Jiangsu Province, China; Critical Illness 
Research, Lawson Health Research Institute, London, Ontario, Canada; Critical 
Care Western, Department of Medicine, Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry, 
University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada; Department of Pathology, 
Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry, University of Western Ontario, 
London, Ontario, Canada.

Myocardial contractile dysfunction in sepsis is associated with the increased 
morbidity and mortality. Although the underlying mechanisms of the cardiac 
depression have not been fully elucidated, an exaggerated inflammatory response 
is believed to be responsible. Nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-like 
receptor containing pyrin domain 3 (NLRP3) inflammasome is an intracellular 
platform that is involved in the maturation and release of interleukin (IL)-1β. 
The aim of the present study is to evaluate whether sepsis activates NLRP3 
inflammasome/caspase-1/IL-1β pathway in cardiac fibroblasts (CFs) and whether 
this cytokine can subsequently impact the function of cardiomyocytes (cardiac 
fibroblast-myocyte cross-talk). We show that treatment of CFs with 
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) induces upregulation of NLRP3, activation of caspase-1, 
as well as the maturation (activation) and release of IL-1β. In addition, the 
genetic (small interfering ribonucleic acid [siRNA]) and pharmacological 
(glyburide) inhibition of the NLRP3 inflammasome in CFs can block this signaling 
pathway. Furthermore, the inhibition of the NLRP3 inflammasome in cardiac 
fibroblasts ameliorated the ability of LPS-challenged CFs to impact 
cardiomyocyte function as assessed by intracellular cyclic adenosine 
monophosphate (cAMP) responses in cardiomyocytes. Salient features of this the 
NLP3 inflammasome/ caspase-1 pathway were confirmed in in vivo models of 
endotoxemia/sepsis. We found that inhibition of the NLRP3 inflammasome 
attenuated myocardial dysfunction in mice with LPS and increased the survival 
rate in mice with feces-induced peritonitis. Our results indicate that the 
activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome in cardiac fibroblasts is pivotal in the 
induction of myocardial dysfunction in sepsis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107639
PMCID: PMC4162616
PMID: 25216263 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.