1. J Med Genet. 2014 Nov;51(11):737-47. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2014-102582. Epub 
2014 Sep 16.

De novo and rare inherited mutations implicate the transcriptional coregulator 
TCF20/SPBP in autism spectrum disorder.

Babbs C(1), Lloyd D(2), Pagnamenta AT(3), Twigg SR(2), Green J(2), McGowan 
SJ(2), Mirza G(4), Naples R(2), Sharma VP(5), Volpi EV(4), Buckle VJ(2), Wall 
SA(6), Knight SJ(3); International Molecular Genetic Study of Autism Consortium 
(IMGSAC); Parr JR(7), Wilkie AO(8).

Author information:
(1)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, 
UK NIHR Biomedical Research Centre, Oxford, UK.
(2)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, 
UK.
(3)NIHR Biomedical Research Centre, Oxford, UK Wellcome Trust Centre for Human 
Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(4)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(5)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, 
UK Craniofacial Unit, Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Oxford 
University Hospitals NHS Trust, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK.
(6)Craniofacial Unit, Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Oxford 
University Hospitals NHS Trust, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK.
(7)Institute of Neuroscience, Newcastle University, Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK.
(8)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, 
UK NIHR Biomedical Research Centre, Oxford, UK Craniofacial Unit, Department of 
Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Trust, John 
Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK.

BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are common and have a strong 
genetic basis, yet the cause of ∼70-80% ASDs remains unknown. By clinical 
cytogenetic testing, we identified a family in which two brothers had ASD, mild 
intellectual disability and a chromosome 22 pericentric inversion, not detected 
in either parent, indicating de novo mutation with parental germinal mosaicism. 
We hypothesised that the rearrangement was causative of their ASD and localised 
the chromosome 22 breakpoints.
METHODS: The rearrangement was characterised using fluorescence in situ 
hybridisation, Southern blotting, inverse PCR and dideoxy-sequencing. Open 
reading frames and intron/exon boundaries of the two physically disrupted genes 
identified, TCF20 and TNRC6B, were sequenced in 342 families (260 multiplex and 
82 simplex) ascertained by the International Molecular Genetic Study of Autism 
Consortium (IMGSAC).
RESULTS: IMGSAC family screening identified a de novo missense mutation of TCF20 
in a single case and significant association of a different missense mutation of 
TCF20 with ASD in three further families. Through exome sequencing in another 
project, we independently identified a de novo frameshifting mutation of TCF20 
in a woman with ASD and moderate intellectual disability. We did not identify a 
significant association of TNRC6B mutations with ASD.
CONCLUSIONS: TCF20 encodes a transcriptional coregulator (also termed SPBP) that 
is structurally and functionally related to RAI1, the critical dosage-sensitive 
protein implicated in the behavioural phenotypes of the Smith-Magenis and 
Potocki-Lupski 17p11.2 deletion/duplication syndromes, in which ASD is 
frequently diagnosed. This study provides the first evidence that mutations in 
TCF20 are also associated with ASD.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2014-102582
PMCID: PMC4215269
PMID: 25228304 [Indexed for MEDLINE]