1. Int J Cancer. 2015 Mar 1;136(5):E252-61. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29217. Epub 2014 Oct
 7.

Neuroblastoma patient-derived orthotopic xenografts retain metastatic patterns 
and geno- and phenotypes of patient tumours.

Braekeveldt N(1), Wigerup C, Gisselsson D, Mohlin S, Merselius M, Beckman S, 
Jonson T, Börjesson A, Backman T, Tadeo I, Berbegall AP, Ora I, Navarro S, 
Noguera R, Påhlman S, Bexell D.

Author information:
(1)Translational Cancer Research, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.

Neuroblastoma is a childhood tumour with heterogeneous characteristics and 
children with metastatic disease often have a poor outcome. Here we describe the 
establishment of neuroblastoma patient-derived xenografts (PDXs) by orthotopic 
implantation of viably cryopreserved or fresh tumour explants of patients with 
high risk neuroblastoma into immunodeficient mice. In vivo tumour growth was 
monitored by magnetic resonance imaging and fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission 
tomography. Neuroblastoma PDXs retained the undifferentiated histology and 
proliferative capacity of their corresponding patient tumours. The PDXs 
expressed neuroblastoma markers neural cell adhesion molecule, chromogranin A, 
synaptophysin and tyrosine hydroxylase. Whole genome genotyping array analyses 
demonstrated that PDXs retained patient-specific chromosomal aberrations such as 
MYCN amplification, deletion of 1p and gain of chromosome 17q. Thus, 
neuroblastoma PDXs recapitulate the hallmarks of high-risk neuroblastoma in 
patients. PDX-derived cells were cultured in serum-free medium where they formed 
free-floating neurospheres, expressed neuroblastoma gene markers MYCN, CHGA, TH, 
SYP and NPY, and retained tumour-initiating and metastatic capacity in vivo. 
PDXs showed much higher degree of infiltrative growth and distant metastasis as 
compared to neuroblastoma SK-N-BE(2)c cell line-derived orthotopic tumours. 
Importantly, the PDXs presented with bone marrow involvement, a clinical feature 
of aggressive neuroblastoma. Thus, neuroblastoma PDXs serve as clinically 
relevant models for studying and targeting high-risk metastatic neuroblastoma.

© 2014 The Authors. Published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.29217
PMCID: PMC4299502
PMID: 25220031 [Indexed for MEDLINE]