1. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 18;9(9):e107966. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107966. 
eCollection 2014.

Avian influenza A H7N9 virus induces severe pneumonia in mice without prior 
adaptation and responds to a combination of zanamivir and COX-2 inhibitor.

Li C(1), Li C(1), Zhang AJ(2), To KK(2), Lee AC(1), Zhu H(3), Wu HW(4), Chan 
JF(2), Chen H(5), Hung IF(6), Li L(7), Yuen KY(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(2)Department of Microbiology, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China; 
State Key Laboratory of Emerging Infectious Diseases, The University of Hong 
Kong, Hong Kong, China; Research Centre of Infection and Immunology, The 
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(3)Department of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(4)Department of Microbiology, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China; 
State Key Laboratory of Emerging Infectious Diseases, The University of Hong 
Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(5)Department of Microbiology, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China; 
State Key Laboratory of Emerging Infectious Diseases, The University of Hong 
Kong, Hong Kong, China; Research Centre of Infection and Immunology, The 
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China; Collaborative Innovation Center for 
Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, Hangzhou, China; Zhejiang 
University, Hangzhou, China.
(6)Research Centre of Infection and Immunology, The University of Hong Kong, 
Hong Kong, China; Department of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong 
Kong, China.
(7)State Key Laboratory for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, the 
First Affiliated Hospital, College of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 
China; Collaborative Innovation Center for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious 
Diseases, Hangzhou, China; Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.

BACKGROUND: Human infection caused by the avian influenza A H7N9 virus has a 
case-fatality rate of over 30%. Systematic study of the pathogenesis of avian 
H7N9 isolate and effective therapeutic strategies are needed.
METHODS: BALB/c mice were inoculated intranasally with an H7N9 virus isolated 
from a chicken in a wet market epidemiologically linked to a fatal human case, 
(A/chicken/Zhejiang/DTID-ZJU01/2013 [CK1]), and with an H7N9 virus isolated from 
a human (A/Anhui/01/2013 [AH1]). The pulmonary viral loads, cytokine/chemokine 
profiles and histopathological changes of the infected mice were compared. The 
therapeutic efficacy of a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID), 
celecoxib, was assessed.
RESULTS: Without prior adaptation, intranasal inoculation of 106 plaque forming 
units (PFUs) of CK1 caused a mortality rate of 82% (14/17) in mice. Viral 
nucleoprotein and RNA expression were limited to the respiratory system and no 
viral RNA could be detected from brain, liver and kidney tissues. CK1 caused 
heavy alveolar inflammatory exudation and pulmonary hemorrhage, associated with 
high pulmonary levels of proinflammatory cytokines. In the mouse lung cell line 
LA-4, CK1 also induced high levels of interleukin-6 (IL-6) and cyclooxygenase-2 
(COX-2) mRNA. Administration of the antiviral zanamivir did not significantly 
improve survival in mice infected with CK1, but co-administration of the 
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) celecoxib in combination with 
zanamivir improved survival and lung pathology.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggested that H7N9 viruses isolated from chicken 
without preceding trans-species adaptation can cause lethal mammalian pulmonary 
infection. The severe proinflammatory responses might be a factor contributing 
to the mortality. Treatment with combination of antiviral and NSAID could 
ameliorate pulmonary inflammation and may improve survival.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107966
PMCID: PMC4169509
PMID: 25232731 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.