1. Oncotarget. 2014 Sep 30;5(18):8778-89. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.2398.

p-21 activated kinase 4 promotes proliferation and survival of pancreatic cancer 
cells through AKT- and ERK-dependent activation of NF-κB pathway.

Tyagi N(1), Bhardwaj A(1), Singh AP(2), McClellan S(1), Carter JE(3), Singh 
S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncologic Sciences, Mitchell Cancer Institute, University of 
South Alabama, Mobile, Alabama, USA.
(2)Department of Oncologic Sciences, Mitchell Cancer Institute, University of 
South Alabama, Mobile, Alabama, USA. Department of Biochemistry and Molecular 
Biology, College of Medicine, University of South Alabama, Mobile, Alabama, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, University of South Alabama, 
Mobile, Alabama, USA.

Identification of novel molecular targets and understanding the mechanisms 
underlying the aggressive nature of pancreatic cancer (PC) remain prime focus 
areas of research. Here, we investigated the expression and pathobiological 
significance of p21-activated kinase 4 (PAK4), a gene that was earlier shown to 
be amplified in a sub-set of PC. Our data demonstrate PAK4 overexpression in PC 
tissues and cell lines with little or no expression in the normal pancreas. PAK4 
silencing in two PC cell lines, MiaPaCa and T3M4, by RNA interference causes 
suppression of growth and clonogenic ability due to decreased cell cycle 
progression and apoptosis-resistance. PAK4-silenced PC cells exhibit altered 
expression of proliferation- and survival-associated proteins. Moreover, we 
observe decreased nuclear accumulation and transcriptional activity of NF-κB in 
PAK4-silenced PC cells associated with stabilization of its inhibitory protein, 
IκBα. Transfection of PAK4-silenced PC cells with constitutively-active mutant 
of IKKβ, an upstream kinase of IκBα, leads to restoration of NF-κB activity and 
PC cell growth. Furthermore, we show that PAK4-induced NF-κB activity is 
mediated through activation and concerted action of ERK and Akt kinases. 
Together, these findings suggest that PAK4 is a regulator of NF-κB pathway in PC 
cells and can serve as a novel target for therapy.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.2398
PMCID: PMC4226721
PMID: 25238288 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest No potential conflict of 
interest to disclose.