1. Iran J Cancer Prev. 2013 Summer;6(3):165-9.

Adipocyte Derived Hormones Gene Expression, Resistin and Visfatin, in AGS 
Gastric Cancer Cell Line.

Gorgian Mohammadi M(1), Hedayati M(2), Zarghami N(3), Ghaemmaghami S(1), 
Mohaddes M(4).

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Clinical Biochemistry, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, 
Tabriz, Iran ; Dept. of Cellular and Molecular Endocrine Research Center, 
Research Institute for Endocrine Sciences, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical 
Sciences,Tehran, Iran.
(2)Dept. of Cellular and Molecular Endocrine Research Center, Research Institute 
for Endocrine Sciences, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences,Tehran, 
Iran.
(3)Dept. of Clinical Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Tabriz University of 
Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran.
(4)Dept. of Medical Genetic, Faculty of Medicine, Tabriz University of Medical 
Sciences, Tabriz, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Adipose tissue has characteristics of an endocrine organ which 
releases a number of adipocyte-specific factors, known as adipocytokines. It has 
recently suggested that adipocytokines might play a role in pathogenesis and 
progression of certain cancers, especially in gastric cancer. This study has 
managed to investigate endogenous and/or exogenous expression of Visfatin and 
Resistin in gastric cancer cell line.
METHODS: Cell culture and semi-quantitative reverse transcription polymerase 
chain reaction has performed to measure mRNA and protein expression of Resistin 
and Visfatin in gastric cancer cell lines. ELISA test has performed for cell 
lysate and supernatant of cell culture to measure Resistin and Visfatin protein 
expression and secretion.
RESULTS: Human gastric cancer cell line (AGS cell line) has found to express 
Visfatin mRNA and protein but Resistin mRNA and protein has not expressed.
CONCLUSION: Visfatin has expressed endogenously in AGS human gastric cancer 
cells. Conversely Resistin has no expression. The results of this study has 
suggested that expression of adipocytokine proteins in real samples, could be a 
biomarker for gastric cancer.

PMCID: PMC4142930
PMID: 25250128