1. Sci Rep. 2014 Oct 6;4:6522. doi: 10.1038/srep06522.

Diversity in ATP concentrations in a single bacterial cell population revealed 
by quantitative single-cell imaging.

Yaginuma H(1), Kawai S(2), Tabata KV(3), Tomiyama K(4), Kakizuka A(5), 
Komatsuzaki T(6), Noji H(7), Imamura H(8).

Author information:
(1)1] Graduate School of Engineering, the University of Tokyo, Japan [2] 
Graduate School of Frontier Biosciences, Osaka University, Japan [3] CREST, JST, 
Japan [4] QBiC, RIKEN, Japan.
(2)1] Research Institute for Electronic Science, Hokkaido University, Japan [2] 
Faculty of Science, Shizuoka University.
(3)1] Graduate School of Engineering, the University of Tokyo, Japan [2] PRESTO, 
JST, Japan.
(4)Graduate School of Frontier Biosciences, Osaka University, Japan.
(5)Graduate School of Biostudies, Kyoto University, Japan.
(6)Research Institute for Electronic Science, Hokkaido University, Japan.
(7)1] Graduate School of Engineering, the University of Tokyo, Japan [2] 
Graduate School of Frontier Biosciences, Osaka University, Japan [3] CREST, JST, 
Japan.
(8)1] Graduate School of Biostudies, Kyoto University, Japan [2] The Hakubi 
Center for Advanced Research, Kyoto University, Japan.

Recent advances in quantitative single-cell analysis revealed large diversity in 
gene expression levels between individual cells, which could affect the 
physiology and/or fate of each cell. In contrast, for most metabolites, the 
concentrations were only measureable as ensemble averages of many cells. In 
living cells, adenosine triphosphate (ATP) is a critically important metabolite 
that powers many intracellular reactions. Quantitative measurement of the 
absolute ATP concentration in individual cells has not been achieved because of 
the lack of reliable methods. In this study, we developed a new 
genetically-encoded ratiometric fluorescent ATP indicator "QUEEN", which is 
composed of a single circularly-permuted fluorescent protein and a bacterial ATP 
binding protein. Unlike previous FRET-based indicators, QUEEN was apparently 
insensitive to bacteria growth rate changes. Importantly, intracellular ATP 
concentrations of numbers of bacterial cells calculated from QUEEN fluorescence 
were almost equal to those from firefly luciferase assay. Thus, QUEEN is 
suitable for quantifying the absolute ATP concentration inside bacteria cells. 
Finally, we found that, even for a genetically-identical Escherichia coli cell 
population, absolute concentrations of intracellular ATP were significantly 
diverse between individual cells from the same culture, by imaging QUEEN signals 
from single cells.

DOI: 10.1038/srep06522
PMCID: PMC4185378
PMID: 25283467 [Indexed for MEDLINE]