1. Clin Chem. 2015 Jan;61(1):267-77. doi: 10.1373/clinchem.2014.228361. Epub 2014
 Oct 8.

Single-tube, highly parallel mutation enrichment in cancer gene panels by use of 
temperature-tolerant COLD-PCR.

Castellanos-Rizaldos E(1), Richardson K(2), Lin R(2), Wu G(2), Makrigiorgos 
MG(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of DNA Repair and Genome Stability and.
(2)Transgenomic Inc., Omaha, NE.
(3)Division of DNA Repair and Genome Stability and Division of Medical Physics 
and Biophysics, Department of Radiation Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA; mmakrigiorgos@lroc.harvard.edu.

BACKGROUND: Multiplexed detection of low-level mutations presents a technical 
challenge for many technologies, including cancer gene panels used for 
targeted-resequencing. Analysis of mutations below approximately 2%-5% abundance 
in tumors with heterogeneity, samples with stromal contamination, or biofluids 
is problematic owing to increased noise from sequencing errors. Technologies 
that reduce noise via deep sequencing unavoidably reduce throughput and increase 
cost. Here we provide proof of principle that coamplification at lower 
denaturation temperature (COLD)-PCR technology enables multiplex low-level 
mutation detection in cancer gene panels while retaining throughput.
METHODS: We have developed a multiplex temperature-tolerant COLD-PCR 
(fast-TT-COLD-PCR) approach that uses cancer gene panels developed for massively 
parallel sequencing. After multiplex preamplification from genomic DNA, we 
attach tails to all amplicons and perform fast-TT-COLD-PCR. This approach 
gradually increases denaturation temperatures in a step-wise fashion, such that 
all possible denaturation temperatures are encompassed. By introducing modified 
nucleotides, fast-COLD-PCR is adapted to enrich for melting temperature 
(Tm)-increasing mutations over all amplicons, in a single tube. Therefore, in 
separate reactions, both Tm-decreasing and Tm-increasing mutations are enriched.
RESULTS: Using custom-made and commercial gene panels containing 8, 50, 190, or 
16 000 amplicons, we demonstrate that fast-TT-COLD-PCR enriches mutations on all 
examined targets simultaneously. Incorporation of deoxyinosine triphosphate 
(dITP)/2,6-diaminopurine triphosphate (dDTP) in place of deoxyguanosine 
triphosphate (dGTP)/deoxyadenosine triphosphate (dATP) enables enrichment of 
Tm-increasing mutations. Serial dilution experiments demonstrate a limit of 
detection of approximately 0.01%-0.1% mutation abundance by use of Ion-Torrent 
and 0.1%-0.3% by use of Sanger sequencing.
CONCLUSIONS: Fast-TT-COLD-PCR improves the limit of detection of cancer gene 
panels by enabling mutation enrichment in multiplex, single-tube reactions. This 
novel adaptation of COLD-PCR converts subclonal mutations to clonal, thereby 
facilitating detection and subsequent mutation sequencing.

© 2014 American Association for Clinical Chemistry.

DOI: 10.1373/clinchem.2014.228361
PMCID: PMC4281501
PMID: 25297854 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT: COLD-PCR is a 
technology owned by the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and licensed, in part, to 
Transgenomic Inc. The manuscript has not been published previously and is not 
being considered concurrently by another journal. All authors and acknowledged 
contributors have read and approved the manuscript.