1. J Psychiatr Res. 2015 Jan;60:95-102. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2014.09.018.
Epub  2014 Sep 26.

Sleep duration, insomnia, and markers of systemic inflammation: results from the 
Netherlands Study of Depression and Anxiety (NESDA).

Prather AA(1), Vogelzangs N(2), Penninx BW(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco, United 
States. Electronic address: aric.prather@ucsf.edu.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, EMGO Institute for Health and Care Research, 
Neuroscience Campus Amsterdam, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.

Systemic inflammation has emerged as a potential pathway linking depressive and 
anxiety disorders with disease risk. Short and long sleep duration, as well as 
insomnia, are common among psychiatric populations and have previously been 
related to increased inflammation. The aim of the present study was to 
investigate associations between sleep duration and insomnia with biomarkers of 
inflammation and to explore whether these associations varied by psychiatric 
diagnostic status. To this end, self-reported measures of sleep duration, 
insomnia symptoms, and markers of inflammation, including C-reactive protein 
(CRP), interleukin-(IL)-6, and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, were obtained in 
2553 adults (aged 18-65 years) diagnosed with current/recent or remitted 
depressive and/or anxiety disorders and healthy controls enrolled in the 
Netherlands Study of Depression and Anxiety (NESDA). Regression analyses 
revealed associations between sleep duration and levels of CRP and IL-6 with 
higher levels observed in long sleepers. These associations remained 
statistically significant after controlling for age, gender, education, body 
mass index, smoking, alcohol consumption, medical comorbidities, medication use, 
psychotropic medication use, and psychiatric diagnostic status. There were no 
clear associations between insomnia symptoms and levels of inflammation. 
Relationships between sleep duration and inflammation did not vary as a function 
of psychiatric diagnostic status. These findings suggest that elevated levels of 
systemic inflammation may represent a mechanism linking long sleep duration and 
disease risk among those with and without depressive and anxiety disorders.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2014.09.018
PMCID: PMC4250403
PMID: 25307717 [Indexed for MEDLINE]