1. Mol Cancer. 2014 Oct 9;13:230. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-13-230.

Histone deacetylase inhibition synergistically enhances pemetrexed cytotoxicity 
through induction of apoptosis and autophagy in non-small cell lung cancer.

Del Bufalo D(1), Desideri M, De Luca T, Di Martile M, Gabellini C, Monica V, 
Busso S, Eramo A, De Maria R, Milella M, Trisciuoglio D.

Author information:
(1)Experimental Chemotherapy Laboratory, Regina Elena National Cancer Institute, 
Rome, Italy. delbufalo@ifo.it.

BACKGROUND: Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the leading cause of 
cancer-related death worldwide. Pemetrexed, a multi-target folate antagonist, 
has demonstrated efficacy in NSCLC histological subtypes characterized by low 
thymidylate synthase (TS) expression. Among many other potential targets, 
histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) modulate TS expression, potentially 
sensitizing to the cytotoxic action of anti-cancer drugs that target the folate 
pathway, such as pemetrexed. Since high levels of TS have been linked to 
clinical resistance to pemetrexed in NSCLC, herein we investigated the molecular 
and functional effects of combined pemetrexed and ITF2357, a pan-HDACi currently 
in clinical trials as an anti-cancer agent.
RESULTS: In NSCLC cell lines, HDAC inhibition by ITF2357 induced histone and 
tubulin acetylation and downregulated TS expression at the mRNA and protein 
level. In combination experiments in vitro ITF2357 and pemetrexed demonstrated 
sequence-dependent synergistic growth-inhibitory effects, with the sequence 
pemetrexed followed by ITF2357 inducing a strikingly synergistic reduction in 
cell viability and induction of both apoptosis and autophagy in all cell line 
models tested, encompassing both adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma. 
Conversely, simultaneous administration of both drugs achieved frankly 
antagonistic effects, while the sequence of ITF2357 followed by pemetrexed had 
additive to slightly synergistic growth-inhibitory effects only in certain cell 
lines. Similarly, highly synergistic growth inhibition was also observed in 
patient-derived lung cancer stem cells (LCSC) exposed to pemetrexed followed by 
ITF2357. In terms of molecular mechanisms of interaction, the synergistic 
growth-inhibitory effects observed were only partially related to TS modulation 
by ITF2357, as genetic silencing of TS expression potentiated growth inhibition 
by either pemetrexed or ITF2357 and, to a lesser extent, by their sequential 
combination. Genetic and pharmacological approaches provided an interesting link 
between the autophagic and apoptotic pathways, and showed that sequential 
pemetrexed/ITF2357 causes a toxic form of autophagy with consequent activation 
of a caspase-dependent apoptotic program. In vivo experiments in NSCLC 
xenografts confirmed that sequential pemetrexed/ITF2357 is feasible and results 
in increased inhibition of tumor growth and increased mice survival.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, these data provide a strong rationale for the clinical 
development of sequential schedules employing pemetrexed followed by HDACi in 
NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1186/1476-4598-13-230
PMCID: PMC4198757
PMID: 25301686 [Indexed for MEDLINE]