1. Nat Chem Biol. 2014 Nov;10(11):902-10. doi: 10.1038/nchembio.1651. Epub 2014
Oct  17.

The intrinsic and extrinsic effects of N-linked glycans on glycoproteostasis.

Hebert DN(1), Lamriben L(1), Powers ET(2), Kelly JW(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Program in Molecular and 
Cellular Biology, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Massachusetts.
(2)Department of Chemistry, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, 
California, USA.
(3)1] Department of Chemistry, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, 
California, USA. [2] Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, The 
Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, California, USA. [3] Skaggs Institute for 
Chemical Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, California, USA.

Proteins that traffic through the eukaryotic secretory pathway are commonly 
modified with N-linked carbohydrates. These bulky amphipathic modifications at 
asparagines intrinsically enhance solubility and folding energetics through 
carbohydrate-protein interactions. N-linked glycans can also extrinsically 
enhance glycoprotein folding by using the glycoprotein homeostasis or 
'glycoproteostasis' network, which comprises numerous glycan binding and/or 
modification enzymes or proteins that synthesize, transfer, sculpt and use 
N-linked glycans to direct folding and trafficking versus degradation and 
trafficking of nascent N-glycoproteins through the cellular secretory pathway. 
If protein maturation is perturbed by misfolding, aggregation or both, stress 
pathways are often activated that result in transcriptional remodeling of the 
secretory pathway in an attempt to alleviate the insult (or insults). The 
inability to achieve glycoproteostasis is linked to several pathologies, 
including amyloidoses, cystic fibrosis and lysosomal storage diseases. Recent 
progress on genetic and pharmacologic adaptation of the glycoproteostasis 
network provides hope that drugs of this mechanistic class can be developed for 
these maladies in the near future.

DOI: 10.1038/nchembio.1651
PMCID: PMC4232232
PMID: 25325701 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing financial interests The authors 
declare no competing financial interests.