1. PLoS Genet. 2014 Oct 16;10(10):e1004651. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004651. 
eCollection 2014 Oct.

Coexistence and within-host evolution of diversified lineages of hypermutable 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa in long-term cystic fibrosis infections.

Feliziani S(1), Marvig RL(2), Luján AM(3), Moyano AJ(1), Di Rienzo JA(4), Krogh 
Johansen H(5), Molin S(2), Smania AM(1).

Author information:
(1)Centro de Investigaciones en Química Biológica de Córdoba (CIQUIBIC), 
CONICET, Departamento de Química Biológica, Facultad de Ciencias Químicas, 
Universidad Nacional de Córdoba, Córdoba, Argentina.
(2)Department of Systems Biology, Technical University of Denmark, Lyngby, 
Denmark.
(3)Centro de Investigaciones en Química Biológica de Córdoba (CIQUIBIC), 
CONICET, Departamento de Química Biológica, Facultad de Ciencias Químicas, 
Universidad Nacional de Córdoba, Córdoba, Argentina; Daphne du Maurier, Centre 
for Ecology and Conservation, College of Life and Environmental Sciences, 
University of Exeter, Cornwall Campus, Cornwall, United Kingdom.
(4)Estadística y Biometría, Facultad de Ciencias Agropecuarias, Universidad 
Nacional de Córdoba, Córdoba, Argentina.
(5)Department of Clinical Microbiology 9301, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen 
University Hospital, Copenhagen, and The Novo Nordisk Foundation Centre for 
Biosustainability, Hørsholm, Technical University of Denmark, Denmark.

The advent of high-throughput sequencing techniques has made it possible to 
follow the genomic evolution of pathogenic bacteria by comparing longitudinally 
collected bacteria sampled from human hosts. Such studies in the context of 
chronic airway infections by Pseudomonas aeruginosa in cystic fibrosis (CF) 
patients have indicated high bacterial population diversity. Such diversity may 
be driven by hypermutability resulting from DNA mismatch repair system (MRS) 
deficiency, a common trait evolved by P. aeruginosa strains in CF infections. No 
studies to date have utilized whole-genome sequencing to investigate within-host 
population diversity or long-term evolution of mutators in CF airways. We 
sequenced the genomes of 13 and 14 isolates of P. aeruginosa mutator populations 
from an Argentinian and a Danish CF patient, respectively. Our collection of 
isolates spanned 6 and 20 years of patient infection history, respectively. We 
sequenced 11 isolates from a single sample from each patient to allow in-depth 
analysis of population diversity. Each patient was infected by clonal 
populations of bacteria that were dominated by mutators. The in vivo mutation 
rate of the populations was ∼100 SNPs/year-∼40-fold higher than rates in 
normo-mutable populations. Comparison of the genomes of 11 isolates from the 
same sample showed extensive within-patient genomic diversification; the 
populations were composed of different sub-lineages that had coexisted for many 
years since the initial colonization of the patient. Analysis of the mutations 
identified genes that underwent convergent evolution across lineages and 
sub-lineages, suggesting that the genes were targeted by mutation to optimize 
pathogenic fitness. Parallel evolution was observed in reduction of overall 
catabolic capacity of the populations. These findings are useful for 
understanding the evolution of pathogen populations and identifying new targets 
for control of chronic infections.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004651
PMCID: PMC4199492
PMID: 25330091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.