1. Front Aging Neurosci. 2014 Oct 8;6:268. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2014.00268. 
eCollection 2014.

Nutrient deprivation induces α-synuclein aggregation through endoplasmic 
reticulum stress response and SREBP2 pathway.

Jiang P(1), Gan M(1), Lin WL(1), Yen SH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine Jacksonville, FL, 
USA.

Abnormal accumulation of filamentous α-synuclein (α-syn) in neurons, regarded as 
Lewy bodies (LBs), are a hallmark of Parkinson disease (PD). Although the exact 
mechanism(s) underlying LBs formation remains unknown, autophagy and ER stress 
response have emerged as two important pathways affecting α-syn aggregation. In 
present study we tested whether cells with the tetracycline-off inducible 
overexpression of α-syn and accumulating α-syn aggregates can benefit from 
autophagy activation elicited by nutrient deprivation (ND), since this approach 
was reported to effectively clear cellular polyglutamine aggregates. We found 
that nutrient deprivation of non-induced cells did not affect cell viability, 
but significantly activated autophagy reflected by increasing the level of 
autophagy marker LC3-II and autophagic flux and decrease of endogenous α-syn. 
Cells with induced α-syn expression alone displayed autophagy activation in an 
α-syn dose-dependent manner to reach a level comparable to that found in 
non-induced, nutrient deprived counterparts. Nutrient deprivation also activated 
autophagy further in α-syn induced cells, but the extent was decreased with 
increase of α-syn dose, indicating α-syn overexpression reduces the 
responsiveness of cells to nutrient deprivation. Moreover, the nutrient 
deprivation enhanced α-syn aggregations concomitant with significant increase of 
apoptosis as well as ER stress response, SREBP2 activation and 
cholesterolgenesis. Importantly, α-syn aggregate accumulation and other effects 
caused by nutrient deprivation were counteracted by knockdown of SREBP2, 
treatment with cholesterol lowering agent-lovastatin, or by GRP78 
overexpression, which also caused decrease of SREBP2 activity. Similar results 
were obtained from studies of primary neurons with α-syn overexpression under 
nutrient deprivation. Together our findings suggested that down-regulation of 
SREBP2 activity might be a means to prevent α-syn aggregation in PD via reducing 
cholesterol levels.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2014.00268
PMCID: PMC4189422
PMID: 25339898