1. PLoS Pathog. 2014 Oct 23;10(10):e1004480. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004480. 
eCollection 2014 Oct.

Candida albicans ethanol stimulates Pseudomonas aeruginosa WspR-controlled 
biofilm formation as part of a cyclic relationship involving phenazines.

Chen AI(1), Dolben EF(1), Okegbe C(2), Harty CE(1), Golub Y(3), Thao S(3), Ha 
DG(1), Willger SD(1), O'Toole GA(1), Harwood CS(3), Dietrich LE(2), Hogan DA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Geisel School of Medicine at 
Dartmouth, Hanover, New Hampshire, United States of America.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Columbia University, New York, New York, 
United States of America.
(3)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, University of Washington, 
Seattle, Washington, United States of America.

In chronic infections, pathogens are often in the presence of other microbial 
species. For example, Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a common and detrimental lung 
pathogen in individuals with cystic fibrosis (CF) and co-infections with Candida 
albicans are common. Here, we show that P. aeruginosa biofilm formation and 
phenazine production were strongly influenced by ethanol produced by the fungus 
C. albicans. Ethanol stimulated phenotypes that are indicative of increased 
levels of cyclic-di-GMP (c-di-GMP), and levels of c-di-GMP were 2-fold higher in 
the presence of ethanol. Through a genetic screen, we found that the diguanylate 
cyclase WspR was required for ethanol stimulation of c-di-GMP. Multiple lines of 
evidence indicate that ethanol stimulates WspR signaling through its cognate 
sensor WspA, and promotes WspR-dependent activation of Pel exopolysaccharide 
production, which contributes to biofilm maturation. We also found that ethanol 
stimulation of WspR promoted P. aeruginosa colonization of CF airway epithelial 
cells. P. aeruginosa production of phenazines occurs both in the CF lung and in 
culture, and phenazines enhance ethanol production by C. albicans. Using a C. 
albicans adh1/adh1 mutant with decreased ethanol production, we found that 
fungal ethanol strongly altered the spectrum of P. aeruginosa phenazines in 
favor of those that are most effective against fungi. Thus, a feedback cycle 
comprised of ethanol and phenazines drives this polymicrobial interaction, and 
these relationships may provide insight into why co-infection with both P. 
aeruginosa and C. albicans has been associated with worse outcomes in cystic 
fibrosis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004480
PMCID: PMC4207824
PMID: 25340349 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.