1. BMC Genomics. 2014 Oct 23;15(1):926. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-926.

Gene expression patterns and sequence polymorphisms associated with mosquito 
resistance to Bacillus thuringiensis israelensis toxins.

Després L(1), Stalinski R, Tetreau G, Paris M, Bonin A, Navratil V, Reynaud S, 
David JP.

Author information:
(1)Université Grenoble Alpes, Laboratoire d'Ecologie Alpine UMR5553, Grenoble, 
France. laurence.despres@ujf-grenoble.fr.

BACKGROUND: Despite the intensive use of Bacillus thuringiensis israelensis 
(Bti) toxins for mosquito control, little is known about the long term effect of 
exposure to this cocktail of toxins on target mosquito populations. In contrast 
to the many cases of resistance to Bacillus thuringiensis Cry toxins observed in 
other insects, there is no evidence so far for Bti resistance evolution in field 
mosquito populations. High fitness costs measured in a Bti selected mosquito 
laboratory strain suggest that evolving resistance to Bti is costly. The aim of 
the present study was to identify transcription level and polymorphism 
variations associated with resistance to Bti toxins in the dengue vector Aedes 
aegypti. We used RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) for comparing a laboratory-selected 
strain showing elevated resistance to Bti toxins and its parental non-selected 
susceptible strain. As the resistant strain displayed two marked larval 
development phenotypes (slow and normal), each phenotype was analyzed separately 
in order to evidence potential links between resistance mechanisms and mosquito 
life-history traits.
RESULTS: A total of 12,458 genes were detected of which 844 were differentially 
transcribed between the resistant and susceptible strains. Polymorphism analysis 
revealed a total of 68,541 SNPs of which 12,571 SNPs exhibited more than 40% 
frequency difference between the resistant and susceptible strains, affecting 
2,953 genes. Bti resistance is associated with changes in the transcription 
level of enzymes involved in detoxification and chitin metabolism. Among 
previously described Bti-toxin receptors, four alkaline phosphatases (ALPs) were 
differentially transcribed between resistant and susceptible larvae, and 
non-synonymous changes affected the protein sequence of one cadherin, six 
aminopeptidases (APNs) and four α-amylases. Other putative Cry receptors located 
in lipid rafts, such as flotillin and glycoside hydrolases, were 
under-transcribed and/or contained non-synonymous substitutions. Finally, 
immunity-related genes showed contrasted transcription and polymorphisms 
patterns between the two developmental resistant phenotypes, suggesting the 
existence of trade-offs between Bti-resistance, life-history traits and 
immunity.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study is the first to analyze the whole transcriptome 
of Bti-resistant mosquitoes by RNA-seq, shedding light on the importance of 
studying both transcription levels and sequence polymorphism variations to get a 
comprehensive view of insecticide resistance.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-926
PMCID: PMC4223840
PMID: 25341495 [Indexed for MEDLINE]