1. Front Physiol. 2014 Oct 10;5:383. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2014.00383. eCollection 
2014.

Pharmacological consequences of the coexpression of BK channel α and auxiliary β 
subunits.

Torres YP(1), Granados ST(2), Latorre R(3).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Nutrición y Bioquímica, Facultad de Ciencias, Pontificia 
Universidad Javeriana Bogotá, Colombia.
(2)Departamento de Nutrición y Bioquímica, Facultad de Ciencias, Pontificia 
Universidad Javeriana Bogotá, Colombia ; Facultad de Ciencias, Centro 
Interdisciplinario de Neurociencia de Valparaíso, Universidad de Valparaíso 
Valparaíso, Chile.
(3)Facultad de Ciencias, Centro Interdisciplinario de Neurociencia de 
Valparaíso, Universidad de Valparaíso Valparaíso, Chile.

Coded by a single gene (Slo1, KCM) and activated by depolarizing potentials and 
by a rise in intracellular Ca(2+) concentration, the large conductance voltage- 
and Ca(2+)-activated K(+) channel (BK) is unique among the superfamily of K(+) 
channels. BK channels are tetramers characterized by a pore-forming α subunit 
containing seven transmembrane segments (instead of the six found in 
voltage-dependent K(+) channels) and a large C terminus composed of two 
regulators of K(+) conductance domains (RCK domains), where the Ca(2+)-binding 
sites reside. BK channels can be associated with accessory β subunits and, 
although different BK modulatory mechanisms have been described, greater 
interest has recently been placed on the role that the β subunits may play in 
the modulation of BK channel gating due to its physiological importance. Four β 
subunits have currently been identified (i.e., β1, β2, β3, and β4) and despite 
the fact that they all share the same topology, it has been shown that every β 
subunit has a specific tissue distribution and that they modify channel kinetics 
as well as their pharmacological properties and the apparent Ca(2+) sensitivity 
of the α subunit in different ways. Additionally, different studies have shown 
that natural, endogenous, and synthetic compounds can modulate BK channels 
through β subunits. Considering the importance of these channels in different 
pathological conditions, such as hypertension and neurological disorders, this 
review focuses on the mechanisms by which these compounds modulate the 
biophysical properties of BK channels through the regulation of β subunits, as 
well as their potential therapeutic uses for diseases such as those mentioned 
above.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2014.00383
PMCID: PMC4193333
PMID: 25346693