1. BMC Res Notes. 2014 Oct 31;7:767. doi: 10.1186/1756-0500-7-767.

Hypoxia alters expression of zebrafish microtubule-associated protein tau 
(mapta, maptb) gene transcripts.

Moussavi Nik SH(1), Newman M, Ganesan S, Chen M, Martins R, Verdile G, Lardelli 
M.

Author information:
(1)Discipline of Genetics, School of Molecular and Biomedical Sciences, The 
University of Adelaide, SA 5005 Adelaide, Australia. 
seyyed.moussavinik@adelaide.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: Microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT) is abundant in neurons and 
functions in assembly and stabilization of microtubules to maintain cytoskeletal 
structure. Human MAPT transcripts undergo alternative splicing to produce 3R and 
4R isoforms normally present at approximately equal levels in the adult brain. 
Imbalance of the 3R-4R isoform ratio can affect microtubule binding and assembly 
and may promote tau hyperphosphorylation and neurofibrillary tangle formation as 
seen in neurodegenerative diseases such as frontotemporal dementia (FTD) and 
Alzheimer's disease (AD). Conditions involving hypoxia such as cerebral ischemia 
and stroke can promote similar tau pathology but whether hypoxic conditions 
cause changes in MAPT isoform formation has not been widely explored. We 
previously identified two paralogues (co-orthologues) of MAPT in zebrafish, 
mapta and maptb.
RESULTS: In this study we assess the splicing of transcripts of these genes in 
adult zebrafish brain under hypoxic conditions. We find hypoxia causes increases 
in particular mapta and maptb transcript isoforms, particularly the 6R and 4R 
isoforms of mapta and maptb respectively. Expression of the zebrafish orthologue 
of human TRA2B, tra2b, that encodes a protein binding to MAPT transcripts and 
regulating splicing, was reduced under hypoxic conditions, similar to 
observations in AD brain.
CONCLUSION: Overall, our findings indicate that hypoxia can alter splicing of 
zebrafish MAPT co-orthologues promoting formation of longer transcripts and 
possibly generating Mapt proteins more prone to hyperphosphorylation. This 
supports the use of zebrafish to provide insight into the mechanisms regulating 
MAPT transcript splicing under conditions that promote neuronal dysfunction and 
degeneration.

DOI: 10.1186/1756-0500-7-767
PMCID: PMC4236441
PMID: 25359609 [Indexed for MEDLINE]