1. New Microbes New Infect. 2014 May;2(3):72-8. doi: 10.1002/nmi2.44. Epub 2014
Apr  20.

Validation of a novel real-time PCR for detecting Rasamsonia argillacea species 
complex in respiratory secretions from cystic fibrosis patients.

Steinmann J(1), Giraud S(2), Schmidt D(1), Sedlacek L(3), Hamprecht A(4), 
Houbraken J(5), Meis JF(6), Bouchara JP(7), Buer J(1), Rath PM(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology, University Hospital Essen, University of 
Duisburg-Essen Essen, Germany.
(2)L'UNAM Université, Université d'Angers, Groupe d'Etude des Interactions 
Hôte-Pathogène Angers, France.
(3)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hospital Epidemiology, Hannover Medical 
School Hannover, Germany.
(4)Institute for Medical Microbiology, Immunology and Hygiene, University 
Hospital of Cologne Cologne, Germany.
(5)CBS-KNAW Fungal Biodiversity Centre Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Medical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, Canisius 
Wilhelmina Hospital Nijmegen, The Netherlands ; Department of Medical 
Microbiology, Radboud University Medical Centre Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(7)L'UNAM Université, Université d'Angers, Groupe d'Etude des Interactions 
Hôte-Pathogène Angers, France ; Laboratory of Parasitology and Mycology, Angers 
University Hospital Angers, France.

Members of the recently introduced fungal genus Rasamsonia (formerly included in 
the Geosmithia genus) have been described as emerging pathogens in 
immunosuppressed hosts or patients with cystic fibrosis (CF). Rasamsonia species 
have often been misidentified as Penicillium or Paecilomyces because of similar 
morphological characteristics. We validated a commercially available real-time 
PCR assay (Primerdesign™, UK) for accurate detection of species from the 
Rasamsonia argillacea complex. First, we tested this assay with a collection of 
74 reference strains and clinical isolates and then compared the PCR with 
cultures of 234 respiratory samples from 152 patients with CF from two 
University Hospitals in Germany and France. The assay reliably detected the 
three main species within the Rasamsonia argillacea species complex 
(R. argillacea, R. piperina, R. aegroticola), which are typically encountered in 
CF patients. The limit of DNA detection was between 0.01 and 1 pg/μL. Analysis 
of the DNA extracts from respiratory specimens of CF patients revealed that four 
out of the 153 patients studied (2.6%) were colonized with R. argillacea species 
complex. Two species from the R. argillacea complex grew in the parallel 
cultures from the same patients. In one patient the PCR was positive 5 months 
before culture. The real-time PCR assay is a sensitive and specific method for 
detecting the three most important species of the R. argillacea species complex 
encountered in the CF context. Detection of these emerging pathogens in 
respiratory secretions from CF patients by this novel assay may increase our 
understanding of the occurrence and epidemiology of the R. argillacea species 
complex.

DOI: 10.1002/nmi2.44
PMCID: PMC4184661
PMID: 25356347