1. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 31;9(10):e110958. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110958. 
eCollection 2014.

Centrosome/Cell cycle uncoupling and elimination in the endoreduplicating 
intestinal cells of C. elegans.

Lu Y(1), Roy R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, The Developmental Biology Research Initiative, McGill 
University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

The centrosome cycle is most often coordinated with mitotic cell division 
through the activity of various essential cell cycle regulators, consequently 
ensuring that the centriole is duplicated once, and only once, per cell cycle. 
However, this coupling can be altered in specific developmental contexts; for 
example, multi-ciliated cells generate hundreds of centrioles without any 
S-phase requirement for their biogenesis, while Drosophila follicle cells 
eliminate their centrosomes as they begin to endoreduplicate. In order to better 
understand how the centrosome cycle and the cell cycle are coordinated in a 
developmental context we use the endoreduplicating intestinal cell lineage of C. 
elegans to address how novel variations of the cell cycle impact this important 
process. In C. elegans, the larval intestinal cells undergo one nuclear division 
without subsequent cytokinesis, followed by four endocycles that are 
characterized by successive rounds of S-phase. We monitored the levels of 
centriolar/centrosomal markers and found that centrosomes lose their 
pericentriolar material following the nuclear division that occurs during the L1 
stage and is thereafter never re-gained. The centrioles then become refractory 
to S phase regulators that would normally promote duplication during the first 
endocycle, after which they are eliminated during the L2 stage. Furthermore, we 
show that SPD-2 plays a central role in the numeral regulation of centrioles as 
a potential target of CDK activity. On the other hand, the phosphorylation on 
SPD-2 by Polo-like kinase, the transcriptional regulation of genes that affect 
centriole biogenesis, and the ubiquitin/proteasome degradation pathway, 
contribute collectively to the final elimination of the centrioles during the L2 
stage.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110958
PMCID: PMC4215990
PMID: 25360893 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.