1. PLoS Genet. 2014 Nov 20;10(11):e1004761. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004761. 
eCollection 2014 Nov.

Natural polymorphisms in human APOBEC3H and HIV-1 Vif combine in primary T 
lymphocytes to affect viral G-to-A mutation levels and infectivity.

Refsland EW(1), Hultquist JF(1), Luengas EM(1), Ikeda T(1), Shaban NM(1), Law 
EK(1), Brown WL(1), Reilly C(2), Emerman M(3), Harris RS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, and Biophysics, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, United States of America; Institute for 
Molecular Virology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, United 
States of America; Center for Genome Engineering, University of Minnesota, 
Minneapolis, Minnesota, United States of America; Masonic Cancer Center, 
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, United States of America.
(2)Institute for Molecular Virology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, 
Minnesota, United States of America; Division of Biostatistics, School of Public 
Health, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, United States of 
America.
(3)Division of Human Biology, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, 
Washington, United States of America.

The Vif protein of HIV-1 allows virus replication by degrading several members 
of the host-encoded APOBEC3 family of DNA cytosine deaminases. Polymorphisms in 
both host APOBEC3 genes and the viral vif gene have the potential to impact the 
extent of virus replication among individuals. The most genetically diverse of 
the seven human APOBEC3 genes is APOBEC3H with seven known haplotypes. 
Overexpression studies have shown that a subset of these variants express stable 
and active proteins, whereas the others encode proteins with a short half-life 
and little, if any, antiviral activity. We demonstrate that these 
stable/unstable phenotypes are an intrinsic property of endogenous APOBEC3H 
proteins in primary CD4+ T lymphocytes and confer differential resistance to 
HIV-1 infection in a manner that depends on natural variation in the Vif protein 
of the infecting virus. HIV-1 with a Vif protein hypo-functional for APOBEC3H 
degradation, yet fully able to counteract APOBEC3D, APOBEC3F, and APOBEC3G, was 
susceptible to restriction and hypermutation in stable APOBEC3H expressing 
lymphocytes, but not in unstable APOBEC3H expressing lymphocytes. In contrast, 
HIV-1 with hyper-functional Vif counteracted stable APOBEC3H proteins as well as 
all other endogenous APOBEC3s and replicated to high levels. We also found that 
APOBEC3H protein levels are induced over 10-fold by infection. Finally, we found 
that the global distribution of stable/unstable APOBEC3H haplotypes correlates 
with the distribution a critical hyper/hypo-functional Vif amino acid residue. 
These data combine to strongly suggest that stable APOBEC3H haplotypes present 
as in vivo barriers to HIV-1 replication, that Vif is capable of adapting to 
these restrictive pressures, and that an evolutionary equilibrium has yet to be 
reached.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004761
PMCID: PMC4238949
PMID: 25411794 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.