1. Mol Ther Methods Clin Dev. 2014;1:14007. doi: 10.1038/mtm.2014.7.

Proteomic profiling of salivary gland after nonviral gene transfer mediated by 
conventional plasmids and minicircles.

Geguchadze R(1), Wang Z(1), Zourelias L(1), Perez-Riveros P(2), Edwards PC(3), 
Machen L(1), Passineau MJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Gene Therapy Program, Allegheny Health Network, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, 
USA.
(2)National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research, Bethesda, Maryland, 
USA.
(3)Department of Oral Pathology, Medicine and Radiology, Indiana University 
School of Dentistry, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.

In this study, we compared gene transfer efficiency and host response to 
ultrasound-assisted, nonviral gene transfer with a conventional plasmid and a 
minicircle vector in the submandibular salivary glands of mice. Initially, we 
looked at gene transfer efficiency with equimolar amounts of the plasmid and 
minicircle vectors, corroborating an earlier report showing that minicircle is 
more efficient in the context of a physical method of gene transfer. We then 
sought to characterize the physiological response of the salivary gland to 
exogenous gene transfer using global proteomic profiling. Somewhat surprisingly, 
we found that sonoporation alone, without a gene transfer vector present, had 
virtually no effect on the salivary gland proteome. However, when a plasmid 
vector was used, we observed profound perturbations of the salivary gland 
proteome that compared in magnitude to that seen in a previous report after high 
doses of AAV. Finally, we found that gene transfer with a minicircle induces 
only minor proteomic alterations that were similar to sonoporation alone. Using 
mass spectrometry, we assigned protein IDs to 218 gel spots that differed 
between plasmid and minicircle. Bioinformatic analysis of these proteins 
demonstrated convergence on 68 known protein interaction pathways, most notably 
those associated with innate immunity, cellular stress, and morphogenesis.

DOI: 10.1038/mtm.2014.7
PMCID: PMC4236002
PMID: 25414909