1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2015 Aug;23(8):1106-10. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2014.245. Epub 2014
 Nov 26.

Identification of schizophrenia-associated loci by combining DNA methylation and 
gene expression data from whole blood.

van Eijk KR(1), de Jong S(2), Strengman E(2), Buizer-Voskamp JE(1), Kahn RS(1), 
Boks MP(1), Horvath S(3), Ophoff RA(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Brain Center Rudolf Magnus, University Medical 
Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(2)UCLA Center for Neurobehavioral Genetics, Semel Institute for Neuroscience 
and Human Behavior, University of California Los Angeles (UCLA), Los Angeles, 
CA, USA.
(3)Department of Human Genetics, University of California Los Angeles (UCLA), 
Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(4)1] Department of Psychiatry, Brain Center Rudolf Magnus, University Medical 
Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands [2] UCLA Center for Neurobehavioral 
Genetics, Semel Institute for Neuroscience and Human Behavior, University of 
California Los Angeles (UCLA), Los Angeles, CA, USA [3] Department of Human 
Genetics, University of California Los Angeles (UCLA), Los Angeles, CA, USA.

Emerging evidence suggests that schizophrenia (SZ) susceptibility involves 
variation at genetic, epigenetic and transcriptome levels. We describe an 
integrated approach that leverages DNA methylation and gene expression data to 
prioritize genetic variation involved in disease. DNA methylation levels were 
obtained from whole blood of 260 SZ patients and 250 unaffected controls of 
which a subset with gene expression data was available. By assessing DNA 
methylation and gene expression in cases and controls, we identified 432 CpG 
sites with differential methylation levels that are associated with differential 
gene expression. We hypothesized that genetic factors involved in these 
methylation levels may be associated with the genetic risk of SZ susceptibility. 
To test this hypothesis, we used results from the Psychiatric Genomics 
Consortium SZ genome-wide association study (GWAS). We observe an enrichment of 
SZ-associated SNPs in the mQTLs of which the associated CpG site is also 
correlated with differential gene expression in SZ. While this enrichment was 
already apparent when using nominal significant thresholds, enrichment was even 
more pronounced when applying more stringent significance levels. One locus, 
previously identified as susceptibility locus in a SZ GWAS, involves SNP 
rs11191514:C>T, which regulates DNA methylation of calcium homeostasis modulator 
1 that is also associated with differential gene expression in patients. 
Overall, our results suggest that epigenetic variation plays an important role 
in SZ susceptibility and that the integration of analyses of genetic, epigenetic 
and gene expression profiles may be a biologically meaningful approach for 
identifying disease susceptibility loci, even when using whole blood data in 
studies of brain-related disorders.

DOI: 10.1038/ejhg.2014.245
PMCID: PMC4795100
PMID: 25424713 [Indexed for MEDLINE]