1. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2015 Jan 5;399:288-95. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2014.10.019.
Epub  2014 Oct 27.

Telomerase in differentiated thyroid cancer: promoter mutations, expression and 
localization.

Muzza M(1), Colombo C(1), Rossi S(2), Tosi D(3), Cirello V(4), Perrino M(1), De 
Leo S(1), Magnani E(5), Pignatti E(5), Vigo B(1), Simoni M(5), Bulfamante G(6), 
Vicentini L(7), Fugazzola L(8).

Author information:
(1)Endocrine Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda, Milan, Italy; Department of 
Clinical Sciences and Community Health, University of Milan, Italy.
(2)Division of Pathology, San Paolo Hospital, Milan, Italy.
(3)Department of Health Sciences, University of Milan, Italy.
(4)Endocrine Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda, Milan, Italy; Department of 
Pathophysiology and Transplantation, University of Milan, Italy.
(5)Azienda USL of Modena, Italy; Department of Biomedicine, Metabolism and 
Neural Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Italy.
(6)Division of Pathology, San Paolo Hospital, Milan, Italy; Department of Health 
Sciences, University of Milan, Italy.
(7)Endocrine Surgery Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca'Granda, Milan, Italy.
(8)Endocrine Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda, Milan, Italy; Department of 
Pathophysiology and Transplantation, University of Milan, Italy. Electronic 
address: laura.fugazzola@unimi.it.

Telomerase-reverse-transcriptase (TERT) promoter mutations have been recently 
described in tumors. In the present large series, TERT mutations were found in 
12% of papillary thyroid cancers (PTCs) and in 14% of follicular thyroid cancers 
(FTCs), and were found to significantly correlate with older age at diagnosis 
and poorer outcome. Interestingly, the prognostic value of TERT mutations 
resulted to be significantly stronger than that of BRAF(V600E). Moreover, the 
outcome was not different among tumors with isolated TERT mutation and those 
with coexistent mutations (TERT/BRAF in PTCs or TERT/RAS in FTCs). TERT 
rs2853669 polymorphism was found in 44.4% of tumors. At WB, TERT was 
significantly more expressed in tumors than in normal samples, being the highest 
levels of expression recorded in TERT mutated cases. At IHC, in tumors and in 
metastatic lymph-nodes TERT staining was significantly higher in the cytoplasm 
than in the nucleus, whereas in normal tissue the degree of staining did not 
differ in the two cellular compartments. In conclusion, TERT mutations were 
shown to strongly correlate with a poorer outcome in differentiated thyroid 
tumors, and neither BRAF nor RAS mutation were found to confer an additional 
effect in the disease persistence. TERT protein was found to be more expressed 
in neoplastic than in normal tissues, and to display a different cellular 
localization, suggesting that it could contribute to thyroid cancer progression 
by mechanisms taking place in the cytoplasm.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mce.2014.10.019
PMID: 25448848 [Indexed for MEDLINE]