1. Mol Genet Metab. 2015 Jan;114(1):66-72. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2014.11.003. Epub
 2014 Nov 8.

Mathematical modeling of the insulin signal transduction pathway for prediction 
of insulin sensitivity from expression data.

Ho CK(1), Rahib L(1), Liao JC(2), Sriram G(3), Dipple KM(4).

Author information:
(1)Biomedical Engineering Interdepartmental Program, Henry Samueli School of 
Engineering and Applied Science at UCLA, USA.
(2)Biomedical Engineering Interdepartmental Program, Henry Samueli School of 
Engineering and Applied Science at UCLA, USA; Department of Chemical and 
Biomolecular Engineering, Henry Samueli School of Engineering and Applied 
Science at UCLA, USA.
(3)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Henry Samueli School of 
Engineering and Applied Science at UCLA, USA; Department of Human Genetics, 
David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, USA.
(4)Biomedical Engineering Interdepartmental Program, Henry Samueli School of 
Engineering and Applied Science at UCLA, USA; Department of Human Genetics, 
David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, USA; Department of Pediatrics, David 
Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, USA; Mattel Children's Hospital at UCLA, USA. 
Electronic address: kdipple@ucla.edu.

Mathematical models of biological pathways facilitate a systems biology approach 
to medicine. However, these models need to be updated to reflect the latest 
available knowledge of the underlying pathways. We developed a mathematical 
model of the insulin signal transduction pathway by expanding the last major 
previously reported model and incorporating pathway components elucidated since 
the original model was reported. Furthermore, we show that inputting gene 
expression data of key components of the insulin signal transduction pathway 
leads to sensible predictions of glucose clearance rates in agreement with 
reported clinical measurements. In one set of simulations, our model predicted 
that glycerol kinase knockout mice have reduced GLUT4 translocation, and 
consequently, reduced glucose uptake. Additionally, a comparison of our extended 
model with the original model showed that the added pathway components improve 
simulations of glucose clearance rates. We anticipate this expanded model to be 
a useful tool for predicting insulin sensitivity in mammalian tissues with 
altered expression protein phosphorylation or mRNA levels of insulin signal 
transduction pathway components.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2014.11.003
PMCID: PMC4319670
PMID: 25468647 [Indexed for MEDLINE]