1. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 3;9(12):e113265. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0113265. 
eCollection 2014.

The crystal structures of apo and cAMP-bound GlxR from Corynebacterium 
glutamicum reveal structural and dynamic changes upon cAMP binding in CRP/FNR 
family transcription factors.

Townsend PD(1), Jungwirth B(2), Pojer F(3), Bußmann M(4), Money VA(1), Cole 
ST(3), Pühler A(2), Tauch A(2), Bott M(4), Cann MJ(1), Pohl E(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological and Biomedical Sciences & Department of Chemistry, 
Biophysical Sciences Institute, Durham University, Durham, United Kingdom.
(2)Institute for Genome Research and Systems Biology, Center for Biotechnology 
(CeBiTec), Bielefeld University, Bielefeld, Germany.
(3)Global Health Institute, Protein Crystallography Core Facility, Ecole 
Poytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland.
(4)Institute of Bio- and Geosciences, IBG-1:Biotechnology, Forschungszentrum 
Jülich, Jülich, Germany.

The cyclic AMP-dependent transcriptional regulator GlxR from Corynebacterium 
glutamicum is a member of the super-family of CRP/FNR (cyclic AMP receptor 
protein/fumarate and nitrate reduction regulator) transcriptional regulators 
that play central roles in bacterial metabolic regulatory networks. In C. 
glutamicum, which is widely used for the industrial production of amino acids 
and serves as a non-pathogenic model organism for members of the 
Corynebacteriales including Mycobacterium tuberculosis, the GlxR homodimer 
controls the transcription of a large number of genes involved in carbon 
metabolism. GlxR therefore represents a key target for understanding the 
regulation and coordination of C. glutamicum metabolism. Here we investigate 
cylic AMP and DNA binding of GlxR from C. glutamicum and describe the crystal 
structures of apo GlxR determined at a resolution of 2.5 Å, and two crystal 
forms of holo GlxR at resolutions of 2.38 and 1.82 Å, respectively. The detailed 
structural analysis and comparison of GlxR with CRP reveals that the protein 
undergoes a distinctive conformational change upon cyclic AMP binding leading to 
a dimer structure more compatible to DNA-binding. As the two binding sites in 
the GlxR homodimer are structurally identical dynamic changes upon binding of 
the first ligand are responsible for the allosteric behavior. The results 
presented here show how dynamic and structural changes in GlxR lead to 
optimization of orientation and distance of its two DNA-binding helices for 
optimal DNA recognition.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0113265
PMCID: PMC4254451
PMID: 25469635 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.