1. Genome Biol Evol. 2014 Dec 4;7(1):81-95. doi: 10.1093/gbe/evu266.

Constraint and adaptation in newt toll-like receptor genes.

Babik W(1), Dudek K(2), Fijarczyk A(2), Pabijan M(2), Stuglik M(2), Szkotak 
R(2), Zieliński P(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Environmental Sciences, Jagiellonian University, Kraków, Poland 
wieslaw.babik@uj.edu.pl.
(2)Institute of Environmental Sciences, Jagiellonian University, Kraków, Poland.

Acute die-offs of amphibian populations worldwide have been linked to the 
emergence of viral and fungal diseases. Inter and intraspecific immunogenetic 
differences may influence the outcome of infection. Toll-like receptors (TLRs) 
are an essential component of innate immunity and also prime acquired defenses. 
We report the first comprehensive assessment of TLR gene variation for urodele 
amphibians. The Lissotriton newt TLR repertoire includes representatives of 13 
families and is compositionally most similar to that of the anuran Xenopus. Both 
ancient and recent gene duplications have occurred in urodeles, bringing the 
total number of TLR genes to at least 21. Purifying selection has predominated 
the evolution of newt TLRs in both long (∼70 Ma) and medium (∼18 Ma) timescales. 
However, we find evidence for both purifying and positive selection acting on 
TLRs in two recently diverged (2-5 Ma) allopatric evolutionary lineages 
(Lissotriton montandoni and L. vulgaris graecus). Overall, both forms of 
selection have been stronger in L. v. graecus, while constraint on most TLR 
genes in L. montandoni appears relaxed. The differences in selection regimes are 
unlikely to be biased by demographic effects because these were controlled by 
means of a historical demographic model derived from an independent data set of 
62 loci. We infer that TLR genes undergo distinct trajectories of adaptive 
evolution in closely related amphibian lineages, highlight the potential of TLRs 
to capture the signatures of different assemblages of pathogenic microorganisms, 
and suggest differences between lineages in the relative roles of innate and 
acquired immunity.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/gbe/evu266
PMCID: PMC4316619
PMID: 25480684 [Indexed for MEDLINE]