1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2014 Dec;93(27):e157. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000000157.

Resistance to vemurafenib can be reversible after treatment interruption: a case 
report of a metastatic melanoma patient.

Mackiewicz-Wysocka M(1), Krokowicz Ł, Kocur J, Mackiewicz J.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Dermatology (MM-W), Poznan University of Medical 
Sciences; Department of General, Endocrinological and Gastroenterological 
Oncology Surgery (LK), Poznan University of Medical Sciences; Department of 
Radiology (JK), Greater Poland Cancer Centre; Department of Medical 
Biotechnology (JM), University of Medical Sciences; Department of Diagnostics 
and Cancer Immunology (JM), Greater Poland Cancer Centre, Poznan; and Department 
of Medical Oncology (JM), Małgorzata Medical Center, Srem, Poland.

About 40% to 60% of melanomas present BRAF mutation. Selective BRAF inhibitors 
such as vemurafenib and dabrafenib are currently approved for the treatment of 
advanced melanoma patients with BRAF mutation. The treatment-induced tumor 
regression occurs in the majority of patients; however, acquired resistance to 
BRAF inhibitors is observed in most of the patients after 6 to 7 months. After 
progression of the disease, the patient might be offered treatment with 
ipilimumab followed by chemotherapy. Subsequent lines of systemic treatment of 
metastatic melanoma patients do not exist.Here we report a case of a 59-year-old 
woman with a diagnosis of BRAF-mutant metastatic melanoma that responded to 
initial treatment with vemurafenib. Subsequently, after disease progression, the 
patient received chemotherapy. Since no clinical response to dacarbazine was 
observed, carboplatin with paclitaxel were applied. Transient partial response 
was obtained, which was followed by further disease progression. Then 
retreatment with vemurafenib was applied. The patient developed very short-term 
tumor regression and significant biochemical response (serum lactate 
dehydrogenase, alanine aminotransferase, and aspartate aminotransferase) to the 
treatment. However, following 5 weeks of retreatment, the patient developed 
progression of the disease. Our clinical observation indicates that in melanoma 
patients who developed resistance to selective BRAF inhibitors, rechallenge 
after treatment interruption might be beneficial.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000000157
PMCID: PMC4602769
PMID: 25501056 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no funding and conflicts of 
interest to disclose.