1. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 11;9(12):e114480. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0114480. 
eCollection 2014.

Cytokine network in adults with falciparum Malaria and HIV-1: increased IL-8 and 
IP-10 levels are associated with disease severity.

Berg A(1), Patel S(2), Gonca M(2), David C(2), Otterdal K(3), Ueland T(4), Dalen 
I(5), Kvaløy JT(6), Mollnes TE(7), Aukrust P(8), Langeland N(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Stavanger University Hospital, Stavanger, Norway; 
Department of Medicine, The Central Hospital of Maputo, Maputo, Mozambique; 
Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(2)Department of Medicine, The Central Hospital of Maputo, Maputo, Mozambique.
(3)Research Institute of Internal Medicine, Oslo University Hospital 
Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway.
(4)Research Institute of Internal Medicine, Oslo University Hospital 
Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway; K.G. Jebsen Inflammatory Research Center, 
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(5)Research Department, Stavanger University Hospital, Stavanger, Norway.
(6)Research Department, Stavanger University Hospital, Stavanger, Norway; 
Department of Mathematics and Natural Sciences, University of Stavanger, 
Stavanger, Norway.
(7)Section of Clinical Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Oslo University 
Hospital Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway; Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, 
Oslo, Norway; K.G. Jebsen Inflammatory Research Center, University of Oslo, 
Oslo, Norway; Institute of Immunology, Oslo University Hospital Rikshospitalet, 
Oslo, Norway; Research Laboratory Nordland Hospital, Bodø, Norway; Faculty of 
Health Sciences, University of Tromsø, Tromsø, Norway.
(8)Research Institute of Internal Medicine, Oslo University Hospital 
Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway; Section of Clinical Immunology and Infectious 
Diseases, Oslo University Hospital Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway; Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway; K.G. Jebsen Inflammatory Research 
Center, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(9)Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway; 
Department of Medicine, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway.

BACKGROUND: Co-infection with malaria and HIV increases the severity and 
mortality of both diseases, but the cytokine responses related to this 
co-infection are only partially characterised. The aim of this study was to 
explore cytokine responses in relation to severity and mortality in malaria 
patients with and without HIV co-infection.
METHODS: This was a prospective cross-sectional study. Clinical data and blood 
samples were collected from adults in Mozambique. Plasma was analysed for 21 
classical pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines, including interleukins, 
interferons, and chemokines.
RESULTS: We included 212 in-patients with fever and/or suspected malaria and 56 
healthy controls. Falciparum malaria was diagnosed in 131 patients, of whom 70 
were co-infected with HIV-1. The malaria patients had marked increases in their 
cytokine responses compared with the healthy controls. Some of these changes, 
particularly interleukin 8 (IL-8) and interferon-γ-inducing protein 10 (IP-10) 
were strongly associated with falciparum malaria and disease severity. Both 
these chemokines were markedly increased in patients with falciparum malaria as 
compared with healthy controls, and raised levels of IL-8 and IP-10 were 
associated with increased disease severity, even after adjusting for relevant 
confounders. For IL-8, particularly high levels were found in malaria patients 
that were co-infected with HIV and in those who died during hospitalization.
INTERPRETATIONS: Our findings underscore the complex role of inflammation during 
infection with P. falciparum, and suggest a potential pathogenic role for IL-8 
and IP-10. However, the correlations do not necessarily mean any causal 
relationship, and further both clinical and mechanistic research is necessary to 
elucidate the role of cytokines in pathogenesis and protection during falciparum 
malaria.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0114480
PMCID: PMC4263737
PMID: 25503583 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.