1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2014 Nov 25;2:69. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2014.00069. 
eCollection 2014.

The neural crest lineage as a driver of disease heterogeneity in Tuberous 
Sclerosis Complex and Lymphangioleiomyomatosis.

Delaney SP(1), Julian LM(2), Stanford WL(3).

Author information:
(1)Sprott Centre for Stem Cell Research, Regenerative Medicine Program, Ottawa 
Hospital Research Institute Ottawa, ON, Canada ; Faculty of Graduate and 
Postdoctoral Studies, University of Ottawa Ottawa, ON, Canada ; Department of 
Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(2)Sprott Centre for Stem Cell Research, Regenerative Medicine Program, Ottawa 
Hospital Research Institute Ottawa, ON, Canada ; Faculty of Graduate and 
Postdoctoral Studies, University of Ottawa Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(3)Sprott Centre for Stem Cell Research, Regenerative Medicine Program, Ottawa 
Hospital Research Institute Ottawa, ON, Canada ; Faculty of Graduate and 
Postdoctoral Studies, University of Ottawa Ottawa, ON, Canada ; Department of 
Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa Ottawa, ON, Canada ; 
Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology, and Immunology, University of Ottawa 
Ottawa, ON, Canada.

Lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM) is a rare neoplastic disease, best characterized 
by the formation of proliferative nodules that express smooth muscle and 
melanocytic antigens within the lung parenchyma, leading to progressive 
destruction of lung tissue and function. The pathological basis of LAM is 
associated with Tuberous Sclerosis Complex (TSC), a multi-system disorder marked 
by low-grade tumors in the brain, kidneys, heart, eyes, lung and skin, arising 
from inherited or spontaneous germ-line mutations in either of the TSC1 or TSC2 
genes. LAM can develop either in a patient with TSC (TSC-LAM) or spontaneously 
(S-LAM), and it is clear that the majority of LAM lesions of both forms are 
characterized by an inactivating mutation in either TSC1 or TSC2, as in TSC. 
Despite this genetic commonality, there is considerable heterogeneity in the 
tumor spectrum of TSC and LAM patients, the basis for which is currently 
unknown. There is extensive clinical evidence to suggest that the cell of origin 
for LAM, as well as many of the TSC-associated tumors, is a neural crest cell, a 
highly migratory cell type with extensive multi-lineage potential. Here we 
explore the hypothesis that the types of tumors that develop and the tissues 
that are affected in TSC and LAM are dictated by the developmental timing of TSC 
gene mutations, which determines the identities of the affected cell types and 
the size of downstream populations that acquire a mutation. We further discuss 
the evidence to support a neural crest origin for LAM and TSC tumors, and 
propose approaches for generating humanized models of TSC and LAM that will 
allow cell of origin theories to be experimentally tested. Identifying the cell 
of origin and developing appropriate humanized models is necessary to truly 
understand LAM and TSC pathology and to establish effective and long-lasting 
therapeutic approaches for these patients.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2014.00069
PMCID: PMC4243694
PMID: 25505789