1. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 15;9(12):e111946. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0111946. 
eCollection 2014.

In silico models for dynamic connected cell cultures mimicking 
hepatocyte-endothelial cell-adipocyte interaction circle.

Andreoni C(1), Orsi G(1), De Maria C(2), Montemurro F(1), Vozzi G(2).

Author information:
(1)Research Center "E. Piaggio", University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.
(2)Research Center "E. Piaggio", University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy; Department of 
Information Engineering, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.

The biochemistry of a system made up of three kinds of cell is virtually 
impossible to work out without the use of in silico models. Here, we deal with 
homeostatic balance phenomena from a metabolic point of view and we present a 
new computational model merging three single-cell models, already available from 
our research group: the first model reproduced the metabolic behaviour of a 
hepatocyte, the second one represented an endothelial cell, and the third one 
described an adipocyte. Multiple interconnections were created among these three 
models in order to mimic the main physiological interactions that are known for 
the examined cell phenotypes. The ultimate aim was to recreate the 
accomplishment of the homeostatic balance as it was observed for an in vitro 
connected three-culture system concerning glucose and lipid metabolism in the 
presence of the medium flow. The whole model was based on a modular approach and 
on a set of nonlinear differential equations implemented in Simulink, applying 
Michaelis-Menten kinetic laws and some energy balance considerations to the 
studied metabolic pathways. Our in silico model was then validated against 
experimental datasets coming from literature about the cited in vitro model. The 
agreement between simulated and experimental results was good and the behaviour 
of the connected culture system was reproduced through an adequate parameter 
evaluation. The developed model may help other researchers to investigate 
further about integrated metabolism and the regulation mechanisms underlying the 
physiological homeostasis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0111946
PMCID: PMC4266517
PMID: 25502576 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.