1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Jan;43(1):418-32. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku1304. Epub 2014 
Dec 15.

Adhesin competence repressor (AdcR) from Streptococcus pyogenes controls 
adaptive responses to zinc limitation and contributes to virulence.

Sanson M(1), Makthal N(2), Flores AR(3), Olsen RJ(2), Musser JM(2), Kumaraswami 
M(4).

Author information:
(1)Center for Molecular and Translational Human Infectious Diseases Research, 
The Methodist Hospital Research Institute, Department of Pathology and Genomic 
Medicine, The Methodist Hospital System, Houston, TX, USA Escuela de 
Biotecnología y Alimentos, Escuela de Medicina y Ciencias de la Salud, 
Tecnologico de Monterrey, Monterrey, NL, Mexico.
(2)Center for Molecular and Translational Human Infectious Diseases Research, 
The Methodist Hospital Research Institute, Department of Pathology and Genomic 
Medicine, The Methodist Hospital System, Houston, TX, USA.
(3)Center for Molecular and Translational Human Infectious Diseases Research, 
The Methodist Hospital Research Institute, Department of Pathology and Genomic 
Medicine, The Methodist Hospital System, Houston, TX, USA Section of Infectious 
Diseases, Department of Pediatrics, Texas Children's Hospital and Baylor College 
of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.
(4)Center for Molecular and Translational Human Infectious Diseases Research, 
The Methodist Hospital Research Institute, Department of Pathology and Genomic 
Medicine, The Methodist Hospital System, Houston, TX, USA 
mkumaraswami@houstonmethodist.org.

Altering zinc bioavailability to bacterial pathogens is a key component of host 
innate immunity. Thus, the ability to sense and adapt to the alterations in zinc 
concentrations is critical for bacterial survival and pathogenesis. To 
understand the adaptive responses of group A Streptococcus (GAS) to zinc 
limitation and its regulation by AdcR, we characterized gene regulation by AdcR. 
AdcR regulates the expression of 70 genes involved in zinc acquisition and 
virulence. Zinc-bound AdcR interacts with operator sequences in the negatively 
regulated promoters and mediates differential regulation of target genes in 
response to zinc deficiency. Genes involved in zinc mobilization and 
conservation are derepressed during mild zinc deficiency, whereas the 
energy-dependent zinc importers are upregulated during severe zinc deficiency. 
Further, we demonstrated that transcription activation by AdcR occurs by direct 
binding to the promoter. However, the repression and activation by AdcR is 
mediated by its interactions with two distinct operator sequences. Finally, 
mutational analysis of the metal ligands of AdcR caused impaired DNA binding and 
attenuated virulence, indicating that zinc sensing by AdcR is critical for GAS 
pathogenesis. Together, we demonstrate that AdcR regulates GAS adaptive 
responses to zinc limitation and identify molecular components required for GAS 
survival during zinc deficiency.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gku1304
PMCID: PMC4288194
PMID: 25510500 [Indexed for MEDLINE]