1. Transl Psychiatry. 2014 Dec 16;4(12):e489. doi: 10.1038/tp.2014.132.

Identification of tetrahydrocarbazoles as novel multifactorial drug candidates 
for treatment of Alzheimer's disease.

Honarnejad K(1), Daschner A(2), Gehring AP(3), Szybinska A(4), Giese A(5), 
Kuznicki J(4), Bracher F(3), Herms J(6).

Author information:
(1)1] Department of Translational Brain Research, German Center for 
Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Munich, Germany [2] Center for Neuropathology 
and Prion Research, Ludwig Maximilian University, Munich, Germany [3] Graduate 
School of Systemic Neurosciences, Ludwig Maximilian University, Munich, Germany.
(2)1] Department of Translational Brain Research, German Center for 
Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Munich, Germany [2] Center for Neuropathology 
and Prion Research, Ludwig Maximilian University, Munich, Germany.
(3)Department of Pharmacy, Center for Drug Research, Ludwig Maximilian 
University, Munich, Germany.
(4)Laboratory of Neurodegeneration, International Institute of Molecular and 
Cell Biology, Warsaw, Poland.
(5)Center for Neuropathology and Prion Research, Ludwig Maximilian University, 
Munich, Germany.
(6)1] Department of Translational Brain Research, German Center for 
Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Munich, Germany [2] Center for Neuropathology 
and Prion Research, Ludwig Maximilian University, Munich, Germany [3] Munich 
Cluster for Systems Neurology (SyNergy), Munich, Germany.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a progressive neurodegenerative brain disorder and 
the most frequent cause of dementia. To date, there are only a few approved 
drugs for AD, which show little or no effect on disease progression. Impaired 
intracellular calcium homeostasis is believed to occur early in the cascade of 
events leading to AD. Here, we examined the possibility of normalizing the 
disrupted calcium homeostasis in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) store as an 
innovative approach for AD drug discovery. High-throughput screening of a 
small-molecule compound library led to the identification of 
tetrahydrocarbazoles, a novel multifactorial class of compounds that can 
normalize the impaired ER calcium homeostasis. We found that the 
tetrahydrocarbazole lead structure, first, dampens the enhanced calcium release 
from ER in HEK293 cells expressing familial Alzheimer's disease (FAD)-linked 
presenilin 1 mutations. Second, the lead structure also improves mitochondrial 
function, measured by increased mitochondrial membrane potential. Third, the 
same lead structure also attenuates the production of amyloid-beta (Aβ) peptides 
by decreasing the cleavage of amyloid precursor protein (APP) by β-secretase, 
without notably affecting α- and γ-secretase cleavage activities. Considering 
the beneficial effects of tetrahydrocarbazoles addressing three key pathological 
aspects of AD, these compounds hold promise for the development of potentially 
effective AD drug candidates.

DOI: 10.1038/tp.2014.132
PMCID: PMC4270312
PMID: 25514752 [Indexed for MEDLINE]