1. Mol Syst Biol. 2014 Nov 27;10(11):762. doi: 10.15252/msb.20145227.

Protein acetylation affects acetate metabolism, motility and acid stress 
response in Escherichia coli.

Castaño-Cerezo S(1), Bernal V(2), Post H(3), Fuhrer T(4), Cappadona S(5), 
Sánchez-Díaz NC(1), Sauer U(4), Heck AJ(3), Altelaar AF(3), Cánovas M(2).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular B e Inmunología, Facultad de 
Química, Universidad de Murcia Campus de Excelencia Mare Nostrum, Murcia, Spain.
(2)Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular B e Inmunología, Facultad de 
Química, Universidad de Murcia Campus de Excelencia Mare Nostrum, Murcia, Spain 
vicente.bernal@gmail.com mcanovas@um.es.
(3)Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Group, Bijvoet Center for 
Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht 
University, Utrecht, The Netherlands Netherlands Proteomics Center, Utrecht, The 
Netherlands.
(4)Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(5)Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Group, Bijvoet Center for 
Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht 
University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Although protein acetylation is widely observed, it has been associated with few 
specific regulatory functions making it poorly understood. To interrogate its 
functionality, we analyzed the acetylome in Escherichia coli knockout mutants of 
cobB, the only known sirtuin-like deacetylase, and patZ, the best-known protein 
acetyltransferase. For four growth conditions, more than 2,000 unique acetylated 
peptides, belonging to 809 proteins, were identified and differentially 
quantified. Nearly 65% of these proteins are related to metabolism. The global 
activity of CobB contributes to the deacetylation of a large number of 
substrates and has a major impact on physiology. Apart from the regulation of 
acetyl-CoA synthetase, we found that CobB-controlled acetylation of isocitrate 
lyase contributes to the fine-tuning of the glyoxylate shunt. Acetylation of the 
transcription factor RcsB prevents DNA binding, activating flagella biosynthesis 
and motility, and increases acid stress susceptibility. Surprisingly, deletion 
of patZ increased acetylation in acetate cultures, which suggests that it 
regulates the levels of acetylating agents. The results presented offer new 
insights into functional roles of protein acetylation in metabolic fitness and 
global cell regulation.

© 2014 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license.

DOI: 10.15252/msb.20145227
PMCID: PMC4299603
PMID: 25518064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]