1. Seizure. 2015 Jan;24:28-32. doi: 10.1016/j.seizure.2014.11.009. Epub 2014 Nov 
26.

Sporadic and familial glut1ds Italian patients: A wide clinical variability.

De Giorgis V(1), Teutonico F(2), Cereda C(3), Balottin U(4), Bianchi M(3), 
Giordano L(5), Olivotto S(1), Ragona F(6), Tagliabue A(7), Zorzi G(6), Nardocci 
N(6), Veggiotti P(8).

Author information:
(1)Brain and Behaviour Department, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
(2)Child and Adolescence Neuropsychiatry Unit, "G. Salvini" Hospital, Rho, 
Italy.
(3)"C. Mondino" National Neurological Institute, Pavia, Italy.
(4)Brain and Behaviour Department, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy; Department 
of Child Neurology and Psychiatry, "C. Mondino" National Neurological Institute, 
Pavia, Italy.
(5)Pediatric Neuropsychiatric Division, Spedali Civili, Brescia, Italy.
(6)Department of Child Neurology, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico "C. 
Besta", Milan, Italy.
(7)Human Nutrition and Eating Disorders Research Centre, University of Pavia, 
Pavia, Italy.
(8)Brain and Behaviour Department, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy; Department 
of Child Neurology and Psychiatry, "C. Mondino" National Neurological Institute, 
Pavia, Italy. Electronic address: pveggiot@unipv.it.

PURPOSE: GLUT1 deficiency syndrome is a treatable neurological disorder 
characterized by developmental delay, movement disorders and epilepsy. It is 
caused by mutations in the SLC2A1 gene inherited as an autosomal dominant trait 
with complete penetrance, even if most detected SCL2A1 mutations are de novo. 
Our aim is to present a wide series of Italian patients to highlight the 
differences among subjects with de novo mutations and those with familial 
transmission.
METHODS: We present clinical and genetic features in a series of 22 GLUT1DS 
Italian patients. Our patients were classified in two different groups: familial 
cases including GLUT1DS patients with genetically confirmed affected relatives 
and sporadic cases with detection of SLC2A1 de novo mutation.
RESULTS: We found remarkable differences in the severity of the clinical picture 
regarding the type of genetic inheritance (sporadic versus familial): sporadic 
patients were characterized by an earlier epilepsy-onset and higher degree of 
intellectual disability. No significant differences were found in terms of type 
of movement disorder, whilst Paroxysmal Exertion-induced Dyskinesia (PED) is 
confirmed to be the most characteristic movement disorder type in GLUT1DS. In 
familial cases the clinical manifestation of the disease was particularly 
variable and heterogeneous, also including asymptomatic patients or those with 
minimal-symptoms.
CONCLUSION: The finding of a "mild" phenotype in familial GLUT1DS gives rise to 
several questions: the real incidence of the disease, treatment option with 
ketogenic diet in adult patients and genetic counseling.

Copyright © 2014 British Epilepsy Association. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.seizure.2014.11.009
PMID: 25564316 [Indexed for MEDLINE]