1. Nat Prod Rep. 2015 Mar;32(3):478-503. doi: 10.1039/c4np00104d.

Biological targets and mechanisms of action of natural products from marine 
cyanobacteria.

Salvador-Reyes LA(1), Luesch H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, College of Pharmacy, University of 
Florida, Gainesville, Florida 32610, USA. luesch@cop.ufl.edu.

Marine cyanobacteria are an ancient group of organisms and prolific producers of 
bioactive secondary metabolites. These compounds are presumably optimized by 
evolution over billions of years to exert high affinity for their intended 
biological target in the ecologically relevant organism but likely also possess 
activity in different biological contexts such as human cells. Screening of 
marine cyanobacterial extracts for bioactive natural products has largely 
focused on cancer cell viability; however, diversification of the screening 
platform led to the characterization of many new bioactive compounds. Targets of 
compounds have oftentimes been elusive if the compounds were discovered through 
phenotypic assays. Over the past few years, technology has advanced to determine 
mechanism of action (MOA) and targets through reverse chemical genetic and 
proteomic approaches, which has been applied to certain cyanobacterial compounds 
and will be discussed in this review. Some cyanobacterial molecules are the 
most-potent-in-class inhibitors and therefore may become valuable tools for 
chemical biology to probe protein function but also be templates for novel 
drugs, assuming in vitro potency translates into cellular and in vivo activity. 
Our review will focus on compounds for which the direct targets have been 
deciphered or which were found to target a novel pathway, and link them to 
disease states where target modulation may be beneficial.

DOI: 10.1039/c4np00104d
PMCID: PMC4344435
PMID: 25571978 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest HL is a co-founder of 
Oceanyx Pharmaceuticals, Inc., which has been licensing various patents and 
patent applications related to cyanobacterial compounds discussed in this 
review.