1. Nat Biotechnol. 2015 Feb;33(2):204-9. doi: 10.1038/nbt.3124. Epub 2015 Jan 12.

Optogenetics enables functional analysis of human embryonic stem cell-derived 
grafts in a Parkinson's disease model.

Steinbeck JA(1), Choi SJ(2), Mrejeru A(2), Ganat Y(1), Deisseroth K(3), Sulzer 
D(4), Mosharov EV(2), Studer L(1).

Author information:
(1)1] Center for Stem Cell Biology, Sloan-Kettering Institute for Cancer 
Research, New York, New York, USA. [2] Developmental Biology Program, 
Sloan-Kettering Institute for Cancer Research, New York, New York, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New 
York, USA.
(3)1] Department of Bioengineering, Stanford University, Stanford, California, 
USA. [2] Department of Psychiatry, Stanford University, Stanford, California, 
USA. [3] Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford University, Stanford, 
California, USA.
(4)1] Department of Neurology, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New 
York, USA. [2] Department of Psychiatry, Columbia University Medical Center, New 
York, New York, USA. [3] Department of Pharmacology, Columbia University Medical 
Center, New York, New York, USA.

Recent studies have shown evidence of behavioral recovery after transplantation 
of human pluripotent stem cell (PSC)-derived neural cells in animal models of 
neurological disease. However, little is known about the mechanisms underlying 
graft function. Here we use optogenetics to modulate in real time 
electrophysiological and neurochemical properties of mesencephalic dopaminergic 
(mesDA) neurons derived from human embryonic stem cells (hESCs). In mice that 
had recovered from lesion-induced Parkinsonian motor deficits, light-induced 
selective silencing of graft activity rapidly and reversibly re-introduced the 
motor deficits. The re-introduction of motor deficits was prevented by the 
dopamine agonist apomorphine. These results suggest that functionality depends 
on graft neuronal activity and dopamine release. Combining optogenetics, slice 
electrophysiology and pharmacological approaches, we further show that 
mesDA-rich grafts modulate host glutamatergic synaptic transmission onto 
striatal medium spiny neurons in a manner reminiscent of endogenous mesDA 
neurons. Thus, application of optogenetics in cell therapy can link 
transplantation, animal behavior and postmortem analysis to enable the 
identification of mechanisms that drive recovery.

DOI: 10.1038/nbt.3124
PMCID: PMC5117952
PMID: 25580598 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare competing financial 
interests: details are available in the online version of the paper.