1. Folia Biol (Praha). 2014;60(6):268-74. doi: 10.14712/fb2014060060268.

Non-invasive screening of cytochrome c oxidase deficiency in children using a 
dipstick immunocapture assay.

Rodinová M(1), Trefilová E(1), Honzík T(1), Tesařová M(1), Zeman J(1), Hansíková 
H(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for the Study of Mitochondrial Disorders, Department of 
Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles 
University and General University Hospital in Prague, Czech Republic.

Cytochrome c oxidase (CIV) deficiency is among the most common childhood 
mitochondrial disorders. The diagnosis of this deficiency is complex, and muscle 
biopsy is used as the gold standard of diagnosis. Our aim was to minimize the 
patient burden and to test the use of a dipstick immunocapture assay (DIA) to 
determine the amount of CIV in non-invasively obtained buccal epithelial cells. 
Buccal smears were obtained from five children with Leigh syndrome including 
three children exhibiting a previously confirmed CIV deficiency in muscle and 
fibroblasts and two children who were clinical suspects for CIV deficiency; the 
smear samples were analysed using CI and CIV human protein quantity dipstick 
assay kits. Samples from five children of similar age and five adults were used 
as controls. Analysis of the controls demonstrated that only samples of buccal 
cells that were frozen for a maximum of 4 h after collection provide accurate 
results. All three patients with confirmed CIV deficiency due to mutations in 
the SURF1 gene exhibited significantly lower amounts of CIV than the similarly 
aged controls; significantly lower amounts were also observed in two new 
patients, for whom later molecular analysis also confirmed pathologic mutations 
in the SURF1 gene. We conclude that DIA is a simple, fast and sensitive method 
for the determination of CIV in buccal cells and is suitable for the screening 
of CIV deficiency in non-invasively obtained material from children who are 
suspected of having mitochondrial disease.

DOI: 10.14712/fb2014060060268
PMID: 25629267 [Indexed for MEDLINE]