1. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 Jan 22;16(2):2472-96. doi: 10.3390/ijms16022472.

Promoter hypermethylation of tumour suppressor genes as potential biomarkers in 
colorectal cancer.

Ng JM(1), Yu J(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Digestive Disease and Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, 
State Key Laboratory of Digestive Disease, Li Ka Shing Institute of Health 
Sciences, CUHK Shenzhen Research Institute, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 
Hong Kong, China.
(2)Institute of Digestive Disease and Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, 
State Key Laboratory of Digestive Disease, Li Ka Shing Institute of Health 
Sciences, CUHK Shenzhen Research Institute, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 
Hong Kong, China. junyu@cuhk.edu.hk.

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is a common malignancy and the fourth leading cause of 
cancer deaths worldwide. It results from the accumulation of multiple genetic 
and epigenetic changes leading to the transformation of colon epithelial cells 
into invasive adenocarcinomas. In CRC, epigenetic changes, in particular 
promoter CpG island methylation, occur more frequently than genetic mutations. 
Hypermethylation contributes to carcinogenesis by inducing transcriptional 
silencing or downregulation of tumour suppressor genes and currently, over 600 
candidate hypermethylated genes have been identified. Over the past decade, a 
deeper understanding of epigenetics coupled with technological advances have 
hinted at the potential of translating benchtop research into biomarkers for 
clinical use. DNA methylation represents one of the largest bodies of literature 
in epigenetics, and hence has the highest potential for minimally invasive 
biomarker development. Most progress has been made in the development of 
diagnostic markers and there are currently two, one stool-based and one 
blood-based, biomarkers that are commercially available for diagnostics. 
Prognostic and predictive methylation markers are still at their infantile 
stages.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms16022472
PMCID: PMC4346847
PMID: 25622259 [Indexed for MEDLINE]