1. Cardiovasc Res. 2015 Apr 1;105(4):397-408. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvv025. Epub 2015 
Jan 29.

Genetic advances in sarcomeric cardiomyopathies: state of the art.

Ho CY(1), Charron P(2), Richard P(3), Girolami F(4), Van Spaendonck-Zwarts 
KY(5), Pinto Y(6).

Author information:
(1)Cardiovascular Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA 
cho@partners.org.
(2)Centre de référence maladies cardiaques héréditaires, ICAN, Inserm UMR_1166, 
Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, AP-HP, Paris, France Université de Versailles-Saint 
Quentin, Hôpital Ambroise Paré, AP-HP, Boulogne-Billancourt, France.
(3)Centre de référence maladies cardiaques héréditaires, ICAN, Inserm UMR_1166, 
Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, AP-HP, Paris, France.
(4)Genetic Diagnostic Unit, Careggi University Hospital, Florence, Italy.
(5)Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Center Amsterdam, 
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Cardiology, Academic Medical Center Amsterdam, University of 
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Genetic studies in the 1980s and 1990s led to landmark discoveries that 
sarcomere mutations cause both hypertrophic and dilated cardiomyopathies. 
Sarcomere mutations also likely play a role in more complex phenotypes and 
overlap cardiomyopathies with features of hypertrophy, dilation, diastolic 
abnormalities, and non-compaction. Identification of the genetic cause of these 
important conditions provides unique opportunities to interrogate and 
characterize disease pathogenesis and pathophysiology, starting from the 
molecular level and expanding from there. With such insights, there is potential 
for clinical translation that may transform management of patients and families 
with inherited cardiomyopathies. If key pathways for disease development can be 
identified, they could potentially serve as targets for novel disease-modifying 
or disease-preventing therapies. By utilizing gene-based diagnostic testing, we 
can identify at-risk individuals prior to the onset of clinical disease, 
allowing for disease-modifying therapy to be initiated early in life, at a time 
that such treatment may be most successful. In this section, we review the 
current application of genetics in clinical management, focusing on hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy as a paradigm; discuss state-of-the-art genetic testing 
technology; review emerging knowledge of gene expression in sarcomeric 
cardiomyopathies; and discuss both the prospects, as well as the challenges, of 
bringing genetics to medicine.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
European Society of Cardiology.

DOI: 10.1093/cvr/cvv025
PMCID: PMC4349164
PMID: 25634555 [Indexed for MEDLINE]