1. Chem Cent J. 2015 Jan 21;9(1):1. doi: 10.1186/s13065-014-0076-x. eCollection 
2015.

Describing hydrogen-bonded structures; topology graphs, nodal symbols and 
connectivity tables, exemplified by five polymorphs of each of sulfathiazole and 
sulfapyridine.

Hursthouse MB(1), Hughes DS(2), Gelbrich T(3), Threlfall TL(2).

Author information:
(1)Chemistry, Faculty of Natural and Environmental Sciences, University of 
Southampton, Southampton, SO17 1BJ UK ; Department of Chemistry, Faculty of 
Science, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, 21588 Saudi Arabia.
(2)Chemistry, Faculty of Natural and Environmental Sciences, University of 
Southampton, Southampton, SO17 1BJ UK.
(3)Institute of Pharmacy, University of Innsbruck, Innrain 52, Innsbruck, 6020 
Austria.

BACKGROUND: Structural systematics is the comparison of sets of chemically 
related crystal structures with the aim to establish and describe relevant 
similarities and relationships. An important topic in this context is the 
comparison of hydrogen-bonded structures (HBSs) and their representation by 
suitable descriptors.
RESULTS: Three different description methods for HBSs are proposed, a graphical 
representation, a symbolic representation and connectivity tables. The most 
comprehensive description is provided by a modified graph of the underlying net 
topology of an HBS which contains information on the multiplicity of links, the 
directionality and chemical connectivity of hydrogen bonds and on symmetry 
relations. By contrast, the alternative symbolic representation is restricted to 
essential properties of an HBS, i.e. its dimensionality, topology type and 
selected connectivity characteristics of nodes. A comparison of their 
connectivity tables readily identifies differences and similarities between 
crystal structures with respect to the intermolecular interaction modes adopted 
by their functional groups. The application of these methods to the known 
polymorphs of sulfathiazole and sulfapyridine is demonstrated and it is shown 
that they enable the rationalisation of previously reported and intricate 
relationships.
CONCLUSIONS: The proposed methods facilitate the comprehensive description of 
the most important relevant aspects of an HBS, including its chemical 
connectivity, net topology and symmetry characteristics, and they represent a 
new way to recognise similarities and relationships in organic crystal 
structures. Graphical AbstractGraphical Representation of mixing of structures 
StzIV and StzV to give structure StzIII.

DOI: 10.1186/s13065-014-0076-x
PMCID: PMC4309923
PMID: 25649693