1. PLoS One. 2015 Feb 6;10(2):e0117188. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0117188. 
eCollection 2015.

Transcriptome analysis of scorpion species belonging to the Vaejovis genus.

Quintero-Hernández V(1), Ramírez-Carreto S(1), Romero-Gutiérrez MT(1), 
Valdez-Velázquez LL(2), Becerril B(1), Possani LD(1), Ortiz E(1).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Medicina Molecular y Bioprocesos, Instituto de Biotecnología, 
Universidad Nacional Autonóma de México, Cuernavaca, Morelos, México.
(2)Facultad de Ciencias Químicas and Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de 
Colima, Colima, México.

Scorpions belonging to the Buthidae family have traditionally drawn much of the 
biochemist's attention due to the strong toxicity of their venoms. Scorpions not 
toxic to mammals, however, also have complex venoms. They have been shown to be 
an important source of bioactive peptides, some of them identified as potential 
drug candidates for the treatment of several emerging diseases and conditions. 
It is therefore important to characterize the large diversity of components 
found in the non-Buthidae venoms. As a contribution to this goal, this 
manuscript reports the construction and characterization of cDNA libraries from 
four scorpion species belonging to the Vaejovis genus of the Vaejovidae family: 
Vaejovis mexicanus, V. intrepidus, V. subcristatus and V. punctatus. Some 
sequences coding for channel-acting toxins were found, as expected, but the main 
transcribed genes in the glands actively producing venom were those coding for 
non disulfide-bridged peptides. The ESTs coding for putative channel-acting 
toxins, corresponded to sodium channel β toxins, to members of the potassium 
channel-acting α or κ families, and to calcium channel-acting toxins of the 
calcin family. Transcripts for scorpine-like peptides of two different lengths 
were found, with some of the species coding for the two kinds. One sequence 
coding for La1-like peptides, of yet unknown function, was found for each 
species. Finally, the most abundant transcripts corresponded to peptides 
belonging to the long chain multifunctional NDBP-2 family and to the short 
antimicrobials of the NDBP-4 family. This apparent venom composition is in 
correspondence with the data obtained to date for other non-Buthidae species. 
Our study constitutes the first approach to the characterization of the venom 
gland transcriptome for scorpion species belonging to the Vaejovidae family.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0117188
PMCID: PMC4319844
PMID: 25659089 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.