1. Front Cell Neurosci. 2015 Jan 21;8:470. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2014.00470. 
eCollection 2014.

Molecular and evolutionary insights into the structural organization of cation 
chloride cotransporters.

Hartmann AM(1), Nothwang HG(2).

Author information:
(1)Systematics and Evolutionary Biology Group, Institute for Biology and 
Environmental Sciences, Carl von Ossietzky University Oldenburg Oldenburg, 
Germany.
(2)Neurogenetics Group, Center of Excellence Hearing4All, School of Medicine and 
Health Sciences, Carl von Ossietzky University Oldenburg Oldenburg, Germany ; 
Research Center for Neurosensory Sciences, Carl von Ossietzky University 
Oldenburg Oldenburg, Germany.

Cation chloride cotransporters (CCC) play an essential role for neuronal 
chloride homeostasis. K(+)-Cl(-) cotransporter (KCC2), is the principal 
Cl(-)-extruder, whereas Na(+)-K(+)-Cl(-) cotransporter (NKCC1), is the major 
Cl(-)-uptake mechanism in many neurons. As a consequence, the action of the 
inhibitory neurotransmitters gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and glycine strongly 
depend on the activity of these two transporters. Knowledge of the mechanisms 
involved in ion transport and regulation is thus of great importance to better 
understand normal and disturbed brain function. Although no overall 
3-dimensional crystal structures are yet available, recent molecular and 
phylogenetic studies and modeling have provided new and exciting insights into 
structure-function relationships of CCC. Here, we will summarize our current 
knowledge of the gross structural organization of the proteins, their functional 
domains, ion binding and translocation sites, and the established role of 
individual amino acids (aa). A major focus will be laid on the delineation of 
shared and distinct organizational principles between KCC2 and NKCC1. Exploiting 
the richness of recently generated genome data across the tree of life, we will 
also explore the molecular evolution of these features.

DOI: 10.3389/fncel.2014.00470
PMCID: PMC4301019
PMID: 25653592