1. PLoS One. 2015 Feb 6;10(2):e0116473. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0116473. 
eCollection 2015.

Identification of synaptosomal proteins binding to monomeric and oligomeric 
α-synuclein.

Betzer C(1), Movius AJ(2), Shi M(2), Gai WP(3), Zhang J(2), Jensen PH(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Aarhus, DANDRITE-Danish Research Institute of Translational 
Neuroscience & Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus, Denmark.
(2)Flinders University School of Medicine, Department of Human Physiology and 
Centre for Neuroscience, Bedford Park, SA, Australia.
(3)Washington School of Medicine, Department of Pathology, Seattle, United 
States of America.

Monomeric α-synuclein (αSN) species are abundant in nerve terminals where they 
are hypothesized to play a physiological role related to synaptic vesicle 
turn-over. In Parkinson's disease (PD) and dementia with Lewy body (DLB), αSN 
accumulates as aggregated soluble oligomers in terminals, axons and the 
somatodendritic compartment and insoluble filaments in Lewy inclusions and Lewy 
neurites. The autosomal dominant heritability associated to mutations in the αSN 
gene suggest a gain of function associated to aggregated αSN. We have conducted 
a proteomic screen to identify the αSN interactome in brain synaptosomes. 
Porcine brain synaptosomes were fractionated, solubilized in non-denaturing 
detergent and subjected to co-immunoprecipitation using purified recombinant 
human αSN monomers or oligomers as bait. The isolated αSN binding proteins were 
identified with LC-LTQ-orbitrap tandem mass spectrometry and quantified by peak 
area using Windows client application, Skyline Targeted Proteomic Environment. 
Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001462. To quantify 
the preferential binding an average fold increase was calculated by comparing 
binding to monomer and oligomer. We identified 10 proteins preferentially 
binding monomer, and 76 binding preferentially to oligomer and a group of 92 
proteins not displaying any preferred conformation of αSN. The proteomic data 
were validated by immunoprecipitation in both human and porcine brain extracts 
using antibodies against monomer αSN interactors: Abl interactor 1, and myelin 
proteolipid protein, and oligomer interactors: glutamate decarboxylase 2, 
synapsin 1, glial fibrillary acidic protein, and VAMP-2. We demonstrate the 
existence of αSN conformation selective ligands and present lists of proteins, 
whose identity and functions will be useful for modeling normal and pathological 
αSN dependent processes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0116473
PMCID: PMC4319895
PMID: 25659148 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.