1. Sci Rep. 2015 Feb 5;5:8250. doi: 10.1038/srep08250.

Associations of PI3KR1 and mTOR polymorphisms with esophageal squamous cell 
carcinoma risk and gene-environment interactions in Eastern Chinese populations.

Zhu J(1), Wang M(2), Zhu M(3), He J(4), Wang JC(5), Jin L(5), Wang XF(5), Xiang 
JQ(6), Wei Q(7).

Author information:
(1)1] Cancer Institute, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center, Shanghai, China 
[2] Department of Oncology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, 
Shanghai, China [3] Molecular Epidemiology Laboratory and Laboratory Medicine, 
Harbin Medical University Cancer Hospital, Harbin, Heilongjiang, China.
(2)1] Cancer Institute, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center, Shanghai, China 
[2] Department of Oncology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, 
Shanghai, China.
(3)Department of Oncology, Xinhua Hospital affiliated to Shanghai Jiaotong 
University, School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Department of Experimental 
Research, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, Sun Yat-Sen 
University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(5)1] Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Contemporary Anthropology, State 
Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, School of Life Sciences, Fudan 
University, Shanghai, China [2] Fudan-Taizhou Institute of Health Sciences, 
Taizhou, Jiangsu, China.
(6)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center, 
Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(7)1] Cancer Institute, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center, Shanghai, China 
[2] Duke Cancer Institute, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the PI3K/PTEN/AKT/mTOR signaling 
pathway may contribute to carcinogenesis. We genotyped five potentially 
functional PIK3R1 and mTOR SNPs in 1116 esophageal squamous cell cancer (ESCC) 
patients and 1117 cancer-free controls to assess their associations with ESCC 
risk. We observed no association with ESCC risk for any of the selected SNPs. 
However, the combined analysis of these SNPs revealed that subjects with 
one-to-three risk genotypes had an increased ESCC risk. Stratified analysis by 
body mass index (BMI) found that ESCC risk was significantly associated with 
each of three mTOR SNPs among subjects with BMI < 25.0. Specifically, we found 
that subjects carrying ≥ 1 risk genotypes had significantly increased ESCC risk, 
particularly for males, ever-smokers, ever-drinkers, and those with age > 60, or 
BMI < 25.0. Moreover, three mTOR haplotypes were associated with an increase in 
ESCC risk. Our meta-analysis of mTOR rs2295080 and cancer risk provided further 
evidence that mTOR SNPs might modulate cancer susceptibility. In this 
population, such risk effects might be modified by other risk factors, 
highlighting the importance of gene-environment interaction in esophageal 
carcinogenesis. Additional, larger studies are warranted to validate our 
findings.

DOI: 10.1038/srep08250
PMCID: PMC4318264
PMID: 25654238 [Indexed for MEDLINE]