1. Front Oncol. 2015 Jan 23;4:383. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2014.00383. eCollection
2014.

Evaluating biomarkers in melanoma.

Karagiannis P(1), Fittall M(2), Karagiannis SN(1).

Author information:
(1)St. John's Institute of Dermatology, Division of Genetics and Molecular 
Medicine, King's College London , London , UK ; NIHR Biomedical Research Centre, 
Guy's and St. Thomas' Hospital, King's College London, Guy's Hospital , London , 
UK.
(2)St. John's Institute of Dermatology, Division of Genetics and Molecular 
Medicine, King's College London , London , UK ; Clinical Oncology, Guy's and St. 
Thomas's NHS Foundation Trust , London , UK.

The incidence of cutaneous melanoma has more than doubled over the last decades 
making it one of the fastest rising cancers worldwide. Improved awareness and 
early detection of malignant moles now permit earlier diagnosis aiming to 
decrease the likelihood of recurrence. However, it is difficult to identify 
those patients initially diagnosed with localized melanoma who subsequently 
develop metastatic disease. For this group, prognosis remains poor and clinical 
outcomes are variable and challenging to predict. Considerable efforts have 
focused on the search for novel prognostic tools, with numerous markers 
evaluated in the circulation and in tumor lesions. The most reliable predictors 
of patient outcome are the clinical and histological features of the primary 
tumor such as Breslow thickness, ulceration status, and mitotic rate. Elevated 
serum levels of the enzyme lactate dehydrogenase, likely to indicate active 
metastatic disease, are also routinely used to monitor patients. The emergence 
of novel immune and checkpoint antibody treatments for melanoma and increasing 
appreciation of key roles of the immune system in promoting or halting cancer 
progression have focused attention to immunological biomarkers. Validation of 
the most promising of these may have clinical applications in assisting 
prognosis, assessing endpoints in therapy, and monitoring responses during 
treatment.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2014.00383
PMCID: PMC4304353
PMID: 25667918