1. PLoS One. 2015 Feb 10;10(2):e0117169. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0117169. 
eCollection 2015.

Clinical proteomics identifies urinary CD14 as a potential biomarker for 
diagnosis of stable coronary artery disease.

Lee MY(1), Huang CH(2), Kuo CJ(3), Lin CL(4), Lai WT(5), Chiou SH(6).

Author information:
(1)Graduate Institute of Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical 
University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan; Division of Cardiology, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Kaohsiung Municipal Ming-Sheng Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(2)Graduate Institute of Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical 
University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(3)Graduate Institute of Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical 
University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan; Quantitative Proteomics Center, Center for 
Research Resources and Development, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, 
Taiwan.
(4)Graduate Institute of Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical 
University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan; Department of Surgery, Kaohsiung Medical 
University Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(5)Division of Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical 
University Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(6)Graduate Institute of Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical 
University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan; Quantitative Proteomics Center, Center for 
Research Resources and Development, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, 
Taiwan; Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.

Inflammation plays a key role in coronary artery disease (CAD) and other 
manifestations of atherosclerosis. Recently, urinary proteins were found to be 
useful markers for reflecting inflammation status of different organs. To 
identify potential biomarker for diagnosis of CAD, we performed one-dimensional 
SDS-gel electrophoresis followed by liquid chromatography coupled with tandem 
mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Among the proteins differentially expressed in 
urine samples, monocyte antigen CD14 was found to be consistently expressed in 
higher amounts in the CAD patients as compared to normal controls. Using 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays to analyze the concentrations of CD14 in 
urine and serum, we confirmed that urinary CD14 levels were significantly higher 
in patients (n = 73) with multi-vessel and single vessel CAD than in normal 
control (n = 35) (P < 0.001). Logistic regression analysis further showed that 
urinary CD14 concentration level is associated with severity or number of 
diseased vessels and SYNTAX score after adjustment for potential confounders. 
Concomitantly, the proportion of CD14+ monocytes was significantly increased in 
CAD patients (59.7 ± 3.6%) as compared with healthy controls (14.9 ± 2.1%) (P < 
0.001), implicating that a high level of urinary CD14 may be potentially 
involved in mechanism(s) leading to CAD pathogenesis. By performing shotgun 
proteomics, we further revealed that CD14-associated inflammatory response 
networks may play an essential role in CAD. In conclusion, the current study has 
demonstrated that release of CD14 in urine coupled with more CD14+ monocytes in 
CAD patients is significantly correlated with severity of CAD, pointing to the 
potential application of urinary CD14 as a novel noninvasive biomarker for 
large-scale diagnostic screening of susceptible CAD patients.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0117169
PMCID: PMC4323104
PMID: 25668619 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.