1. Oncotarget. 2015 Feb 28;6(6):3479-92. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.2980.

PD-1 pathway inhibitors: the next generation of immunotherapy for advanced 
melanoma.

Luke JJ(1), Ott PA(2).

Author information:
(1)Section of Hematology/Oncology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(2)Melanoma Disease Center, Dana Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA.

Checkpoint inhibitors are revolutionizing treatment options and expectations for 
patients with melanoma. Ipilimumab, a monoclonal antibody against cytotoxic 
T-lymphocyte-associated antigen 4 (CTLA-4), was the first approved checkpoint 
inhibitor. Emerging long-term data indicate that approximately 20% of 
ipilimumab-treated patients achieve long-term survival. The first programmed 
death 1 (PD-1) inhibitor, pembrolizumab, was recently approved by the United 
States Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of melanoma; nivolumab was 
previously approved in Japan. PD-1 inhibitors are also poised to become standard 
of care treatment for other cancers, including non-small cell lung cancer, renal 
cell carcinoma and Hodgkin's lymphoma. Immunotherapy using checkpoint inhibition 
is a different treatment approach to chemotherapy and targeted agents: instead 
of directly acting on the tumor to induce tumor cell death, checkpoint 
inhibitors enhance or de novo stimulate antitumor immune responses to eliminate 
cancer cells. Initial data suggest that objective anti-tumor response rates may 
be higher with anti-PD-1 agents compared with ipilimumab and the safety profile 
may be more tolerable. This review explores the development and next steps for 
PD-1 pathway inhibitors, including discussion of their novel mechanism of action 
and clinical data to-date, with a focus on melanoma.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.2980
PMCID: PMC4414130
PMID: 25682878 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement Dr. Luke reports 
consultancy and travel from Amgen, Bayer, and Genentech, and clinical trial 
support to his institution from EMD Serono, GlaxoSmithKline, and Novartis. Dr. 
Ott reports consultancy from Bristol-Myers Squibb and clinical trial support to 
his institution from ARMO BioSciences, Bristol-Myers Squibb, MedImmune, and 
Merck.