1. Cell Death Dis. 2015 Feb 19;6(2):e1647. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2015.21.

Structural and biochemical changes underlying a keratoderma-like phenotype in 
mice lacking suprabasal AP1 transcription factor function.

Rorke EA(1), Adhikary G(2), Young CA(2), Rice RH(3), Elias PM(4), Crumrine D(4), 
Meyer J(4), Blumenberg M(5), Eckert RL(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Maryland School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(2)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Maryland School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(3)Department of Environmental Toxicology, University of California, Davis, CA, 
USA.
(4)Dermatology Service, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San Francisco and 
Department of Dermatology, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(5)The R.O. Perelman Department of Dermatology, Department of Biochemistry and 
Molecular Pharmacology, New York University Cancer Institute, New York City, NY, 
USA.
(6)1] Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Maryland School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA [2] Dermatology, University of Maryland School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA [3] Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of 
Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA [4] Greenebaum Cancer Center 
University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.

Epidermal keratinocyte differentiation on the body surface is a carefully 
choreographed process that leads to assembly of a barrier that is essential for 
life. Perturbation of keratinocyte differentiation leads to disease. Activator 
protein 1 (AP1) transcription factors are key controllers of this process. We 
have shown that inhibiting AP1 transcription factor activity in the suprabasal 
murine epidermis, by expression of dominant-negative c-jun (TAM67), produces a 
phenotype type that resembles human keratoderma. However, little is understood 
regarding the structural and molecular changes that drive this phenotype. In the 
present study we show that TAM67-positive epidermis displays altered cornified 
envelope, filaggrin-type keratohyalin granule, keratin filament, desmosome 
formation and lamellar body secretion leading to reduced barrier integrity. To 
understand the molecular changes underlying this process, we performed proteomic 
and RNA array analysis. Proteomic study of the corneocyte cross-linked proteome 
reveals a reduction in incorporation of cutaneous keratins, filaggrin, 
filaggrin2, late cornified envelope precursor proteins, hair keratins and hair 
keratin-associated proteins. This is coupled with increased incorporation of 
desmosome linker, small proline-rich, S100, transglutaminase and 
inflammation-associated proteins. Incorporation of most cutaneous keratins 
(Krt1, Krt5 and Krt10) is reduced, but incorporation of 
hyperproliferation-associated epidermal keratins (Krt6a, Krt6b and Krt16) is 
increased. RNA array analysis reveals reduced expression of mRNA encoding 
differentiation-associated cutaneous keratins, hair keratins and associated 
proteins, late cornified envelope precursors and filaggrin-related proteins; and 
increased expression of mRNA encoding small proline-rich proteins, protease 
inhibitors (serpins), S100 proteins, defensins and hyperproliferation-associated 
keratins. These findings suggest that AP1 factor inactivation in the suprabasal 
epidermal layers reduces expression of AP1 factor-responsive genes expressed in 
late differentiation and is associated with a compensatory increase in 
expression of early differentiation genes.

DOI: 10.1038/cddis.2015.21
PMCID: PMC4669787
PMID: 25695600 [Indexed for MEDLINE]