1. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2015 Mar;39(3):391-402. doi: 10.1111/acer.12643. Epub
2015  Feb 19.

The pharmacogenetics of alcohol use disorder.

Jones JD(1), Comer SD, Kranzler HR.

Author information:
(1)Division on Substance Abuse , New York State Psychiatric Institute & Columbia 
University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York.

BACKGROUND: Annually, the use and abuse of alcohol contributes to millions of 
deaths and billions of dollars in societal costs. To determine the impact of 
genetic variation on the susceptibility to the disorder and its response to 
treatment, studies have been conducted to assess the contribution of a variety 
of candidate genetic variants. These variants, which we review here, were chosen 
based upon their observed or hypothesized functional relevance to alcohol use 
disorder (AUD) risk or to the mechanism by which medications used to treat the 
disorder exert their effects.
METHODS: This qualitative review examines studies in which candidate 
polymorphisms were tested as moderator variables to identify pharmacogenetic 
effects on either the subjective response to alcohol or the outcomes of 
pharmacotherapy.
RESULTS: Although findings from these studies provide evidence of a number of 
clinically relevant pharmacogenetic effects, the literature is limited and there 
are conflicting findings that require resolution.
CONCLUSIONS: Pharmacogenetic studies of AUD treatment that use greater 
methodological rigor and better statistical controls, such as corrections for 
multiple testing, may help to resolve inconsistent findings. These procedures 
could also lead to the discovery of more robust and clinically meaningful 
moderator effects. As the field evolves through methodological standardization 
and the use of larger study samples, pharmacogenetic research has the potential 
to inform clinical care by enhancing therapeutic effects and personalizing 
treatments. These efforts may also provide insights into the mechanisms by which 
medications reduce heavy drinking or promote abstinence in patients with an AUD.

Copyright © 2015 by the Research Society on Alcoholism.

DOI: 10.1111/acer.12643
PMCID: PMC4348335
PMID: 25703505 [Indexed for MEDLINE]