1. Mol Cancer Ther. 2015 May;14(5):1247-58. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-14-0913. 
Epub 2015 Mar 11.

Enhancement of the proapoptotic properties of newcastle disease virus promotes 
tumor remission in syngeneic murine cancer models.

Cuadrado-Castano S(1), Ayllon J(2), Mansour M(3), de la Iglesia-Vicente J(3), 
Jordan S(4), Tripathi S(5), García-Sastre A(6), Villar E(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Salamanca, 
Salamanca, Spain. Department of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount 
Sinai, New York, New York.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, New York. Global Health and Emerging Pathogens Institute, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York.
(3)Department of Pathology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
New York.
(4)Department of Oncological Sciences, Immunology Institute and the Tisch Cancer 
Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, New York.
(6)Department of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, New York. Global Health and Emerging Pathogens Institute, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York. Division of Infectious Disease, 
Department of Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New 
York. Adolfo.Garcia-Sastre@mssm.edu.
(7)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Salamanca, 
Salamanca, Spain.

Newcastle disease virus (NDV) is considered a promising agent for cancer therapy 
due to its oncolytic properties. These include preferential replication in 
transformed cells, induction of innate and adaptive immune responses within 
tumors, and cytopathic effects in infected tumor cells due to the activation of 
apoptosis. To enhance the latter and thus possibly enhance the overall oncolytic 
activity of NDV, we generated a recombinant NDV encoding the human TNF receptor 
Fas (rNDV-B1/Fas). rNDV-B1/Fas replicates to similar titers as its wild-type 
(rNDV-B1) counterpart; however, overexpression of Fas in infected cells leads to 
higher levels of cytotoxicity correlated with faster and increased apoptosis 
responses, in which both the intrinsic and extrinsic pathways are activated 
earlier. Furthermore, in vivo studies in syngeneic murine melanoma models show 
an enhancement of the oncolytic properties of rNDV-B1/Fas, with major 
improvements in survival and tumor remission. Altogether, our data suggest that 
upregulation of the proapoptotic function of NDV is a viable approach to enhance 
its antitumor properties and adds to the currently known, rationally based 
strategies to design optimized therapeutic viral vectors for the treatment of 
cancer.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-14-0913
PMCID: PMC4425597
PMID: 25761895 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: Icahn School of Medicine 
at Mount Sinai owns patent positions for reverse genetics of Newcastle disease 
viruses.