1. Front Microbiol. 2015 Feb 26;6:137. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2015.00137. eCollection
 2015.

The broad-spectrum antibiotic, zeamine, kills the nematode worm Caenorhabditis 
elegans.

Hellberg JE(1), Matilla MA(2), Salmond GP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge Cambridge, UK.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge Cambridge, UK ; 
Department of Environmental Protection, Estación Experimental del Zaidín - 
Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas Granada, Spain.

Soil bacteria can be prolific producers of secondary metabolites and other 
biologically active compounds of economic and clinical importance. These natural 
products are often synthesized by large multi-enzyme complexes such as 
polyketide synthases (PKSs) or non-ribosomal peptide synthases (NRPSs). The 
plant-associated Gram-negative bacterium, Serratia plymuthica A153, produces 
several secondary metabolites and is capable of killing the nematode worm 
Caenorhabditis elegans; a commonly used model for the study of bacterial 
virulence. In this study, we show that disruption of the hybrid PKS/NRPS zeamine 
(zmn) gene cluster results in the attenuation of "fast-killing" of C. elegans, 
indicating that zeamine has nematicidal activity. C. elegans also exhibits 
age-dependent susceptibility to zeamine, with younger worms being most sensitive 
to the bioactive molecule. The zmn gene cluster is widely distributed within 
Serratia and phytopathogenic Dickeya species and investigation of strains 
harboring the zmn gene cluster showed that several of them are highly virulent 
in C. elegans. Zeamine was described previously as a phytotoxin and 
broad-spectrum antibacterial compound. In addition to its nematicidal 
properties, we show here that zeamine can also kill Saccharomyces cerevisiae and 
Schizosaccharomyces pombe. The expression of the zmn gene cluster and regulation 
of zeamine production were also investigated. Transcription of the cluster was 
growth phase-dependent, and was modulated by the post-transcriptional RNA 
chaperone, Hfq. The results of this study show that zeamine is a highly toxic 
molecule with little, or no, apparent host specificity in very diverse 
biological systems. In its current form, zeamine(s) may be useful as a lead 
compound suitable for chemical modification and structure-activity assays. 
However, because of widespread non-selective toxicity in multiple bioassays, 
unmodified zeamine(s) is unlikely to be suitable as a therapeutic antibiotic.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2015.00137
PMCID: PMC4341552
PMID: 25767467