1. Exp Mol Med. 2015 Mar 13;47(3):e151. doi: 10.1038/emm.2014.124.

Stem cell therapy for Alzheimer's disease and related disorders: current status 
and future perspectives.

Tong LM(1), Fong H(2), Huang Y(3).

Author information:
(1)1] Gladstone Institute of Neurological Disease, University of California, San 
Francisco, CA, USA [2] Biomedical Sciences Graduate Program, University of 
California, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(2)1] Gladstone Institute of Neurological Disease, University of California, San 
Francisco, CA, USA [2] Department of Neurology, University of California, San 
Francisco, CA, USA.
(3)1] Gladstone Institute of Neurological Disease, University of California, San 
Francisco, CA, USA [2] Biomedical Sciences Graduate Program, University of 
California, San Francisco, CA, USA [3] Department of Neurology, University of 
California, San Francisco, CA, USA [4] Department of Pathology, University of 
California, San Francisco, CA, USA.

Underlying cognitive declines in Alzheimer's disease (AD) are the result of 
neuron and neuronal process losses due to a wide range of factors. To date, all 
efforts to develop therapies that target specific AD-related pathways have 
failed in late-stage human trials. As a result, an emerging consensus in the 
field is that treatment of AD patients with currently available drug candidates 
might come too late, likely as a result of significant neuronal loss in the 
brain. In this regard, cell-replacement therapies, such as human embryonic stem 
cell- or induced pluripotent stem cell-derived neural cells, hold potential for 
treating AD patients. With the advent of stem cell technologies and the ability 
to transform these cells into different types of central nervous system neurons 
and glial cells, some success in stem cell therapy has been reported in animal 
models of AD. However, many more steps remain before stem cell therapies will be 
clinically feasible for AD and related disorders in humans. In this review, we 
will discuss current research advances in AD pathogenesis and stem cell 
technologies; additionally, the potential challenges and strategies for using 
cell-based therapies for AD and related disorders will be discussed.

DOI: 10.1038/emm.2014.124
PMCID: PMC4351411
PMID: 25766620 [Indexed for MEDLINE]