1. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 13;10(3):e0119717. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0119717. 
eCollection 2015.

Vitronectin expression in the airways of subjects with asthma and chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Salazar-Peláez LM(1), Abraham T(2), Herrera AM(1), Correa MA(3), Ortega JE(4), 
Paré PD(5), Seow CY(6).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, Universidad CES, Medellín, Colombia.
(2)Penn State Microscopy Imaging Core, Penn State Hershey College of Medicine, 
Hershey, Pennsylvania, United States of America.
(3)Instituto Nacional de Medicina Legal y Ciencias Forenses, Medellín, Colombia.
(4)Clínica Cardio VID, Medellín, Colombia.
(5)James Hogg Research Centre, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, 
Canada.
(6)School of Medicine, Universidad CES, Medellín, Colombia; James Hogg Research 
Centre, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

Vitronectin, a multifunctional glycoprotein, is involved in coagulation, 
inhibition of the formation of the membrane attack complex (MAC), cell adhesion 
and migration, wound healing, and tissue remodeling. The primary cellular source 
of vitronectin is hepatocytes; it is not known whether resident cells of airways 
produce vitronectin, even though the glycoprotein has been found in exhaled 
breath condensate and bronchoalveolar lavage from healthy subjects and patients 
with interstitial lung disease. It is also not known whether vitronectin 
expression is altered in subjects with asthma and COPD. In this study, bronchial 
tissue from 7 asthmatic, 10 COPD and 14 control subjects was obtained at autopsy 
and analyzed by immunohistochemistry to determine the percent area of submucosal 
glands occupied by vitronectin. In a separate set of experiments, quantitative 
colocalization analysis was performed on tracheobronchial tissue sections 
obtained from donor lungs (6 asthmatics, 4 COPD and 7 controls). Vitronectin RNA 
and protein expressions in bronchial surface epithelium were examined in 12 
subjects who undertook diagnostic bronchoscopy. Vitronectin was found in the 
tracheobronchial epithelium from asthmatic, COPD, and control subjects, although 
its expression was significantly lower in the asthmatic group. Colocalization 
analysis of 3D confocal images indicates that vitronectin is expressed in the 
glandular serous epithelial cells and in respiratory surface epithelial cells 
other than goblet cells. Expression of the 65-kDa vitronectin isoform was lower 
in bronchial surface epithelium from the diseased subjects. The cause for the 
decreased vitronectin expression in asthma is not clear, however, the reduced 
concentration of vitronectin in the epithelial/submucosal layer of airways may 
be linked to airway remodeling.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0119717
PMCID: PMC4358944
PMID: 25768308 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.