1. Arch Iran Med. 2015 Mar;18(3):179-84.

New evidence for the role of calpain 10 in autosomal recessive intellectual 
disability: identification of two novel nonsense variants by exome sequencing in 
Iranian families.

Oladnabi M(1), Musante L(2), Larti F(3), Hu H(2), Abedini SS(3), Wienker T(2), 
Ropers HH(2), Kahrizi K(3), Najmabadi H(3).

Author information:
(1)Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran. kahrizi@yahoo.com.
(2)Department of Human Molecular Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Molecular 
Genetics, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Knowledge of the genes responsible for intellectual disability, 
particularly autosomal recessive forms, is rapidly expanding. Increasing numbers 
of the gene show great heterogeneity and supports the hypothesis that human 
genome may contain over 2000 causative genes with a critical role in brain 
development.
METHODS: Since 2004, we have applied genome-wide SNP genotyping and 
next-generation sequencing in large consanguineous Iranian families with 
intellectual disability, to identify the genes harboring disease-causing 
mutations. The current study paved the way for identification of responsible 
genes in two unrelated Iranian families.
RESULTS: We found two novel nonsense mutations, p.C77* and p.Q115*, in the 
calpain catalytic domain of CAPN10, which is a cysteine protease known to be 
involved in pathogenesis of noninsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. Another 
different mutation in this gene (p.S138_R139ins5) has previously been reported 
in an Iranian family. All of these patients have common clinical features in 
spite of specific brain structural abnormalities on MRI.
CONCLUSIONS: Different mutations in CAPN10 have already been found in three 
independent Iranian families. These results have strongly supported the possible 
role of CAPN10 in human brain development. Altogether, we proposed CAPN10 as a 
promising candidate gene for intellectual disability, which should be considered 
in diagnostic gene panels.

PMID: 25773692 [Indexed for MEDLINE]