1. Front Oncol. 2015 Mar 3;5:52. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2015.00052. eCollection 2015.

A new mouse avatar model of non-small cell lung cancer.

Russo MV(1), Faversani A(2), Gatti S(3), Ricca D(2), Del Gobbo A(2), Ferrero 
S(4), Palleschi A(5), Vaira V(6), Bosari S(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pathology, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore 
Policlinico , Milan , Italy ; Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, 
Doctorate School in Molecular and Translational Medicine, University of Milan , 
Milan , Italy.
(2)Division of Pathology, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore 
Policlinico , Milan , Italy.
(3)Center for Preclinical Surgical Research, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda 
Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico , Milan , Italy ; Department of Medical 
Biotechnology and Translational Medicine, University of Milan , Milan , Italy.
(4)Division of Pathology, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore 
Policlinico , Milan , Italy ; Department of Biomedical, Surgical and Dental 
Sciences, University of Milan , Milan , Italy.
(5)Division of Thoracic Surgery and Lung Transplantation, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' 
Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico , Milan , Italy.
(6)Division of Pathology, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore 
Policlinico , Milan , Italy ; Istituto Nazionale Genetica Molecolare "Romeo ed 
Enrica Invernizzi" (INGM) , Milan , Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Lung cancer remains the leading cause of tumor-related deaths, 
despite advances in the understanding of the disease pathogenesis and in its 
clinical treatment. It is crucial to develop novel technologies to discover 
disease biomarkers and predict individual therapy response.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We established 48 patients-derived tumor xenografts 
(PDTXs) implanted in the subrenal capsule of immunodeficient mice using thin, 
precision-cut tumor tissue slices, derived from five patients affected by 
non-small cell lung cancer. Twenty-six tissue slices were immediately processed 
and implanted at sample recovery [patients-derived tumor xenografts derived from 
fresh tissue (dPDTX)], whereas the remaining sections were cultured on specific 
organotypic supports at 37°C and 5% CO2 for 24 h before grafting 
[patients-derived tumor xenografts derived from cultured tissue (cPDTX)]. At 
sacrifice, xenografts tissue morphology, proliferation (Ki67), and histotype 
markers were analyzed. Oncogenic miRNAs profiles were assessed in PDTXs, human 
tumors, and serum from one patient.
RESULTS: Xenografts retained the original cancer features and there were no 
differences between dPDTXs and cPDTXs. Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) xenografts 
showed a higher engraftment rate than adenocarcinoma (AC)-derived tumors. At 
basal time, Ki67 levels were higher in SCCs than in ACs, and the expression 
levels of genes associated to a stem cell-like phenotype were also more 
expressed in SCC samples. The analysis of oncogenic miRNAs showed that 
circulating miR-19b, -21, and -210 levels were correlated with higher Ki67 
expression in xenografts.
CONCLUSION: Our study implemented the PDTX model with thin, precision-cut tumor 
slices from small tumors, which could be useful for clinical applications and 
predictive purposes. The different engraftment success is likely determined by 
tumor histotype, high proliferation index, and the expression of genes essential 
for cancer stem cells maintenance. Our PDTXs model could be a valid tool to 
expand primary tumors for the discovery of new biomarkers and explore 
therapeutic options.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2015.00052
PMCID: PMC4347595
PMID: 25785245