1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2015 Apr;56(4):2553-67. doi: 10.1167/iovs.14-16298.

A High-Throughput Drug Screening Strategy for Detecting Rhodopsin P23H Mutant 
Rescue and Degradation.

Chen Y(1), Tang H(2), Seibel W(2), Papoian R(2), Li X(1), Lambert NA(3), 
Palczewski K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio, 
United States.
(2)Drug Discovery Center, College of Medicine, University of Cincinnati, 
Cincinnati, Ohio, United States.
(3)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Georgia Regents University, 
Augusta, Georgia, United States.

PURPOSE: Inherent instability of the P23H mutant opsin accounts for 
approximately 10% of autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa cases. Our purpose 
was to develop an overall set of reliable screening strategies to assess if 
either stabilization or enhanced degradation of mutant rhodopsin could rescue 
rod photoreceptors expressing this mutant protein. These strategies promise to 
reveal active compounds and clarify molecular mechanisms of biologically 
important processes, such as inhibition of target degradation or enhanced target 
folding.
METHODS: Cell-based bioluminescence reporter assays were developed and validated 
for high-throughput screening (HTS) of compounds that promote either 
stabilization or degradation of P23H mutant opsin. Such assays were further 
complemented by immunoblotting and image-based analyses.
RESULTS: Two stabilization assays of P23H mutant opsin were developed and 
validated, one based on β-galactosidase complementarity and a second assay 
involving bioluminescence resonance energy transfer (BRET) technology. Moreover, 
two additional assays evaluating mutant protein degradation also were employed, 
one based on the disappearance of luminescence and another employing the ALPHA 
immunoassay. Imaging of cells revealed the cellular localization of mutant 
rhodopsin, whereas immunoblots identified changes in the aggregation and 
glycosylation of P23H mutant opsin.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate that these initial HTS and following assays 
can identify active therapeutic compounds, even for difficult targets such as 
mutant rhodopsin. The assays are readily scalable and their function has been 
proven with model compounds. High-throughput screening, supported by automated 
imaging and classic immunoassays, can further characterize multiple steps and 
pathways in the biosynthesis and degradation of this essential visual system 
protein.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.14-16298
PMCID: PMC4554260
PMID: 25783607 [Indexed for MEDLINE]