1. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 24;10(3):e0121104. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0121104. 
eCollection 2015.

Lessons learned from whole exome sequencing in multiplex families affected by a 
complex genetic disorder, intracranial aneurysm.

Farlow JL(1), Lin H(1), Sauerbeck L(2), Lai D(1), Koller DL(1), Pugh E(3), 
Hetrick K(3), Ling H(3), Kleinloog R(4), van der Vlies P(5), Deelen P(6), Swertz 
MA(6), Verweij BH(4), Regli L(7), Rinkel GJ(4), Ruigrok YM(4), Doheny K(3), Liu 
Y(1), Broderick J(2), Foroud T(1); FIA Study Investigators.

Collaborators: Broderick J, Woo D, Kissela B, Kleindorfer D, Schneider A, 
Zuccarello M, Ringer A, Deka R, Foroud T, Brown RD Jr, Huston J 3rd, Mesissner 
I, Wiebers D, Qureshi AI, Rasmussen PA, Connolly E Jr, Sacco RL, Malkaff M, 
Payner TD, Ferguson GG, Aldrich E, Rouleau G, Anderson CS, Mee EW, Hankey GJ, 
Knuckey N, Reilly PL, Laidlaw JD, D'Urso P, Rosenfeld JV, Morgan MK, Dorsch N, 
Besser M, Batjer H, Richard MT, Kassam A, Steinberg GK, Johnston S, Ko NU, 
Giannotta SL, Kassell NF, Worrall BB, Lui KC, Dumont A, Tirschell DL, Kaufmann 
AM, Fisher WS 3rd, Abdel Aziz KM, Day AL, Du R, Ogilvy C, Lewis SB, Murphy KP, 
Radvany M, Gandhi D, Lisabeth L, Pandey A, Morgenstern L, Derdeyn C, Langefeld 
C, Bailey-Wilson J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana, United States of America.
(2)Department of Neurology and Rehabilitation Medicine, University of Cincinnati 
School of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio, United States of America.
(3)Center for Inherited Disease Research, Johns Hopkins University; Baltimore, 
Maryland, United States of America.
(4)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Brain Center Rudolf Magnus, 
University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(5)Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, University of 
Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(6)Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, University of 
Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands; Genomics Coordination Center, University 
Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(7)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Brain Center Rudolf Magnus, 
University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands; Department of 
Neurosurgery, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

Genetic risk factors for intracranial aneurysm (IA) are not yet fully 
understood. Genomewide association studies have been successful at identifying 
common variants; however, the role of rare variation in IA susceptibility has 
not been fully explored. In this study, we report the use of whole exome 
sequencing (WES) in seven densely-affected families (45 individuals) recruited 
as part of the Familial Intracranial Aneurysm study. WES variants were 
prioritized by functional prediction, frequency, predicted pathogenicity, and 
segregation within families. Using these criteria, 68 variants in 68 genes were 
prioritized across the seven families. Of the genes that were expressed in IA 
tissue, one gene (TMEM132B) was differentially expressed in aneurysmal samples 
(n=44) as compared to control samples (n=16) (false discovery rate adjusted 
p-value=0.023). We demonstrate that sequencing of densely affected families 
permits exploration of the role of rare variants in a relatively common disease 
such as IA, although there are important study design considerations for 
applying sequencing to complex disorders. In this study, we explore methods of 
WES variant prioritization, including the incorporation of unaffected 
individuals, multipoint linkage analysis, biological pathway information, and 
transcriptome profiling. Further studies are needed to validate and characterize 
the set of variants and genes identified in this study.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0121104
PMCID: PMC4372548
PMID: 25803036 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.