1. Front Cell Neurosci. 2015 Mar 10;6:174. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2015.00071. 
eCollection 2015.

Dysfunctional HCN ion channels in neurological diseases.

DiFrancesco JC(1), DiFrancesco D(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurophysiology, Foundation Neurological Institute C. Besta 
Milano, Italy ; Department of Neurology, San Gerardo Hospital and Laboratory of 
Neurobiology, Milan Center for Neuroscience, University of Milano-Bicocca Monza, 
Italy.
(2)The PaceLab, Department of Biosciences, University of Milano Milano, Italy.

Hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucleotide-gated (HCN) channels are expressed 
as four different isoforms (HCN1-4) in the heart and in the central and 
peripheral nervous systems. HCN channels are activated by membrane 
hyperpolarization at voltages close to resting membrane potentials and carry the 
hyperpolarization-activated current, dubbed If (funny current) in heart and Ih 
in neurons. HCN channels contribute in several ways to neuronal activity and are 
responsible for many important cellular functions, including cellular 
excitability, generation, and modulation of rhythmic activity, dendritic 
integration, transmission of synaptic potentials, and plasticity phenomena. 
Because of their role, defective HCN channels are natural candidates in the 
search for potential causes of neurological disorders in humans. Several data, 
including growing evidence that some forms of epilepsy are associated with HCN 
mutations, support the notion of an involvement of dysfunctional HCN channels in 
different experimental models of the disease. Additionally, some anti-epileptic 
drugs are known to modify the activity of the Ih current. HCN channels are 
widely expressed in the peripheral nervous system and recent evidence has 
highlighted the importance of the HCN2 isoform in the transmission of pain. HCN 
channels are also present in the midbrain system, where they finely regulate the 
activity of dopaminergic neurons, and a potential role of these channels in the 
pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease has recently emerged. The function of HCN 
channels is regulated by specific accessory proteins, which control the correct 
expression and modulation of the neuronal Ih current. Alteration of these 
proteins can severely interfere with the physiological channel function, 
potentially predisposing to pathological conditions. In this review we address 
the present knowledge of the association between HCN dysfunctions and 
neurological diseases, including clinical, genetic, and physiopathological 
aspects.

DOI: 10.3389/fncel.2015.00071
PMCID: PMC4354400
PMID: 25805968