1. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 27;10(3):e0122377. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0122377. 
eCollection 2015.

Intrapericardial administration of mesenchymal stem cells in a large animal 
model: a bio-distribution analysis.

Blázquez R(1), Sánchez-Margallo FM(1), Crisóstomo V(2), Báez C(2), Maestre J(2), 
García-Lindo M(3), Usón A(1), Álvarez V(1), Casado JG(1).

Author information:
(1)Stem Cell Therapy Unit, Minimally Invasive Surgery Centre, Caceres, Spain.
(2)Endoluminal Therapy and Diagnosis, Minimally Invasive Surgery Centre, 
Caceres, Spain.
(3)Anaesthetics Unit, Minimally Invasive Surgery Centre, Caceres, Spain.

The appropriate administration route for cardiovascular cell therapy is 
essential to ensure the viability, proliferative potential, homing capacity and 
implantation of transferred cells. At the present, the intrapericardial 
administration of pharmacological agents is considered an efficient method for 
the treatment of cardiovascular diseases. However, only a few reports have 
addressed the question whether the intrapericardial delivery of Mesenchymal Stem 
Cells (MSCs) could be an optimal administration route. This work firstly aimed 
to analyze the pericardial fluid as a cell-delivery vehicle. Moreover, the in 
vivo biodistribution pattern of intrapericardially administered MSCs was 
evaluated in a clinically relevant large animal model. Our in vitro results 
firstly showed that, MSCs viability, proliferative behavior and phenotypic 
profile were unaffected by exposure to pericardial fluid. Secondly, in vivo cell 
tracking by magnetic resonance imaging, histological examination and 
Y-chromosome amplification clearly demonstrated the presence of MSCs in 
pericardium, ventricles (left and right) and atrium (left and right) when MSCs 
were administered into the pericardial space. In conclusion, here we demonstrate 
that pericardial fluid is a suitable vehicle for MSCs and intrapericardial route 
provides an optimal retention and implantation of MSCs.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0122377
PMCID: PMC4376786
PMID: 25816232 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.