1. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 30;10(3):e0122705. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0122705. 
eCollection 2015.

Multidimensional clinical phenotyping of an adult cystic fibrosis patient 
population.

Conrad DJ(1), Bailey BA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep 
Medicine, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, California, United 
States of America.
(2)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, San Diego State University, San 
Diego, California, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Cystic Fibrosis (CF) is a multi-systemic disease resulting from 
mutations in the Cystic Fibrosis Transmembrane Regulator (CFTR) gene and has 
major manifestations in the sino-pulmonary, and gastro-intestinal tracts. 
Clinical phenotypes were generated using 26 common clinical variables to 
generate classes that overlapped quantiles of lung function and were based on 
multiple aspects of CF systemic disease.
METHODS: The variables included age, gender, CFTR mutations, FEV1% predicted, 
FVC% predicted, height, weight, Brasfield chest xray score, pancreatic 
sufficiency status and clinical microbiology results. Complete datasets were 
compiled on 211 subjects. Phenotypes were identified using a proximity matrix 
generated by the unsupervised Random Forests algorithm and subsequent clustering 
by the Partitioning around Medoids (PAM) algorithm. The final phenotypic classes 
were then characterized and compared to a similar dataset obtained three years 
earlier.
FINDINGS: Clinical phenotypes were identified using a clustering strategy that 
generated four and five phenotypes. Each strategy identified 1) a low lung 
health scores phenotype, 2) a younger, well-nourished, male-dominated class, 3) 
various high lung health score phenotypes that varied in terms of age, gender 
and nutritional status. This multidimensional clinical phenotyping strategy 
identified classes with expected microbiology results and low risk clinical 
phenotypes with pancreatic sufficiency.
INTERPRETATION: This study demonstrated regional adult CF clinical phenotypes 
using non-parametric, continuous, ordinal and categorical data with a minimal 
amount of subjective data to identify clinically relevant phenotypes. These 
studies identified the relative stability of the phenotypes, demonstrated 
specific phenotypes consistent with published findings and identified others 
needing further study.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0122705
PMCID: PMC4378917
PMID: 25822311 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.