1. Laryngoscope. 2015 Oct;125(10):2398-404. doi: 10.1002/lary.25255. Epub 2015
Mar  30.

Sonographic evidence of abnormal tracheal cartilage ring structure in cystic 
fibrosis.

Diwakar A(1), Adam RJ(1)(2), Michalski AS(1), Tamegnon MM(3), Fischer AJ(4), 
Launspach JL(1), Horan RA(1), Kao SC(5), Chaloner K(3), Meyerholz DK(6), Stoltz 
DA(1)(7)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Iowa Roy J. and Lucille A. 
Carver College of Medicine, Iowa City, Iowa.
(2)Department of Biomedical Engineering, College of Engineering, University of 
Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, College of Public Health, University of Iowa, 
Iowa City, Iowa, U.S.A.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, University of Iowa Roy J. and Lucille A. Carver 
College of Medicine, Iowa City, Iowa.
(5)Department of Radiology, University of Iowa Roy J. and Lucille A. Carver 
College of Medicine, Iowa City, Iowa.
(6)Department of Pathology, University of Iowa Roy J. and Lucille A. Carver 
College of Medicine, Iowa City, Iowa.
(7)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, University of Iowa Roy J. 
and Lucille A. Carver College of Medicine, Iowa City, Iowa.

OBJECTIVES/HYPOTHESIS: Tracheal cartilage ring structural abnormalities have 
been reported in cystic fibrosis (CF) mice and pigs. Whether similar findings 
are present in humans with CF is unknown. We hypothesized that tracheal 
cartilage ring shape and size would be different in people with CF.
STUDY DESIGN: Tracheal cartilage ring size and shape were measured in adults 
with (n = 21) and without CF (n = 18).
METHODS: Ultrasonography was used in human subjects to noninvasively assess 
tracheal cartilage ring structure in both the sagittal and the transverse 
planes. Tracheal cartilage ring thickness was also determined from histological 
sections obtained from newborn non-CF and CF pigs. These values were compared 
with human data.
RESULTS: Human CF tracheas had a greater width and were less circular in shape 
compared to non-CF subjects. CF tracheal cartilage rings had a greater midline 
cross-sectional area and were thicker compared to non-CF rings. Maximal tracheal 
cartilage ring thickness was also greater in both newborn CF pigs and human 
adults with CF, compared to non-CF controls.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrate that structural differences exist in 
tracheal cartilage rings in adults with CF. Comparison with newborn CF pig data 
suggests that some of these changes may be congenital in nature.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: 3b

© 2015 The American Laryngological, Rhinological and Otological Society, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/lary.25255
PMCID: PMC4578972
PMID: 25827636 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Potential Conflict of Interests: The authors 
have no potential conflicts to disclose with regards to the content of this 
manuscript.