1. Otol Neurotol. 2015 Jul;36(6):1096-102. doi: 10.1097/MAO.0000000000000747.

Targeted Exome Sequencing of Deafness Genes After Failure of Auditory 
Phenotype-Driven Candidate Gene Screening.

Kim BJ(1), Kim AR, Park G, Park WY, Chang SO, Oh SH, Choi BY.

Author information:
(1)*Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Seoul National 
University Hospital, Seoul; †Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck 
Surgery, Dankook University Hospital, Cheonan; ‡Department of Biomedical 
Sciences, College of Medicine, Seoul National University, Seoul; §Department of 
Molecular and Cellular Biology, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, 
Suwon; ∥Samsung Genome Institute, Samsung Medical Center, Seoul; and ¶Department 
of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Seoul National University Bundang 
Hospital, Seongnam, Korea.

OBJECTIVE: To demonstrate the efficacy and advantages of targeted exome 
sequencing (TES) of known deafness genes in cases with failed or misleading 
auditory phenotype-driven candidate gene screening.
STUDY DESIGN: Prospective cohort survey.
SETTING: Otolaryngology department of a tertiary referral hospital.
PATIENTS: Six hearing-impaired probands with seemingly non-syndromic features 
from six deaf families were enrolled in this study after failure of genetic 
diagnosis using auditory phenotype-driven candidate gene screening.
INTERVENTION: TES of known deafness genes was performed in the six probands, and 
a final causative variant was pursued using subsequent filtering steps.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE: Potential causative variants determined using TES were 
confirmed by previously introduced filtering steps.
RESULTS: We detected causative variants in three (50%) of six families, and 
these variants were in the COCH, PAX3, and GJB2 genes. Additionally, we also 
recapitulated the recent finding from other report arguing for the 
non-pathogenic potential of MYO1A variant.
CONCLUSIONS: TES of a deafness panel provides a comprehensive genetic screening 
tool that can be implemented without being misled by the audiogram configuration 
information and can complement incomplete clinical physical examinations. In 
addition, the secondary incidental finding obtained by TES contributes useful 
information regarding the deafness field.

DOI: 10.1097/MAO.0000000000000747
PMID: 25830873 [Indexed for MEDLINE]