1. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 1;10(4):e0121099. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0121099. 
eCollection 2015.

Screening of the Pan-African natural product library identifies ixoratannin A-2 
and boldine as novel HIV-1 inhibitors.

Tietjen I(1), Ntie-Kang F(2), Mwimanzi P(3), Onguéné PA(4), Scull MA(5), Idowu 
TO(6), Ogundaini AO(6), Meva'a LM(4), Abegaz BM(7), Rice CM(5), Andrae-Marobela 
K(8), Brockman MA(9), Brumme ZL(10), Fedida D(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Pharmacology, and Therapeutics, University of 
British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada; Faculty of Health Sciences, Simon 
Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Chemical and Bioactivity Information Centre, Faculty 
of Science, University of Buea, Buea, Cameroon.
(3)Faculty of Health Sciences, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada.
(4)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, University of Douala, Douala, 
Cameroon.
(5)Laboratory of Virology and Infectious Disease, The Rockefeller University, 
New York, NY, United States of America.
(6)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, Obafemi Awolowo 
University, Ile-Ife, Nigeria.
(7)African Academy of Sciences, Nairobi, Kenya.
(8)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Botswana, Gaborone, 
Botswana.
(9)Faculty of Health Sciences, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada; 
Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Simon 
Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada; British Columbia Centre for Excellence 
in HIV/AIDS, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(10)Faculty of Health Sciences, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada; 
British Columbia Centre for Excellence in HIV/AIDS, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(11)Department of Anesthesiology, Pharmacology, and Therapeutics, University of 
British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

The continued burden of HIV in resource-limited regions such as parts of 
sub-Saharan Africa, combined with adverse effects and potential risks of 
resistance to existing antiretroviral therapies, emphasize the need to identify 
new HIV inhibitors. Here we performed a virtual screen of molecules from the 
pan-African Natural Product Library, the largest collection of medicinal 
plant-derived pure compounds on the African continent. We identified eight 
molecules with structural similarity to reported interactors of Vpu, an HIV-1 
accessory protein with reported ion channel activity. Using in vitro HIV-1 
replication assays with a CD4+ T cell line and peripheral blood mononuclear 
cells, we confirmed antiviral activity and minimal cytotoxicity for two 
compounds, ixoratannin A-2 and boldine. Notably, ixoratannin A-2 retained 
inhibitory activity against recombinant HIV-1 strains encoding patient-derived 
mutations that confer resistance to protease, non-nucleoside reverse 
transcriptase, or integrase inhibitors. Moreover, ixoratannin A-2 was less 
effective at inhibiting replication of HIV-1 lacking Vpu, supporting this 
protein as a possible direct or indirect target. In contrast, boldine was less 
effective against a protease inhibitor-resistant HIV-1 strain. Both ixoratannin 
A-2 and boldine also inhibited in vitro replication of hepatitis C virus (HCV). 
However, BIT-225, a previously-reported Vpu inhibitor, demonstrated antiviral 
activity but also cytotoxicity in HIV-1 and HCV replication assays. Our work 
identifies pure compounds derived from African plants with potential novel 
activities against viruses that disproportionately afflict resource-limited 
regions of the world.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0121099
PMCID: PMC4382154
PMID: 25830320 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.