1. J Bacteriol. 2015 Jun 15;197(12):2012-9. doi: 10.1128/JB.02590-14. Epub 2015
Apr  6.

Biosynthesis of the Common Polysaccharide Antigen of Pseudomonas aeruginosa 
PAO1: Characterization and Role of 
GDP-D-Rhamnose:GlcNAc/GalNAc-Diphosphate-Lipid α1,3-D-Rhamnosyltransferase WbpZ.

Wang S(1), Hao Y(2), Lam JS(2), Vlahakis JZ(3), Szarek WA(3), Vinnikova A(4), 
Veselovsky VV(5), Brockhausen I(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Department of Biomedical and Molecular Sciences, 
Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Guelph, Guelph, 
Ontario, Canada.
(3)Department of Chemistry, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Department of Medicine, Department of Biomedical and Molecular Sciences, 
Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada N. D. Zelinsky Institute of 
Organic Chemistry, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia.
(5)N. D. Zelinsky Institute of Organic Chemistry, Russian Academy of Sciences, 
Moscow, Russia.
(6)Department of Medicine, Department of Biomedical and Molecular Sciences, 
Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada brockhau@queensu.ca.

The opportunistic pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa produces two major cell 
surface lipopolysaccharides, characterized by distinct O antigens, called common 
polysaccharide antigen (CPA) and O-specific antigen (OSA). CPA contains a 
polymer of D-rhamnose (D-Rha) in α1-2 and α1-3 linkages. Three putative 
glycosyltransferase genes, wbpX, wbpY, and wbpZ, are part of the CPA 
biosynthesis cluster. To characterize the enzymatic function of the wbpZ gene 
product, we chemically synthesized the donor substrate GDP-D-Rha and 
enzymatically synthesized GDP-D-[(3)H]Rha. Using nuclear magnetic resonance 
(NMR) spectroscopy, we showed that WbpZ transferred one D-Rha residue from 
GDP-D-Rha in α1-3 linkage to both GlcNAc- and GalNAc-diphosphate-lipid acceptor 
substrates. WbpZ is also capable of transferring D-mannose (D-Man) to these 
acceptors. Therefore, WbpZ has a relaxed specificity with respect to both 
acceptor and donor substrates. The diphosphate group of the acceptor, however, 
is required for activity. WbpZ does not require divalent metal ion for activity 
and exhibits an unusually high pH optimum of 9. WbpZ from PAO1 is therefore a 
GDP-D-Rha:GlcNAc/GalNAc-diphosphate-lipid α1,3-D-rhamnosyltransferase that has 
significant activity of GDP-D-Man:GlcNAc/GalNAc-diphosphate-lipid 
α1,3-D-mannosyltransferase. We used site-directed mutagenesis to replace the Asp 
residues of the two DXD motifs with Ala. Neither of the mutant constructs of 
wbpZ (D172A or D254A) could be used to rescue CPA biosynthesis in the ΔwbpZ 
knockout mutant in a complementation assay. This suggested that D172 and D254 
are essential for WbpZ function. This work is the first detailed 
characterization study of a D-Rha-transferase and a critical step in the 
development of CPA synthesis inhibitors.
IMPORTANCE: This is the first characterization of a D-rhamnosyltransferase and 
shows that it is essential in Pseudomonas aeruginosa for the synthesis of the 
common polysaccharide antigen.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.02590-14
PMCID: PMC4438205
PMID: 25845842 [Indexed for MEDLINE]