1. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 6;10(4):e0121815. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0121815. 
eCollection 2015.

Flexible lab-tailored cut-offs for suitability of formalin-fixed tumor samples 
for diagnostic mutational analyses.

Mariani S(1), Di Bello C(2), Bonello L(3), Tondat F(3), Pacchioni D(2), Molinaro 
L(2), Barreca A(1), Macrì L(2), Chiusa L(2), di Celle PF(2), Cassoni P(1), 
Sapino A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Sciences; University of Torino, Torino, Italy.
(2)Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Città della Salute e della Scienza; 
Presidio Ospedaliero Molinette of Torino, Torino, Italy.
(3)Department of Molecular Biotechnology and Health Sciences, University of 
Torino, Torino, Italy.

The selection of proper tissues from formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded tumors 
before diagnostic molecular testing is responsibility of the pathologist and 
represents a crucial step to produce reliable test results. The international 
guidelines suggest two cut-offs, one for the percentage and one for the number 
of tumor cells, in order to enrich the tumor content before DNA extraction. The 
aim of the present work was two-fold: to evaluate to what extent a low 
percentage or absolute number of tumor cells can be qualified for somatic 
mutation testing; and to determine how assay sensitivities can guide 
pathologists towards a better definition of morphology-based adequacy cut-offs. 
We tested 1797 tumor specimens from melanomas, colorectal and lung 
adenocarcinomas. Respectively, their BRAF, K-RAS and EGFR genes were analyzed at 
specific exons by mutation-enriched PCR, pyrosequencing, direct sequencing and 
real-time PCR methods. We demonstrate that poorly cellular specimens do not 
modify the frequency distribution of either mutated or wild-type DNA samples nor 
that of specific mutations. This observation suggests that currently recommended 
cut-offs for adequacy of specimens to be processed for molecular assays seem to 
be too much stringent in a laboratory context that performs highly sensitive 
routine analytical methods. In conclusion, new cut-offs are needed based on test 
sensitivities and documented tumor heterogeneity.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0121815
PMCID: PMC4386759
PMID: 25844806 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.