1. J Med Life. 2015 Apr-Jun;8(2):171-5.

Pharmacogenetics aspects of oral anticoagulants therapy.

Militaru FC(1), Vesa SC(1), Pop TR(2), Buzoianu AD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology and Clinical Pharmacology, "Iuliu 
Haţieganu" University of Medicine and Pharmacy Cluj-Napoca.
(2)5th Department of Surgery, Municipal Hospital of Cluj-Napoca, "Iuliu 
Haţieganu" University of Medicine and Pharmacy Cluj-Napoca.

RATIONALE: Vitamin K antagonists (VKA), such as warfarin and acenocoumarol, are 
widely used for the prevention and treatment of thromboembolic diseases and they 
are some of the most commonly prescribed types of medications. They are 
characterized by narrow therapeutic indices and inter-individual or 
intra-individual variability in response to the treatment.
OBJECTIVE: to establish the influence of several genetic factors on VKA efficacy 
and adverse reactions.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The metabolism of VKA differs depending on their chemical 
structure: indandiones derivatives (fluindione) or coumarin derivatives 
(acenocoumarol, phenprocoumon or warfarin). They are mostly metabolized in 
hepatocytes via a monooxygenase, cytochrome P450 2C9 (CYP2C9), resulting in 
inactive products. The gene encoding CYP2C9 is polymorphic, its genetic variants 
being associated with differences in the enzymatic activity of CYP2C9. The most 
important in terms of their frequency in the general population are CYP2C9*2 and 
CYP2C9*3. Both alleles are associated with a marked decrease in CYP2C9 enzyme 
activity. VK epoxide reductase (VKOR) is an enzyme with an important role in VK 
metabolism. Various polymorphisms in the VKORC1 gene have been described. 
VKORC1*2 haplotype seems to be the most important in relation to the variability 
in response to VKA.
DISCUSSIONS: Various studies have shown a relationship between the genotype and 
the mean warfarin maintenance dosing: in patients carrying 2C9*1/*2 alleles, the 
dose is reduced by 18-40% in patients carrying 2C9*2/*2 alleles, by 21-49% in 
patients carrying 2C9*1/*3 alleles. The A allele of the c.-1639G>A polymorphism 
in the VKORC1 gene is associated with the need for a lower dose of acenocoumarol 
in patients on anticoagulant therapy.
ABBREVIATIONS: SNP = Single Nucleotide Polymorphism, VKA = vitamin K 
antagonists, C1 - VKORC1 = vitamin K epoxide reductase complex subunit, INR = 
International Normalized Ratio.

PMCID: PMC4392103
PMID: 25866574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]