1. J Vis Exp. 2015 Mar 1;(97):52319. doi: 10.3791/52319.

Adapting human videofluoroscopic swallow study methods to detect and 
characterize dysphagia in murine disease models.

Lever TE(1), Braun SM(2), Brooks RT(2), Harris RA(2), Littrell LL(2), Neff 
RM(3), Hinkel CJ(3), Allen MJ(4), Ulsas MA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, University of Missouri; 
levert@health.missouri.edu.
(2)Department of Communication Science and Disorders, University of Missouri.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of Missouri.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, University of Missouri.

This study adapted human videofluoroscopic swallowing study (VFSS) methods for 
use with murine disease models for the purpose of facilitating translational 
dysphagia research. Successful outcomes are dependent upon three critical 
components: test chambers that permit self-feeding while standing unrestrained 
in a confined space, recipes that mask the aversive taste/odor of 
commercially-available oral contrast agents, and a step-by-step test protocol 
that permits quantification of swallow physiology. Elimination of one or more of 
these components will have a detrimental impact on the study results. Moreover, 
the energy level capability of the fluoroscopy system will determine which 
swallow parameters can be investigated. Most research centers have high energy 
fluoroscopes designed for use with people and larger animals, which results in 
exceptionally poor image quality when testing mice and other small rodents. 
Despite this limitation, we have identified seven VFSS parameters that are 
consistently quantifiable in mice when using a high energy fluoroscope in 
combination with the new murine VFSS protocol. We recently obtained a low energy 
fluoroscopy system with exceptionally high imaging resolution and magnification 
capabilities that was designed for use with mice and other small rodents. 
Preliminary work using this new system, in combination with the new murine VFSS 
protocol, has identified 13 swallow parameters that are consistently 
quantifiable in mice, which is nearly double the number obtained using 
conventional (i.e., high energy) fluoroscopes. Identification of additional 
swallow parameters is expected as we optimize the capabilities of this new 
system. Results thus far demonstrate the utility of using a low energy 
fluoroscopy system to detect and quantify subtle changes in swallow physiology 
that may otherwise be overlooked when using high energy fluoroscopes to 
investigate murine disease models.

DOI: 10.3791/52319
PMCID: PMC4401177
PMID: 25866882 [Indexed for MEDLINE]