1. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 13;10(4):e0123113. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0123113. 
eCollection 2015.

Immunomodulator-based enhancement of anti smallpox immune responses.

Martínez O(1), Miranda E(2), Ramírez M(1), Santos S(1), Rivera C(3), Vázquez 
L(3), Sánchez T(3), Tremblay RL(4), Ríos-Olivares E(5), Otero M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Puerto Rico, Medical Sciences 
Campus, San Juan, Puerto Rico.
(2)Department of Microbiology, University of Puerto Rico, Medical Sciences 
Campus, San Juan, Puerto Rico; Department of Microbiology Universidad Central 
del Caribe School of Medicine, Bayamón, Puerto Rico.
(3)Department Biology, University of Puerto Rico, Rio Piedras Campus, San Juan, 
Puerto Rico.
(4)Department of Biology, University of Puerto Rico, Humacao, Puerto Rico; 
Department of Biology, University of Puerto Rico, Rio Piedras Campus, San Juan, 
Puerto Rico; Center for Applied Tropical Ecology and Conservation, University of 
Puerto Rico, Rio Piedras campus, San Juan, Puerto Rico.
(5)Department of Microbiology Universidad Central del Caribe School of Medicine, 
Bayamón, Puerto Rico.

BACKGROUND: The current live vaccinia virus vaccine used in the prevention of 
smallpox is contraindicated for millions of immune-compromised individuals. 
Although vaccination with the current smallpox vaccine produces protective 
immunity, it might result in mild to serious health complications for some 
vaccinees. Thus, there is a critical need for the production of a safe 
virus-free vaccine against smallpox that is available to everyone. For that 
reason, we investigated the impact of imiquimod and resiquimod (Toll-like 
receptors agonists), and the codon-usage optimization of the vaccinia virus A27L 
gene in the enhancement of the immune response, with intent of producing a safe, 
virus-free DNA vaccine coding for the A27 vaccinia virus protein.
METHODS: We analyzed the cellular-immune response by measuring the IFN-γ 
production of splenocytes by ELISPOT, the humoral-immune responses measuring 
total IgG and IgG2a/IgG1 ratios by ELISA, and the TH1 and TH2 cytokine profiles 
by ELISA, in mice immunized with our vaccine formulation.
RESULTS: The proposed vaccine formulation enhanced the A27L vaccine-mediated 
production of IFN-γ on mouse spleens, and increased the humoral immunity with a 
TH1-biased response. Also, our vaccine induced a TH1 cytokine milieu, which is 
important against viral infections.
CONCLUSION: These results support the efforts to find a new mechanism to enhance 
an immune response against smallpox, through the implementation of a safe, 
virus-free DNA vaccination platform.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0123113
PMCID: PMC4395221
PMID: 25875833 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.