1. BMC Cancer. 2015 Apr 8;15:237. doi: 10.1186/s12885-015-1241-x.

Treatment of advanced gastrointestinal tumors with genetically modified 
autologous mesenchymal stromal cells (TREAT-ME1): study protocol of a phase I/II 
clinical trial.

Niess H(1), von Einem JC(2), Thomas MN(3), Michl M(4), Angele MK(5), Huss R(6), 
Günther C(7), Nelson PJ(8), Bruns CJ(9), Heinemann V(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of General, Visceral, Transplantation, Vascular and Thoracic 
Surgery, Hospital of the University of Munich, Munich, Germany. 
hanno.niess@med.uni-muenchen.de.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology and Comprehensive Cancer Center, Hospital of 
the University of Munich, Munich, Germany. jobst.von-einem@med.uni-muenchen.de.
(3)Department of General, Visceral, Transplantation, Vascular and Thoracic 
Surgery, Hospital of the University of Munich, Munich, Germany. 
michael.thomas@med.uni-muenchen.de.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology and Comprehensive Cancer Center, Hospital of 
the University of Munich, Munich, Germany. marlies.michl@med.uni-muenchen.de.
(5)Department of General, Visceral, Transplantation, Vascular and Thoracic 
Surgery, Hospital of the University of Munich, Munich, Germany. 
martin.angele@med.uni-muenchen.de.
(6)Apceth GmbH and Co. KG, Munich, Germany. r.huss@apceth.com.
(7)Apceth GmbH and Co. KG, Munich, Germany. c.guenther@apceth.com.
(8)Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik IV, Campus Innenstadt, Klinikum der 
Universitaet Muenchen, Arbeitsgruppe Klinische Biochemie, Munich, Germany. 
peter.nelson@med.uni-muenchen.de.
(9)Department of Surgery, Hospital of the University of Magdeburg, Magdeburg, 
Germany. christiane.bruns@med.ovgu.de.
(10)Department of Medical Oncology and Comprehensive Cancer Center, Hospital of 
the University of Munich, Munich, Germany. volker.heinemann@med.uni-muenchen.de.

BACKGROUND: Adenocarcinoma originating from the digestive system is a major 
contributor to cancer-related deaths worldwide. Tumor recurrence, advanced local 
growth and metastasis are key factors that frequently prevent these tumors from 
curative surgical treatment. Preclinical research has demonstrated that the 
dependency of these tumors on supporting mesenchymal stroma results in 
susceptibility to cell-based therapies targeting this stroma.
METHODS/DESIGN: TREAT-ME1 is a prospective, uncontrolled, single-arm phase I/II 
study assessing the safety and efficacy of genetically modified autologous 
mesenchymal stromal cells (MSC) as delivery vehicles for a cell-based gene 
therapy for advanced, recurrent or metastatic gastrointestinal or 
hepatopancreatobiliary adenocarcinoma. Autologous bone marrow will be drawn from 
each eligible patient after consent for bone marrow donation has been obtained 
(under a separate EC-approved protocol). In the following ~10 weeks the 
investigational medicinal product (IMP) is developed for each patient. To this 
end, the patient's MSCs are stably transfected with a gamma-retroviral, 
replication-incompetent and self-inactivating (SIN) vector system containing a 
therapeutic promoter - gene construct that allows for tumor-specific expression 
of the therapeutic gene. After release of the IMP the patients are enrolled 
after given informed consent for participation in the TREAT-ME 1 trial. In the 
phase I part of the study, the safety of the IMP is tested in six patients by 
three treatment cycles consisting of re-transfusion of MSCs at different 
concentrations followed by administration of the prodrug Ganciclovir. In the 
phase II part of the study, sixteen patients will be enrolled receiving IMP 
treatment. A subgroup of patients that qualifies for surgery will be treated 
preoperatively with the IMP to verify homing of the MSCs to tumors as to be 
confirmed in the surgical specimen.
DISCUSSION: The TREAT-ME1 clinical study involves a highly innovative 
therapeutic strategy combining cell and gene therapy and is conducted at a high 
level of pharmaceutical quality ensuring patient safety. This patient-tailored 
approach represents the first clinical study worldwide utilizing genetically 
engineered MSCs in humans.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: EU Clinical Trials Register/European Union Drug Regulating 
Authorities Clinical Trials Database number: 2012-003741-15.

DOI: 10.1186/s12885-015-1241-x
PMCID: PMC4393860
PMID: 25879229 [Indexed for MEDLINE]