1. BMC Genet. 2015 Mar 19;16:28. doi: 10.1186/s12863-015-0183-2.

Variability of candidate genes, genetic structure and association with sugar 
accumulation and climacteric behavior in a broad germplasm collection of melon 
(Cucumis melo L.).

Leida C(1), Moser C(2), Esteras C(3), Sulpice R(4)(5), Lunn JE(6), de Langen 
F(7), Monforte AJ(8), Picó B(9).

Author information:
(1)Research and Innovation Center, Department Genomics and Biology of Fruit 
Crops, Fondazione Edmund Mach (FEM), Via E. Mach 1, 38010, San Michele, Italy. 
carmen.leida@fmach.it.
(2)Research and Innovation Center, Department Genomics and Biology of Fruit 
Crops, Fondazione Edmund Mach (FEM), Via E. Mach 1, 38010, San Michele, Italy. 
claudio.moser@fmach.it.
(3)Institute for the Conservation and Breeding of Agricultural Biodiversity 
(COMAV-UPV), Universitat Politècnica de Valencia, Camino de Vera s/n, 46022, 
Valencia, Spain. criesgo@upvnet.upv.es.
(4)Max-Planck-Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology, Wissenschaftspark Golm, 
Am Mühlenberg 1, 14476, Potsdam, Germany. ronan.sulpice@nuigalway.ie.
(5)Plant Systems Biology Research Laboratory, Department of Botany and Plant 
Science, Plant and AgriBiosciences Research Centre, National University of 
Galway, University Road, Galway, Ireland. ronan.sulpice@nuigalway.ie.
(6)Max-Planck-Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology, Wissenschaftspark Golm, 
Am Mühlenberg 1, 14476, Potsdam, Germany. lunn@mpimp-golm.mpg.de.
(7)HMCLAUSE (Business Unit of Limagrain), Station de Mas Saint Pierre, La 
Galine, 13210, Saint-Rémy-de-Provence, France. frank.delangen@hmclause.coml.
(8)Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular de Plantas (IBMCP), Universitat 
Politècnica de València (UPV)-Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas 
(CSIC), Ciudad Politécnica de la Innovación (CPI), Ed. 8E, C/Ingeniero Fausto 
Elio s/n, 46022, Valencia, Spain. amonforte@ibmcp.upv.es.
(9)Institute for the Conservation and Breeding of Agricultural Biodiversity 
(COMAV-UPV), Universitat Politècnica de Valencia, Camino de Vera s/n, 46022, 
Valencia, Spain. mpicosi@btc.upv.es.

BACKGROUND: A collection of 175 melon (Cucumis melo L.) accessions (including 
wild relatives, feral types, landraces, breeding lines and commercial cultivars) 
from 50 countries was selected to study the phenotypic variability for ripening 
behavior and sugar accumulation. The variability of single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) at 53 selected candidate genes involved in sugar 
accumulation and fruit ripening processes was studied, as well as their 
association with phenotypic variation of related traits.
RESULTS: The collection showed a strong genetic structure, defining seven groups 
plus a number of accessions that could not be associated to any of the groups 
(admixture), which fitted well with the botanical classification of melon 
varieties. The variability in candidate genes for ethylene, cell wall and 
sugar-related traits was high and similar to SNPs located in reference genes. 
Variability at ripening candidate genes had an important weight on the genetic 
stratification of melon germplasm, indicating that traditional farmers might 
have selected for ripening traits during cultivar diversification. A strong 
relationship was also found between the genetic structure and phenotypic 
diversity, which could hamper genetic association studies. Accessions belonging 
to the ameri group are the most appropriate for association analysis given the 
high phenotypic and molecular diversity within the group, and lack of genetic 
structure. The most remarkable association was found between sugar content and 
SNPs in LG III, where a hotspot of sugar content QTLs has previously been 
defined. By studying the differences in allelic variation of SNPs within 
horticultural groups with specific phenotypic features, we also detected 
differential variation in sugar-related candidates located in LGIX and LGX, and 
in ripening-related candidates located in LGII and X, all in regions with 
previously mapped QTLs for the corresponding traits.
CONCLUSIONS: In the current study we have found an important variability at both 
the phenotypic and candidate gene levels for ripening behavior and sugar 
accumulation in melon fruit. By combination of differences in allelic diversity 
and association analysis, we have identified several candidate genes that may be 
involved in the melon phenotypic diversity.

DOI: 10.1186/s12863-015-0183-2
PMCID: PMC4380257
PMID: 25886993 [Indexed for MEDLINE]