1. Oncotarget. 2015 May 10;6(13):10924-39. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.3454.

Quantitative phosphoproteome analysis of embryonic stem cell differentiation 
toward blood.

Piazzi M(1), Williamson A(2), Lee CF(2), Pearson S(3), Lacaud G(4), Kouskoff 
V(3), McCubrey JA(5), Cocco L(1), Whetton AD(2).

Author information:
(1)Cell Signaling Laboratory, Department of Biomedical Science (DIBINEM), 
University of Bologna, Italy.
(2)Stem Cell and Leukaemia Proteomics Laboratory, Manchester Academic Health 
Science Centre, The University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(3)Stem Cell Research Group, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, 
University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(4)Stem Cell Biology Group Paterson Institute for Cancer Research, Manchester 
Academic Health Science Centre, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Brody School of Medicine at East 
Carolina University, Greenville, NC, USA.

Murine embryonic stem (ES) cells can differentiate in vitro into three germ 
layers (endodermic, mesodermic, ectodermic). Studies on the differentiation of 
these cells to specific early differentiation stages has been aided by an ES 
cell line carrying the Green Fluorescent Protein (GFP) targeted to the Brachyury 
(Bry) locus which marks mesoderm commitment. Furthermore, expression of the 
Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor receptor 2 (Flk1) along with Bry defines 
hemangioblast commitment. Isobaric-tag for relative and absolute quantification 
(iTRAQ(TM)) and phosphopeptide enrichment coupled to liquid chromatography 
separation and mass spectrometry allow the study of phosphorylation changes 
occurring at different stages of ES cell development using Bry and Flk1 
expression respectively. We identified and relatively quantified 37 
phosphoentities which are modulated during mesoderm-induced ES cells 
differentiation, comparing epiblast-like, early mesoderm and 
hemangioblast-enriched cells. Among the proteins differentially phosphorylated 
toward mesoderm differentiation were: the epigenetic regulator Dnmt3b, the 
protein kinase GSK3b, the chromatin remodeling factor Smarcc1, the transcription 
factor Utf1; as well as protein specifically related to stem cell 
differentiation, as Eomes, Hmga2, Ints1 and Rif1. As most key factors regulating 
early hematopoietic development have also been implicated in various types of 
leukemia, understanding the post-translational modifications driving their 
regulation during normal development could result in a better comprehension of 
their roles during abnormal hematopoiesis in leukemia.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.3454
PMCID: PMC4484429
PMID: 25890499 [Indexed for MEDLINE]