1. Anticancer Res. 2015 May;35(5):2709-13.

Analyses of EGF A61G Gene Variation and Serum EGF Level on Gastric Cancer 
Susceptibility and Clinicopathological Parameters.

Cacina C(1), Arikan S(2), Düzköylü Y(2), Doğan MB(2), Okay E(3), Turan S(1), 
Yaylim I(4), Isbir T(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Institute of Experimental Medicine, 
Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(2)Istanbul Research and Teaching and Research Hospital, Surgery Clinic, 
Istanbul, Turkey.
(3)Kocaeli University, School of Medicine, Department of General Surgery, 
Kocaeli, Turkey.
(4)Department of Molecular Medicine, Institute of Experimental Medicine, 
Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey ilhanyaylim@gmail.com.
(5)Department of Medical Biology, Yeditepe University Medical Faculty, Istanbul, 
Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Epidermal growth factor (EGF) induces various biological signaling 
pathways, including proliferation and differentiation and it is the natural 
ligand of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) which is a member of 
tyrosine kinase transmembrane receptor family. EGF and EGFR control important 
processes in carcinogenesis and several differences in this signaling pathway 
are very common in certain types of cancers. In present study, we examined EGF 
A61G gene polymorphism as a marker of risk and progression in gastric cancer.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 84 patients with gastric cancer and 146 
control individuals were enrolled in the current study. EGF A61G gene variation 
was genotyped by using polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length 
polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) analysis.
RESULTS: The distribution of EGF A61G genotypes were different between patients 
with gastric cancer and controls (p=0.039). Serum EGF levels in gastric cancer 
cases were significantly lower than those in controls (p=0.012). There were no 
correlations between the serum EGF levels according to EGF A61G genotype and 
allelic distributions in patients with gastric cancer.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggested that EGF A61G gene variations and EGF serum 
levels might be associated with the risk of gastric cancer.

Copyright© 2015 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G. 
Delinassios), All rights reserved.

PMID: 25964549 [Indexed for MEDLINE]