1. J Med Genet. 2015 Jul;52(7):484-92. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2015-103130. Epub 
2015 May 18.

Rare genetic variants in Tunisian Jewish patients suffering from age-related 
macular degeneration.

Pras E(1), Kristal D(2), Shoshany N(3), Volodarsky D(4), Vulih I(4), Celniker 
G(5), Isakov O(5), Shomron N(5), Pras E(6).

Author information:
(1)The Matlow's Ophthalmo-Genetics Laboratory, Department of Ophthalmology, 
Assaf-Harofeh Medical Center, Zerifin, Israel Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel 
Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Edith-Wolfson Medical Center, Holon, Israel.
(3)The Matlow's Ophthalmo-Genetics Laboratory, Department of Ophthalmology, 
Assaf-Harofeh Medical Center, Zerifin, Israel.
(4)Dyn Labs, Assaf-Harofeh Medical Center, Zerifin, Israel.
(5)Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel Functional 
Genomics Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(6)Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel Danek 
Gartener Institute of Human Genetics, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Aviv University, 
Tel Aviv, Israel.

PURPOSE: To explore the molecular basis of familial, early onset, age-related 
macular degeneration (AMD) with diverse phenotypes, using whole exome sequencing 
(WES).
METHODS: We performed WES on four patients (two sibs from two families) 
manifesting early-onset AMD and searched for disease-causing genetic variants in 
previously identified macular degeneration related genes. Validation studies of 
the variants included bioinformatics tools, segregation analysis of mutations 
within the families and mutation screening in an AMD cohort of patients.
RESULTS: The index patients were in their 50s when diagnosed and displayed a 
wide variety of clinical AMD presentations: from limited drusen in the posterior 
pole to multiple basal-laminar drusen extending peripherally. Severe visual 
impairment due to extensive geographic atrophy and/or 
choroidal-neovascularisation was common by the age of 75 years. Approximately, 
400 000 genomic variants for each DNA sample were included in the downstream 
bioinformatics analysis, which ended in the discovery of two novel variants; in 
one family a single bp deletion was identified in the Hemicentin (HMCN1) gene 
(c.4162delC), whereas in the other, a missense variant (p.V412M) in the 
Complement Factor-I (CFI) gene was found. Screening for these variants in a 
cohort of patients with AMD identified another family with the CFI variant.
CONCLUSIONS: This report uses WES to uncover rare genetic variants in AMD. A 
null-variant in HMCN1 has been identified in one AMD family, and a missense 
variant in CFI was discovered in two other families. These variants confirm the 
genetic complexity and significance of rare genetic variants in the pathogenesis 
of AMD.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2015-103130
PMID: 25986072 [Indexed for MEDLINE]