1. BMJ Open. 2015 May 19;5(5):e007506. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2014-007506.

DNA sequence analysis and genotype-phenotype assessment in 71 patients with 
syndromic hearing loss or auditory neuropathy.

Tang HY(1), Fang P(2), Lin JW(1), Darilek S(3), Osborne BT(1), Haymond JA(1), 
Manolidis S(4), Roa BB(5), Oghalai JS(6), Alford RL(1).

Author information:
(1)Bobby R Alford Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Baylor 
College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.
(2)Medical Genetics Laboratories, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, 
USA Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas, USA.
(4)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery, Albert Einstein 
College of Medicine of Yeshiva University, Bronx, New York, USA.
(5)Myriad Genetic Laboratories, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.
(6)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Stanford University, 
Stanford, California, USA.

OBJECTIVES: Aetiological assessment of 71 probands whose clinical presentation 
suggested a genetic syndrome or auditory neuropathy.
METHODS: Sanger sequencing was performed on DNA isolated from peripheral blood 
or lymphoblastoid cell lines. Genes were selected for sequencing based on each 
patient's clinical presentation and suspected diagnosis. Observed DNA sequence 
variations were assessed for pathogenicity by review of the scientific 
literature, and mutation and polymorphism databases, through the use of in 
silico tools including sorting intolerant from tolerant (SIFT) and polymorphism 
phenotyping (PolyPhen), and according to the recommendations of the American 
College of Medical Genetics and Genomics for the interpretation of DNA sequence 
variations. Novel DNA sequence variations were sought in controls.
RESULTS: DNA sequencing of the coding and near-coding regions of genes relevant 
to each patient's clinical presentation revealed 37 sequence variations of known 
or uncertain pathogenicity in 9 genes from 25 patients. 14 novel sequence 
variations were discovered. Assessment of phenotypes revealed notable findings 
in 9 patients.
CONCLUSIONS: DNA sequencing in patients whose clinical presentation suggested a 
genetic syndrome or auditory neuropathy provided opportunities for aetiological 
assessment and more precise genetic counselling of patients and families. The 
failure to identify a genetic aetiology in many patients in this study 
highlights the extreme heterogeneity of genetic hearing loss, the incompleteness 
of current knowledge of aetiologies of hearing loss, and the limitations of 
conventional DNA sequencing strategies that evaluate only coding and near-coding 
segments of genes.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2014-007506
PMCID: PMC4442153
PMID: 25991456 [Indexed for MEDLINE]