1. Dev Period Med. 2015 Jan-Mar;19(1):32-40.

Meconium ileus in newborns with cystic fibrosis - results of treatment in the 
group of patients operated on in the years 2000-2014.

Boczar M(1), Sawicka E, Zybert K.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Department of Children's and Adolescents' Surgery, Institute of 
Mother and Child, Kasprzaka Street 17a, 01-211 Warsaw, Poland, tel. (+48 22) 
32-77-107, e-mail: mariaboczar@vp.pl.

AIM: Evaluation of diagnostic and treatment procedures in children with cystic 
fibrosis (CF) operated on because of meconium ileus (MI).
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The authors retrospectively reviewed the documentation of 
10 CF newborn patients operated on in the years 2000-2014 because of MI. In 
prenatal ultrasound (US) examinations, suspicion of bowel abnormalities was 
raised in 2 cases, even though all the 10 mothers had a minimum of 3 US 
examinations during pregnancy. The mean gestational age of the newborns was 39.2 
weeks - 36-41 weeks), their mean birth weight 3472g (2560-4550 g). Family 
history of CF was positive in two patients. Genetic testing was performed in all 
the children operated on.
RESULTS: In all the children operated on, mutations in both alleles of the CFTR 
gene were found. Five patients were F508del homozygotic, 4 were heterozygotic 
for this mutation, one had another mutation. Sweat tests were positive in all 
the children. Abdominal distention was observed in 9 patients, vomiting and 
retention of gastric contents in 5. In 8 children meconium was not passed at 
all. 2 children passed a small amount of viscid meconium. Before the operation, 
rectal saline washouts were done in 5 newborns. Five patients were operated on 
during the first day of life, four on the second day and one on the third day of 
life. Intra-operatively a simple form of MI was diagnosed in 8 cases, a 
complicated form in 2 cases. In patients with the simple form of MI, a 
Bishop-Koop stoma was created after the evacuation of meconium. Two of these 
children needed a resection of some centimetres of dilated terminal ileum with 
doubtful viability. In newborns with the complicated form of MI, the treatment 
was individualized, always with stoma formation. The time of postoperative 
meconium evacuation through enterostomy ranged from 6 to 15 days. Enteral 
feeding was started on average on the 9th day postoperatively. The mean hospital 
stay was 22.9 days. In 8 children the stoma was taken out at the mean age of 
19.4 months, in one patient the stoma closed spontaneously. No disturbances in 
electrolyte balance or excessive fluid loss, nor any body weight deficits 
connected with the stoma were observed. There were no complications during stoma 
closure. All the patients are alive. The time of observation ranges from 7 to 
146 months (average 95 months). All the patients currently present respiratory 
symptoms, have pancreatic insufficiency and need pancreatic enzyme 
supplementation. Seven do not, however, have body weight and height deficits. 
All the children with weight and height deficits have abnormal liver function 
tests. During observation two patients had MI equivalent symptoms, which was 
resolved by conservative treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: 1. In every case of intra-operative diagnosis of MI, it is 
necessary to perform genetic testing and sweat tests to confirm or exclude CF. 
2. Mechanical intra-operative decompression of the bowel from inspissated 
meconium with a temporary stoma, which makes the continuation of bowel 
decompression possible in the postoperative period, is an effective treatment in 
children with MI. 3. The Bishop-Koop stoma, permitting the passage through the 
whole gastrointestinal tract, is a safe option. In our material, no 
complications of this stoma, such as stoma care problems or dyselectrolithemia 
were observed. 4. The decision of stoma closure in children with MI and CF 
should be delayed until the moment of introducing a broadened diet and should be 
undertaken together with a pediatrician who is a specialist in CF therapy. .

PMID: 26003068 [Indexed for MEDLINE]