1. Biomaterials. 2015 Aug;61:216-28. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2015.05.035.
Epub  2015 May 19.

Bioactive nanofibers enable the identification of thrombospondin 2 as a key 
player in enamel regeneration.

Huang Z(1), Newcomb CJ(2), Lei Y(1), Zhou Y(1), Bornstein P(3), Amendt BA(4), 
Stupp SI(5), Snead ML(6).

Author information:
(1)Center for Craniofacial Molecular Biology, Herman Ostrow School of Dentistry 
of USC, The University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(2)Simpson Querrey Institute for BioNanotechnology, Northwestern University, 
Chicago, IL, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(4)Craniofacial Anomalies Research Center, Carver College of Medicine, 
University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA.
(5)Simpson Querrey Institute for BioNanotechnology, Northwestern University, 
Chicago, IL, USA; Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Northwestern 
University, Evanston, IL, USA; Department of Chemistry, Northwestern University, 
Evanston, IL, USA; Department of Biomedical Engineering, Northwestern 
University, Evanston, IL, USA; Department of Medicine, Northwestern University, 
Chicago, IL, USA.
(6)Center for Craniofacial Molecular Biology, Herman Ostrow School of Dentistry 
of USC, The University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. Electronic 
address: mlsnead@usc.edu.

Tissue regeneration and development involves highly synchronized signals both 
between cells and with the extracellular environment. Biomaterials can be tuned 
to mimic specific biological signals and control cell response(s). As a result, 
these materials can be used as tools to elucidate cell signaling pathways and 
candidate molecules involved with cellular processes. In this work, we explore 
enamel-forming cells, ameloblasts, which have a limited regenerative capacity. 
By exposing undifferentiated cells to a self-assembling matrix bearing RGDS 
epitopes, we elicited a regenerative signal at will that subsequently led to the 
identification of thrombospondin 2 (TSP2), an extracellular matrix protein that 
has not been previously recognized as a key player in enamel development and 
regeneration. Targeted disruption of the thrombospondin 2 gene (Thbs2) resulted 
in enamel formation with a disordered architecture that was highly susceptible 
to wear compared to their wild-type counterparts. To test the regenerative 
capacity, we injected the bioactive matrix into the enamel organ and discovered 
that the enamel organic epithelial cells in TSP-null mice failed to polarize on 
the surface of the artificial matrix, greatly reducing integrin β1 and Notch1 
expression levels, which represent signaling pathways known to be associated 
with TSP2. These results suggest TSP2 plays an important role in regulating 
cell-matrix interactions during enamel formation. Exploiting the signaling 
pathways activated by biomaterials can provide insight into native signaling 
mechanisms crucial for tooth development and cell-based strategies for enamel 
regeneration.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2015.05.035
PMCID: PMC4467543
PMID: 26004236 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures The authors declare they have no 
conflicts of interest.