1. Am J Manag Care. 2015 Mar 1;21(3):e197-205.

Factors affecting medication adherence trajectories for patients with heart 
failure.

Juarez DT(1), Williams AE, Chen C, Daida YG, Tanaka SK, Trinacty CM, Vogt TM.

Author information:
(1)University of Hawaii at Hilo, Daniel K. Inouye College of Pharmacy, 677 Ala 
Moana Blvd, Ste 1025, Honolulu, HI 96813. Email: dtjuarez@hawaii.edu.

OBJECTIVES: To examine the relationship between patient characteristics and 
medication adherence trajectories for patients with congestive heart failure 
(CHF).
STUDY DESIGN: Historical prospective study.
METHODS: We conducted a secondary analysis of data assembled for the Practice 
Variation and Care Outcomes (PRAVCO) study, which examined patterns of 
cardiovascular care. We used group based trajectory modeling to define 
medication adherence trajectories, and then modeled factors associated with 
belonging to a trajectory group during the 6year period from 2005 to 2010 (n = 
10,986). We focused on the use of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors 
or angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs) for secondary prevention of CHF.
RESULTS: Four trajectory groups were optimal in characterizing adherence level 
patterns: 1) low adherence group, with an initial average adherence rate of 62% 
that dropped to between 40% and 50%; 2) increasing adherence group, with an 
initial average adherence rate of 55% that increased to 90%; 3) decreasing 
adherence group, with an initial average adherence rate above 90% that decreased 
to 60%; 4) high adherence group, with an average adherence rate consistently 
above 90%. Age, region, education, smoking, and race were all significantly 
associated with the likelihood of belonging to a particular trajectory. 
Nonwhites were less likely to be in the high adherence group, and smoking was 
more common in the low adherence group (22%) than in the high group (10%); 
increasing body mass index and Charlson Comorbidity Index (CCI) scores were also 
associated with being in the low adherence group.
CONCLUSIONS: Population characteristics associated with sustained low adherence 
might be used to target interventions and improve vulnerable patients' prospects 
of heart health.

PMCID: PMC6358173
PMID: 26014307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Author Disclosures: The authors report no 
relationship or financial interest with any entity that would pose a conflict of 
interest with the subject matter of this article.