1. PLoS Biol. 2015 May 28;13(5):e1002144. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1002144. 
eCollection 2015 May.

Signature Patterns of MHC Diversity in Three Gombe Communities of Wild 
Chimpanzees Reflect Fitness in Reproduction and Immune Defense against SIVcpz.

Wroblewski EE(1), Norman PJ(1), Guethlein LA(1), Rudicell RS(2), Ramirez MA(3), 
Li Y(3), Hahn BH(3), Pusey AE(4), Parham P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Structural Biology and Department of Microbiology and 
Immunology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, United 
States of America.
(2)Vaccine Research Center, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, 
United States of America; Sanofi, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of 
America.
(3)Departments of Medicine and Microbiology, Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of 
America.
(4)Department of Evolutionary Anthropology, Duke University, Durham, North 
Carolina, United States of America.

Comment in
    Chimps, Humans, and the Hominid Struggle against Viruses.

Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules determine immune 
responses to viral infections. These polymorphic cell-surface glycoproteins bind 
peptide antigens, forming ligands for cytotoxic T and natural killer cell 
receptors. Under pressure from rapidly evolving viruses, hominoid MHC class I 
molecules also evolve rapidly, becoming diverse and species-specific. Little is 
known of the impact of infectious disease epidemics on MHC class I variant 
distributions in human populations, a context in which the chimpanzee is the 
superior animal model. Population dynamics of the chimpanzees inhabiting Gombe 
National Park, Tanzania have been studied for over 50 years. This population is 
infected with SIVcpz, the precursor of human HIV-1. Because HLA-B is the most 
polymorphic human MHC class I molecule and correlates strongly with HIV-1 
progression, we determined sequences for its ortholog, Patr-B, in 125 Gombe 
chimpanzees. Eleven Patr-B variants were defined, as were their frequencies in 
Gombe's three communities, changes in frequency with time, and effect of SIVcpz 
infection. The growing populations of the northern and central communities, 
where SIVcpz is less prevalent, have stable distributions comprising a majority 
of low-frequency Patr-B variants and a few high-frequency variants. Driving the 
latter to high frequency has been the fecundity of immigrants to the northern 
community, whereas in the central community, it has been the fecundity of 
socially dominant individuals. In the declining population of the southern 
community, where greater SIVcpz prevalence is associated with mortality and 
emigration, Patr-B variant distributions have been changing. Enriched in this 
community are Patr-B variants that engage with natural killer cell receptors. 
Elevated among SIVcpz-infected chimpanzees, the Patr-B*06:03 variant has 
striking structural and functional similarities to HLA-B*57, the human allotype 
most strongly associated with delayed HIV-1 progression. Like HLA-B*57, 
Patr-B*06:03 correlates with reduced viral load, as assessed by detection of 
SIVcpz RNA in feces.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1002144
PMCID: PMC4447270
PMID: 26020813 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.