1. Oncogenesis. 2015 Jun 1;4(6):e151. doi: 10.1038/oncsis.2015.5.

Mutations of the functional ARH1 allele in tumors from ARH1 heterozygous mice 
and cells affect ARH1 catalytic activity, cell proliferation and tumorigenesis.

Kato J(1), Vekhter D(1), Heath J(1), Zhu J(1), Barbieri JT(2), Moss J(1).

Author information:
(1)Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Branch, National Heart, Lung, and Blood 
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(2)Medical College of Wisconsin, Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Milwaukee, 
WI, USA.

ADP-ribosylation results from transfer of the ADP-ribose moiety of nicotinamide 
adenine dinucleotide (NAD) to an acceptor with ADP-ribose-acceptor content 
determined by the activities of ADP-ribosyltransferases, which modify the 
acceptor, and ADP-ribose-acceptor hydrolase (ARH), which cleave the 
ADP-ribose-acceptor bond. ARH1 was discovered as an ADP-ribose(arginine)protein 
hydrolase. Previously, we showed that ARH1-knockout and ARH1 heterozygous mice 
spontaneously developed tumors. Further, ARH1-knockout and ARH1 heterozygous 
mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) produced tumors when injected into nude mice. 
In tumors arising in ARH1 heterozygous mice and MEFs, we found both loss of 
heterozygosity (LOH) of the ARH1 gene and ARH1 gene mutations. In the present 
report, we found that these mutant ARH1 genes encode proteins with reduced ARH1 
enzymatic activity. Moreover, MEFs transformed with ARH1 mutant genes exhibiting 
different levels of ARH1 activity showed altered rates of proliferation, 
anchorage-independent colony growth in soft agar, and tumorigenesis in nude 
mice. MEFs transformed with the wild-type (WT) gene, but expressing low levels 
of hydrolase activity were also tumorigenic. However, transformation with the WT 
gene was less likely to yield tumors than transformation with a mutant gene 
exhibiting similar hydrolase activity. Thus, control of protein-ADP-ribosylation 
by ARH1 is critical for tumorigenesis. In the human cancer database, LOH and 
mutations of the ARH1 gene were observed. Further, ARH1 gene mutations were 
located in exons 3 and 4, comparable to exons 2 and 3 of the murine ARH1 gene, 
which comprise the catalytic site. Thus, human ARH1 gene mutations similar to 
their murine counterparts may be involved in human cancers.

DOI: 10.1038/oncsis.2015.5
PMCID: PMC4753525
PMID: 26029825