1. Online J Rural Nurs Health Care. 2014;14(1):43-65. doi: 
10.14574/ojrnhc.v14i1.276.

Using mHealth Tools to Improve Rural Diabetes Care Guided by the Chronic Care 
Model.

Mallow JA(1), Theeke LA(2), Barnes ER(3), Whetsel T(4), Mallow BK(5).

Author information:
(1)West Virginia University School of Nursing, jamallow@hsc.wvu.edu.
(2)West Virginia University School of Nursing, ltheeke@hsc.wvu.edu.
(3)West Virginia University School of Pharmacy, ebarnes@hsc.wvu.edu.
(4)West Virginia University School of Nursing, twhetsel@hsc.wvu.edu.
(5)Sovern Run LLC, bkmallow@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Used as an integrated tool, mHealth may improve the 
ability of healthcare providers in rural areas to provide care, improve access 
to care for underserved populations, and improve biophysical outcomes of care 
for persons with diabetes in rural, underserved populations. Our objective in 
this paper is to present an integrated review of the impact of mHealth 
interventions for community dwelling individuals with type two diabetes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A literature search was performed using keywords in 
PubMed to identify research studies which mHealth technology was used as the 
intervention.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: Interventions using mHealth have been found to improve 
outcomes, be cost effective, and culturally relevant. mHealth technology that 
has been used to improve outcomes include: seeking out health information via 
the web, access to appointment scheduling and medication refills, secure 
messaging, computerized interventions to manage a chronic condition, use of a 
personal health record, use of remote monitoring devices, and seeking support 
from others with similar health concerns through social networks.
CONCLUSION: Using the validated Chronic Care Model to translate what is known 
about mHealth technology to clinical practice has the potential to improve the 
ability of healthcare providers in rural areas to provide care, improve access 
to care for underserved populations, and improve biophysical outcomes of care 
for persons with diabetes in rural underserved populations. While these 
approaches were effective in improving some outcomes, they have not resulted in 
the establishment of the necessary electronic infrastructure for a sustainable 
mobile healthcare delivery model.

DOI: 10.14574/ojrnhc.v14i1.276
PMCID: PMC4445371
PMID: 26029005