1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2015 May;56(5):3371-82. doi: 10.1167/iovs.14-14007.

Patient-Specific Induced Pluripotent Stem Cell-Derived RPE Cells: Understanding 
the Pathogenesis of Retinopathy in Long-Chain 3-Hydroxyacyl-CoA Dehydrogenase 
Deficiency.

Polinati PP(1), Ilmarinen T(2), Trokovic R(1), Hyotylainen T(3), Otonkoski T(4), 
Suomalainen A(4), Skottman H(2), Tyni T(4).

Author information:
(1)Research Program of Molecular Neurology, Biomedicum 1, University of 
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(2)Institute of Biomedical Technology, University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland 
3BioMediTech, Tampere, Finland.
(3)Valtion Teknillinen Tutkimuskeskus (VTT) Technical Research Centre of 
Finland, Tietotie 2, Espoo, Finland.
(4)Research Program of Molecular Neurology, Biomedicum 1, University of 
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland 5Children's Hospital, Helsinki University Central 
Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.

PURPOSE: Retinopathy is an important manifestation of trifunctional protein 
(TFP) deficiencies but not of other defects of fatty acid oxidation. The common 
homozygous mutation in the TFP α-subunit gene HADHA (hydroxyacyl-CoA 
dehydrogenase), c.1528G>C, affects the long-chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA 
dehydrogenase (LCHAD) activity of TFP and blindness in infancy. The pathogenesis 
of the retinopathy is unknown. This study aimed to utilize human induced 
pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC) technology to create a disease model for the 
disorder, and to derive clues for retinopathy pathogenesis.
METHODS: We implemented hiPSC technology to generate LCHAD deficiency (LCHADD) 
patient-specific retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) monolayers. These patient and 
control RPEs were extensively characterized for function and structure, as well 
as for lipid composition by mass spectrometry.
RESULTS: The hiPSC-derived RPE monolayers of patients and controls were 
functional, as they both were able to phagocytose the photoreceptor outer 
segments in vitro. Interestingly, the patient RPEs had intense cytoplasmic 
neutral lipid accumulation, and lipidomic analysis revealed an increased 
triglyceride accumulation. Further, patient RPEs were small and irregular in 
shape, and their tight junctions were disorganized. Their ultrastructure showed 
decreased pigmentation, few melanosomes, and more melanolysosomes.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrate that the RPE cell model reveals novel early 
pathogenic changes in LCHADD retinopathy, with robust lipid accumulation, 
inefficient pigmentation that is evident soon after differentiation, and a 
defect in forming tight junctions inducing apoptosis. We propose that 
LCHADD-RPEs are an important model for mitochondrial TFP retinopathy, and that 
their early pathogenic changes contribute to infantile blindness of LCHADD.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.14-14007
PMID: 26024122 [Indexed for MEDLINE]