1. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 2;10(6):e0128976. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0128976. 
eCollection 2015.

The Role of Inducible Hsp70, and Other Heat Shock Proteins, in Adaptive Complex 
of Cold Tolerance of the Fruit Fly (Drosophila melanogaster).

Štětina T(1), Koštál V(2), Korbelová J(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Entomology, Biology Centre of the Czech Academy of Sciences, 
České Budějovice, Czech Republic; Faculty of Science, University of South 
Bohemia, České Budějovice, Czech Republic.
(2)Institute of Entomology, Biology Centre of the Czech Academy of Sciences, 
České Budějovice, Czech Republic.

BACKGROUND: The ubiquitous occurrence of inducible Heat Shock Proteins (Hsps) 
up-regulation in response to cold-acclimation and/or to cold shock, including 
massive increase of Hsp70 mRNA levels, often led to hasty interpretations of its 
role in the repair of cold injury expressed as protein denaturation or 
misfolding. So far, direct functional analyses in Drosophila melanogaster and 
other insects brought either limited or no support for such interpretations. In 
this paper, we analyze the cold tolerance and the expression levels of 24 
different mRNA transcripts of the Hsps complex and related genes in response to 
cold in two strains of D. melanogaster: the wild-type and the Hsp70- null mutant 
lacking all six copies of Hsp70 gene.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We found that larvae of both strains show similar patterns 
of Hsps complex gene expression in response to long-term cold-acclimation and 
during recovery from chronic cold exposures or acute cold shocks. No 
transcriptional compensation for missing Hsp70 gene was seen in Hsp70- strain. 
The cold-induced Hsps gene expression is most probably regulated by alternative 
splice variants C and D of the Heat Shock Factor. The cold tolerance in Hsp70- 
null mutants was clearly impaired only when the larvae were exposed to severe 
acute cold shock. No differences in mortality were found between two strains 
when the larvae were exposed to relatively mild doses of cold, either chronic 
exposures to 0°C or acute cold shocks at temperatures down to -4°C.
CONCLUSIONS: The up-regulated expression of a complex of inducible Hsps genes, 
and Hsp70 mRNA in particular, is tightly associated with cold-acclimation and 
cold exposure in D. melanogaster. Genetic elimination of Hsp70 up-regulation 
response has no effect on survival of chronic exposures to 0°C or mild acute 
cold shocks, while it negatively affects survival after severe acute cold shocks 
at temperatures below -8°C.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0128976
PMCID: PMC4452724
PMID: 26034990 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.