1. Yonsei Med J. 2015 Jul;56(4):877-86. doi: 10.3349/ymj.2015.56.4.877.

Gene-Environment Interactions in Asthma: Genetic and Epigenetic Effects.

Lee JU(1), Kim JD(1), Park CS(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Interdisciplinary Program in Biomedical Science Major, 
Soonchunhyang Graduate School, Bucheon, Korea.
(2)Genome Research Center and Division of Allergy and Respiratory Medicine, 
Soonchunhyang University Bucheon Hospital, Bucheon, Korea. mdcspark@daum.net.

Over the past three decades, a large number of genetic studies have been aimed 
at finding genetic variants associated with the risk of asthma, applying various 
genetic and genomic approaches including linkage analysis, candidate gene 
polymorphism studies, and genome-wide association studies (GWAS). However, 
contrary to general expectation, even single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
discovered by GWAS failed to fully explain the heritability of asthma. Thus, 
application of rare allele polymorphisms in well defined phenotypes and 
clarification of environmental factors have been suggested to overcome the 
problem of 'missing' heritability. Such factors include allergens, cigarette 
smoke, air pollutants, and infectious agents during pre- and post-natal periods. 
The first and simplest interaction between a gene and the environment is a 
candidate interaction of both a well known gene and environmental factor in a 
direct physical or chemical interaction such as between CD14 and endotoxin or 
between HLA and allergens. Several GWAS have found environmental interactions 
with occupational asthma, aspirin exacerbated respiratory disease, tobacco 
smoke-related airway dysfunction, and farm-related atopic diseases. As one of 
the mechanisms behind gene-environment interaction is epigenetics, a few studies 
on DNA CpG methylation have been reported on subphenotypes of asthma, pitching 
the exciting idea that it may be possible to intervene at the junction between 
the genome and the environment. Epigenetic studies are starting to include data 
from clinical samples, which will make them another powerful tool for re-search 
on gene-environment interactions in asthma.

DOI: 10.3349/ymj.2015.56.4.877
PMCID: PMC4479853
PMID: 26069107 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no financial conflicts of 
interest.