1. J Infect Dis. 2015 Oct 1;212 Suppl 2:S322-8. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiv268. Epub 
2015 Jun 19.

Shedding of Ebola Virus Surface Glycoprotein Is a Mechanism of Self-regulation 
of Cellular Cytotoxicity and Has a Direct Effect on Virus Infectivity.

Dolnik O(1), Volchkova VA(2), Escudero-Perez B(2), Lawrence P(2), Klenk HD(3), 
Volchkov VE(2).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Basis of Viral Pathogenicity, CIRI, INSERM U1111 - CNRS UMR5308, 
Université de Lyon, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Ecole Normale Supérieure 
de Lyon, France Institut für Virologie, Philipps-Universität Marburg, Germany.
(2)Molecular Basis of Viral Pathogenicity, CIRI, INSERM U1111 - CNRS UMR5308, 
Université de Lyon, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Ecole Normale Supérieure 
de Lyon, France.
(3)Institut für Virologie, Philipps-Universität Marburg, Germany.

The surface glycoprotein (GP) is responsible for Ebola virus (EBOV) attachment 
and membrane fusion during virus entry. Surface expression of highly 
glycosylated GP causes marked cytotoxicity via masking of a wide range of 
cellular surface molecules, including integrins. Considerable amounts of surface 
GP are shed from virus-infected cells in a soluble truncated form by tumor 
necrosis factor α-converting enzyme. In this study, the role of GP shedding was 
investigated using a reverse genetics approach by comparing recombinant viruses 
possessing amino acid substitutions at the GP shedding site. Virus with an L635V 
substitution showed a substantial decrease in shedding, whereas a D637V 
substitution resulted in a striking increase in the release of shed GP. 
Variations in shedding efficacy correlated with observed differences in the 
amounts of shed GP in the medium, GP present in virus-infected cells, and GP 
present on virions. An increase in shedding appeared to be associated with a 
reduction in viral cytotoxicity, and, vice versa, the virus that shed less was 
more cytotoxic. An increase in shedding also resulted in a reduction in viral 
infectivity, whereas a decrease in shedding efficacy enhanced viral growth 
characteristics in vitro. Differences in shedding efficacy and, as a result, 
differences in the amount of mature GP available for incorporation into budding 
virions did not equate to differences in overall release of viral particles. 
Likewise, data suggest that the resulting differences in the amount of mature GP 
on the cell surface led to variations in the GP content of released particles 
and, as a consequence, in infectivity. In conclusion, fine-tuning of the levels 
of EBOV GP expressed at the surface of virus-infected cells via GP shedding 
plays an important role in EBOV replication by orchestrating the balance between 
optimal virion GP content and cytotoxicity caused by GP.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Infectious Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For Permissions, 
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiv268
PMID: 26092855 [Indexed for MEDLINE]