1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2015 Jun 25;9(6):e0003847. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pntd.0003847. eCollection 2015.

Genotypic Diversity Is Associated with Clinical Outcome and Phenotype in 
Cryptococcal Meningitis across Southern Africa.

Beale MA(1), Sabiiti W(2), Robertson EJ(3), Fuentes-Cabrejo KM(3), O'Hanlon 
SJ(4), Jarvis JN(5), Loyse A(3), Meintjes G(6), Harrison TS(3), May RC(7), 
Fisher MC(4), Bicanic T(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Infection and Immunity, St. George's University London, London, 
United Kingdom; Department of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, Imperial College 
School of Public Health, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Institute of Infection and Immunity, St. George's University London, London, 
United Kingdom; School of Medicine University of St. Andrews, St. Andrews, 
United Kingdom.
(3)Institute of Infection and Immunity, St. George's University London, London, 
United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, Imperial College School of 
Public Health, London, United Kingdom.
(5)Botswana-UPenn Partnership, Gaborone, Botswana; Division of Infectious 
Diseases, Department of Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America; Department 
of Clinical Research, Faculty of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, London School 
of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
(6)Division of Infectious Diseases and HIV Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa; Institute of Infectious 
Disease and Molecular Medicine, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South 
Africa.
(7)Institute of Microbiology and Infection and the School of Biosciences, 
University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom; National Institute for 
Health Research (NIHR) Surgical Reconstruction and Microbiology Research Centre, 
University Hospitals of Birmingham National Health Service (NHS) Foundation 
Trust, Queen Elizabeth Hospital Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom.

Cryptococcal meningitis is a major cause of mortality throughout the developing 
world, yet little is known about the genetic markers underlying Cryptococcal 
virulence and patient outcome. We studied a cohort of 230 Cryptococcus 
neoformans (Cn) isolates from HIV-positive South African clinical trial patients 
with detailed clinical follow-up using multi-locus sequence typing and in vitro 
phenotypic virulence assays, correlating these data with clinical and fungal 
markers of disease in the patient. South African Cn displayed high levels of 
genetic diversity and locus variability compared to globally distributed types, 
and we identified 50 sequence types grouped within the main molecular types VNI, 
VNII and VNB, with 72% of isolates typed into one of seven 'high frequency' 
sequence types. Spatial analysis of patients' cryptococcal genotype was not 
shown to be clustered geographically, which might argue against recent local 
acquisition and in favour of reactivation of latent infection. Through 
comparison of MLST genotyping data with clinical parameters, we found a 
relationship between genetic lineage and clinical outcome, with patients 
infected with the VNB lineage having significantly worse survival (n=8, HR 3.35, 
CI 1.51-7.20, p=0.003), and this was maintained even after adjustment for known 
prognostic indicators and treatment regimen. Comparison of fungal genotype with 
in vitro phenotype (phagocytosis, laccase activity and CSF survival) performed 
on a subset of 89 isolates revealed evidence of lineage-associated virulence 
phenotype, with the VNII lineage displaying increased laccase activity (p=0.001) 
and ex vivo CSF survival (p=0.0001). These findings show that Cryptococcus 
neoformans is a phenotypically heterogeneous pathogen, and that lineage plays an 
important role in cryptococcal virulence during human infection. Furthermore, a 
detailed understanding of the genetic diversity in Southern Africa will support 
further investigation into how genetic diversity is structured across African 
environments, allowing assessment of the risks different ecotypes pose to 
infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0003847
PMCID: PMC4482434
PMID: 26110902 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.