1. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2015 Aug;22(4):T105-22. doi: 10.1530/ERC-15-0241. Epub
2015  Jun 25.

15 YEARS OF PARAGANGLIOMA: The association of pituitary adenomas and 
phaeochromocytomas or paragangliomas.

O'Toole SM(1), Dénes J(1), Robledo M(1), Stratakis CA(1), Korbonits M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of EndocrinologyBarts and the London School of Medicine, Queen 
Mary University of London, London EC1M 6BQ, UKHereditary Endocrine Cancer 
GroupSpanish National Cancer Center, Madrid and ISCIII Center for Biomedical 
Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), Madrid, SpainSection on Endocrinology and 
Genetics Eunice Kennedy Shriver Institute of Child Health and Human Development, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(2)Department of EndocrinologyBarts and the London School of Medicine, Queen 
Mary University of London, London EC1M 6BQ, UKHereditary Endocrine Cancer 
GroupSpanish National Cancer Center, Madrid and ISCIII Center for Biomedical 
Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), Madrid, SpainSection on Endocrinology and 
Genetics Eunice Kennedy Shriver Institute of Child Health and Human Development, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA m.korbonits@qmul.ac.uk.

The combination of pituitary adenomas (PA) and phaeochromocytomas (phaeo) or 
paragangliomas (PGL) is a rare event. Although these endocrine tumours may occur 
together by coincidence, there is mounting evidence that, in at least some 
cases, classical phaeo/PGL-predisposing genes may also play a role in pituitary 
tumorigenesis. A new condition that we termed '3Pas' for the association of PA 
with phaeo and/or PGL was recently described in patients with succinate 
dehydrogenase mutations and PAs. It should also be noted that the classical 
tumour suppressor gene, MEN1 that is the archetype of the PA-predisposing genes, 
is also rarely associated with phaeos in both mice and humans with MEN1 defects. 
In this report, we review the data leading to the discovery of 3PAs, other 
associations linking PAs with phaeos and/or PGLs, and the corresponding clinical 
and molecular genetics.

© 2015 Society for Endocrinology.

DOI: 10.1530/ERC-15-0241
PMID: 26113600 [Indexed for MEDLINE]