1. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 26;10(6):e0130703. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0130703. 
eCollection 2015.

Transcriptome Profile of the Response of Paracoccidioides spp. to a Camphene 
Thiosemicarbazide Derivative.

do Carmo Silva L(1), Tamayo Ossa DP(2), Castro SV(1), Bringel Pires L(3), Alves 
de Oliveira CM(3), Conceição da Silva C(4), Coelho NP(4), Bailão AM(1), 
Parente-Rocha JA(1), Soares CM(1), Ruiz OH(2), Ochoa JG(2), Pereira M(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratório de Biologia Molecular, Instituto de Patologia Tropical e Saúde 
Pública Universidade Federal de Goiás, Goiânia, Brazil.
(2)Unidad de Biología Celular y Molecular, Corporación para Investigaciones 
Biológicas (CIB) and Facultad de Medicina Universidad de Antioquia, Medellín, 
Colombia.
(3)Laboratório de Produtos Naturais, Instituto de Química, Universidade Federal 
de Goiás, Goiânia, Brazil.
(4)Laboratório de Fitoquímica e Síntese Orgânica, Departamento de Química, 
Universidade Estadual de Maringá, Paraná, Brazil.

Paracoccidioidomycosis (PCM) is a systemic granulomatous human mycosis caused by 
fungi of the genus Paracoccidioides, which is geographically restricted to Latin 
America. Inhalation of spores, the infectious particles of the fungus, is a 
common route of infection. The PCM treatment of choice is azoles such as 
itraconazole, but sulfonamides and amphotericin B are used in some cases despite 
their toxicity to mammalian cells. The current availability of treatments 
highlights the need to identify and characterize novel targets for antifungal 
treatment of PCM as well as the need to search for new antifungal compounds 
obtained from natural sources or by chemical synthesis. To this end, we 
evaluated the antifungal activity of a camphene thiosemicarbazide derivative 
(TSC-C) compound on Paracoccidioides yeast. To determine the response of 
Paracoccidioides spp. to TSC-C, we analyzed the transcriptional profile of the 
fungus after 8 h of contact with the compound. The results demonstrate that 
Paracoccidioides lutzii induced the expression of genes related to metabolism; 
cell cycle and DNA processing; biogenesis of cellular components; cell 
transduction/signal; cell rescue, defense and virulence; cellular transport, 
transport facilities and transport routes; energy; protein synthesis; protein 
fate; transcription; and other proteins without classification. Additionally, we 
observed intensely inhibited genes related to protein synthesis. Analysis by 
fluorescence microscopy and flow cytometry revealed that the compound induced 
the production of reactive oxygen species. Using an isolate with down-regulated 
SOD1 gene expression (SOD1-aRNA), we sought to determine the function of this 
gene in the defense of Paracoccidioides yeast cells against the compound. Mutant 
cells were more susceptible to TSC-C, demonstrating the importance of this gene 
in response to the compound. The results presented herein suggest that TSC-C is 
a promising candidate for PCM treatment.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0130703
PMCID: PMC4483234
PMID: 26114868 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.