1. BMC Genomics. 2015 Jul 7;16:506. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-1656-4.

Arterial endothelial methylome: differential DNA methylation in 
athero-susceptible disturbed flow regions in vivo.

Jiang YZ(1), Manduchi E(2), Stoeckert CJ Jr(3), Davies PF(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine and Institute for Medicine & 
Engineering, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 1010 
Vagelos Building, 3340 Smith Walk, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA. 
jyizhou@mail.med.upenn.edu.
(2)Department of Genetics and Institute for Biomedical Informatics, Perelman 
School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA. 
manduchi@upenn.edu.
(3)Department of Genetics and Institute for Biomedical Informatics, Perelman 
School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA. 
stoeckrt@upenn.edu.
(4)Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine and Institute for Medicine & 
Engineering, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 1010 
Vagelos Building, 3340 Smith Walk, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA. 
pfd@mail.med.upenn.edu.

BACKGROUND: Atherosclerosis is a heterogeneously distributed disease of arteries 
in which the endothelium plays an important central role. Spatial transcriptome 
profiling of endothelium in pre-lesional arteries has demonstrated differential 
phenotypes primed for athero-susceptibility at hemodynamic sites associated with 
disturbed blood flow. DNA methylation is a powerful epigenetic regulator of 
endothelial transcription recently associated with flow characteristics. We 
investigated differential DNA methylation in flow region-specific aortic 
endothelial cells in vivo in adult domestic male and female swine.
RESULTS: Genome-wide DNA methylation was profiled in endothelial cells (EC) 
isolated from two robust locations of differing patho-susceptibility:--an 
athero-susceptible site located at the inner curvature of the aortic arch (AA) 
and an athero-protected region in the descending thoracic (DT) aorta. Complete 
methylated DNA immunoprecipitation sequencing (MeDIP-seq) identified over 5500 
endothelial differentially methylated regions (DMRs). DMR density was 
significantly enriched in exons and 5'UTR sequences of annotated genes, 60 of 
which are linked to cardiovascular disease. The set of DMR-associated genes was 
enriched in transcriptional regulation, pattern specification HOX loci, 
oxidative stress and the ER stress adaptive pathway, all categories linked to 
athero-susceptible endothelium. Examination of the relationship between DMR and 
mRNA in HOXA genes demonstrated a significant inverse relationship between CpG 
island promoter methylation and gene expression. Methylation-specific PCR (MSP) 
confirmed differential CpG methylation of HOXA genes, the ER stress gene ATF4, 
inflammatory regulator microRNA-10a and ARHGAP25 that encodes a negative 
regulator of Rho GTPases involved in cytoskeleton remodeling. Gender-specific 
DMRs associated with ciliogenesis that may be linked to defects in cilia 
development were also identified in AA DMRs.
CONCLUSIONS: An endothelial methylome analysis identifies epigenetic DMR 
characteristics associated with transcriptional regulation in regions of 
atherosusceptibility in swine aorta in vivo. The data represent the first 
methylome blueprint for spatio-temporal analyses of lesion susceptibility 
predisposing to endothelial dysfunction in complex flow environments in vivo.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-015-1656-4
PMCID: PMC4492093
PMID: 26148682 [Indexed for MEDLINE]