1. Dev Biol. 2015 Sep 1;405(1):96-107. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.06.020. Epub
2015  Jun 30.

Gdf5 progenitors give rise to fibrocartilage cells that mineralize via hedgehog 
signaling to form the zonal enthesis.

Dyment NA(1), Breidenbach AP(2), Schwartz AG(3), Russell RP(4), Aschbacher-Smith 
L(5), Liu H(5), Hagiwara Y(6), Jiang R(5), Thomopoulos S(3), Butler DL(2), Rowe 
DW(4).

Author information:
(1)Center for Regenerative Medicine and Skeletal Development, School of Dental 
Medicine, University of Connecticut Health Center, United States. Electronic 
address: dyment@uchc.edu.
(2)Biomedical Engineering Program, College of Engineering and Applied Science, 
University of Cincinnati, United States.
(3)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Washington University in St. Louis, United 
States.
(4)Center for Regenerative Medicine and Skeletal Development, School of Dental 
Medicine, University of Connecticut Health Center, United States.
(5)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical 
Center, United States.
(6)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Nippon Medical School Hospital, Tokyo, 
Japan.

The sequence of events that leads to the formation of a functionally graded 
enthesis is not clearly defined. The current study demonstrates that clonal 
expansion of Gdf5 progenitors contributes to linear growth of the enthesis. 
Prior to mineralization, Col1+ cells in the enthesis appose Col2+ cells of the 
underlying primary cartilage. At the onset of enthesis mineralization, cells at 
the base of the enthesis express alkaline phosphatase, Indian hedgehog, and ColX 
as they mineralize. The mineralization front then extends towards the tendon 
midsubstance as cells above the front become encapsulated in mineralized 
fibrocartilage over time. The hedgehog (Hh) pathway regulates this process, as 
Hh-responsive Gli1+ cells within the developing enthesis mature from 
unmineralized to mineralized fibrochondrocytes in response to activated 
signaling. Hh signaling is required for mineralization, as tissue-specific 
deletion of its obligate transducer Smoothened in the developing tendon and 
enthesis cells leads to significant reductions in the apposition of mineralized 
fibrocartilage. Together, these findings provide a spatiotemporal map of events 
- from expansion of the embryonic progenitor pool to synthesis of the collagen 
template and finally mineralization of this template - that leads to the 
formation of the mature zonal enthesis. These results can inform future 
tendon-to-bone repair strategies to create a mechanically functional enthesis in 
which tendon collagen fibers are anchored to bone through mineralized 
fibrocartilage.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.06.020
PMCID: PMC4529782
PMID: 26141957 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: COMPETING INTERESTS The authors declare no 
competing financial interests.