1. Arch Oral Biol. 2015 Sep;60(9):1356-67. doi:
10.1016/j.archoralbio.2015.06.016.  Epub 2015 Jun 23.

Novel missense mutation of the FAM83H gene causes retention of amelogenin and a 
mild clinical phenotype of hypocalcified enamel.

Urzúa B(1), Martínez C(2), Ortega-Pinto A(3), Adorno D(4), Morales-Bozo I(5), 
Riadi G(6), Jara L(7), Plaza A(8), Lefimil C(9), Lozano C(10), Reyes M(11).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Research in Dental Sciences, Faculty of Dentistry, University 
of Chile, Sergio Livingstone Ave. N° 943, Independencia, Santiago, Chile. 
Electronic address: brurzua@gmail.com.
(2)Institute for Research in Dental Sciences, Faculty of Dentistry, University 
of Chile, Sergio Livingstone Ave. N° 943, Independencia, Santiago, Chile. 
Electronic address: carolina_aml@yahoo.com.
(3)Department of Pathology and Oral Medicine, Faculty of Dentistry, University 
of Chile, Sergio Livingstone Ave. N° 943, Independencia, Santiago, Chile. 
Electronic address: aveortega@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Pathology and Oral Medicine, Faculty of Dentistry, University 
of Chile, Sergio Livingstone Ave. N° 943, Independencia, Santiago, Chile. 
Electronic address: daniadorno@gmail.com.
(5)Institute for Research in Dental Sciences, Faculty of Dentistry, University 
of Chile, Sergio Livingstone Ave. N° 943, Independencia, Santiago, Chile. 
Electronic address: irenemoralesbozo@gmail.com.
(6)Center of Bioinformatics and Molecular Simulations, CBSM, Faculty of 
Engineering, University of Talca, 2 norte Ave. N° 685, Talca, Chile. Electronic 
address: griadi@gmail.com.
(7)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of Chile, 
Independencia Ave. N° 1027, Santiago, Chile. Electronic address: 
ljara@med.uchile.cl.
(8)Institute for Research in Dental Sciences, Faculty of Dentistry, University 
of Chile, Sergio Livingstone Ave. N° 943, Independencia, Santiago, Chile. 
Electronic address: anitaplazaflores@yahoo.com.
(9)Institute for Research in Dental Sciences, Faculty of Dentistry, University 
of Chile, Sergio Livingstone Ave. N° 943, Independencia, Santiago, Chile. 
Electronic address: claulefi@gmail.com.
(10)Institute for Research in Dental Sciences, Faculty of Dentistry, University 
of Chile, Sergio Livingstone Ave. N° 943, Independencia, Santiago, Chile. 
Electronic address: carlalozan@gmail.com.
(11)Department of Pathology and Oral Medicine, Faculty of Dentistry, University 
of Chile, Sergio Livingstone Ave. N° 943, Independencia, Santiago, Chile. 
Electronic address: montserrat.reyes.r@gmail.com.

OBJECTIVE: Amelogenesis imperfecta (AI) is a group of clinically and genetically 
heterogeneous inherited conditions, causing alterations in the structure of 
enamel and chemical composition of enamel matrix during development. The 
objective of this study was to compare the clinical, radiographic, histological 
and immunohistochemical phenotypes of subjects affected with hypocalcified AI 
from three Chilean families and identify causal mutations in the FAM83H gene.
DESIGN: The diagnosis was made using clinical, radiographic, histological and 
genealogical data from the patients, who were evaluated according to the 
classification criteria by Witkop. PCR and Sanger sequencing of the complete 
coding sequence and surrounding intron regions of the FAM83H gene were 
conducted. The structural study of the affected teeth was performed with light 
microscopy, scanning electron microscopy and immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: The probands of the three families were diagnosed with hypocalcified 
AI, but in only one of them the missense variant p.Gly557Cys was identified. 
This variant was not present in the SNP database or in 100 healthy controls and 
segregated with the disease in the affected family. Using light microscopy, a 
normal prismatic structure was observed in all three cases. However, the 
ultrastructure was found to be affected in two of the cases, showing persistence 
of organic matter including amelogenins.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that FAM83H missense mutation reported in one 
of the families analyzed in this study might cause a phenotype of hypocalcified 
enamel more attenuated with retention of amelogenin.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2015.06.016
PMID: 26142250 [Indexed for MEDLINE]