1. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 10;10(7):e0132533. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0132533. 
eCollection 2015.

Genogeography and Immune Epitope Characteristics of Hepatitis B Virus Genotype C 
Reveals Two Distinct Types: Asian and Papua-Pacific.

Thedja MD(1), Muljono DH(2), Ie SI(3), Sidarta E(3), Turyadi(3), Verhoef J(4), 
Marzuki S(5).

Author information:
(1)Eijkman Institute for Molecular Biology, Jakarta, Indonesia; Eijkman Winkler 
Institute, University Medical Centre (UMC) Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(2)Eijkman Institute for Molecular Biology, Jakarta, Indonesia; Faculty of 
Medicine, Hasanuddin University, Makassar, Indonesia; Sydney Medical School, 
University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
(3)Eijkman Institute for Molecular Biology, Jakarta, Indonesia.
(4)Eijkman Winkler Institute, University Medical Centre (UMC) Utrecht, Utrecht, 
The Netherlands.
(5)Eijkman Institute for Molecular Biology, Jakarta, Indonesia; Department of 
Medicine, Monash Medical Centre, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, 
Australia.

Distribution of hepatitis B virus (HBV) genotypes/subgenotypes is geographically 
and ethnologically specific. In the Indonesian archipelago, HBV genotype C 
(HBV/C) is prevalent with high genome variability, reflected by the presence of 
13 of currently existing 16 subgenotypes. We investigated the association 
between HBV/C molecular characteristics with host ethnicity and geographical 
distribution by examining various subgenotypes of HBV/C isolates from the Asia 
and Pacific region, with further analysis on the immune epitope characteristics 
of the core and surface proteins. Phylogenetic tree was constructed based on 
complete HBV/C genome sequences from Asia and Pacific region, and genetic 
distance between isolates was also examined. HBV/C surface and core immune 
epitopes were analyzed and grouped by comparing the amino acid residue 
characteristics and geographical origins. Based on phylogenetic tree and 
geographical origins of isolates, two major groups of HBV/C 
isolates--East-Southeast Asia and Papua-Pacific--were identified. Analysis of 
core and surface immune epitopes supported these findings with several amino 
acid substitutions distinguishing the East-Southeast Asia isolates from the 
Papua-Pacific isolates. A west-to-east gradient of HBsAg subtype distribution 
was observed with adrq+ prominent in the East and Southeast Asia and adrq- in 
the Pacific, with several adrq-indeterminate subtypes observed in Papua and 
Papua New Guinea (PNG). This study indicates that HBV/C isolates can be 
classified into two types, the Asian and the Papua-Pacific, based on the virus 
genome diversity, immune epitope characteristics, and geographical distribution, 
with Papua and PNG as the molecular evolutionary admixture region in the 
switching from adrq+ to adrq-.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0132533
PMCID: PMC4498642
PMID: 26162099 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.