1. Int J Exp Pathol. 2015 Aug;96(4):203-31. doi: 10.1111/iep.12135. Epub 2015 Jul
 15.

Fell-Muir Lecture: Heparan sulphate and the art of cell regulation: a polymer 
chain conducts the protein orchestra.

Gallagher J(1).

Author information:
(1)Cancer Research UK Manchester Institute, Institute of Cancer Sciences, 
Paterson Building, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.

Heparan sulphate (HS) sits at the interface of the cell and the extracellular 
matrix. It is a member of the glycosaminoglycan family of anionic 
polysaccharides with unique structural features designed for protein interaction 
and regulation. Its client proteins include soluble effectors (e.g. growth 
factors, morphogens, chemokines), membrane receptors and cell adhesion proteins 
such as fibronectin, fibrillin and various types of collagen. The 
protein-binding properties of HS, together with its strategic positioning in the 
pericellular domain, are indicative of key roles in mediating the flow of 
regulatory signals between cells and their microenvironment. The control of 
transmembrane signalling is a fundamental element in the complex biology of HS. 
It seems likely that, in some way, HS orchestrates diverse signalling pathways 
to facilitate information processing inside the cell. A dictionary definition of 
an orchestra is 'a large group of musicians who play together on various 
instruments …' to paraphrase, the HS orchestra is 'a large group of proteins 
that play together on various receptors'. HS conducts this orchestra to ensure 
that proteins hit the right notes on their receptors but, in the manner of a 
true conductor, does it also set 'the musical pulse' and create rhythm and 
harmony attractive to the cell? This is too big a question to answer but fun to 
think about as you read this review.

© 2015 The Authors. International Journal of Experimental Pathology published by 
John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Company of the International Journal of 
Experimental Pathology (CIJEP).

DOI: 10.1111/iep.12135
PMCID: PMC4561558
PMID: 26173450 [Indexed for MEDLINE]