1. JIMD Rep. 2016;26:13-9. doi: 10.1007/8904_2015_479. Epub 2015 Aug 4.

Periventricular Calcification, Abnormal Pterins and Dry Thickened Skin: 
Expanding the Clinical Spectrum of RMND1?

Casey JP(1)(2), Crushell E(2)(3), Thompson K(4), Twomey E(5), He L(4), Ennis 
S(2), Philip RK(6), Taylor RW(4), King MD(7), Lynch SA(8).

Author information:
(1)Genetics Department, Temple Street Children's University Hospital, Dublin 1, 
Ireland.
(2)School of Medicine and Medical Sciences, UCD Academic Centre on Rare 
Diseases, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland.
(3)National Centre for Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Temple Street Children's 
University Hospital, Dublin 1, Ireland.
(4)Wellcome Trust Centre for Mitochondrial Research, Institute of Neuroscience, 
The Medical School, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE2 4HH, UK.
(5)Radiology Department, Temple Street Children's University Hospital, Dublin 1, 
Ireland.
(6)Division of Neonatology, Department of Paediatrics, University Maternity 
Hospital Limerick, Ennis Road, Limerick, Ireland.
(7)Department of Paediatric Neurology and Clinical Neurophysiology, Temple 
Street Children's University Hospital, Dublin 1, Ireland.
(8)Genetics Department, Temple Street Children's University Hospital, Dublin 1, 
Ireland. sally.lynch@ucd.ie.

BACKGROUND: We report a consanguineous Sudanese family whose two affected sons 
presented with a lethal disorder characterised by severe neonatal lactic 
acidosis, hypertonia, microcephaly and intractable seizures. One child had 
additional unique features of periventricular calcification, abnormal pterins 
and dry thickened skin.
METHODS: Exome enrichment was performed on pooled genomic libraries from the two 
affected children and sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq2000. After quality control 
and variant identification, rare homozygous variants were prioritised. 
Respiratory chain complex activities were measured and normalised to citrate 
synthase activity in cultured patient fibroblasts. RMND1 protein levels were 
analysed by standard Western blotting.
RESULTS: Exome sequencing identified a previously reported homozygous missense 
variant in RMND1 (c.1250G>A; p.Arg417Gln), the gene associated with combined 
oxidation phosphorylation deficiency 11 (COXPD11), as the most likely cause of 
this disorder. This finding suggests the presence of a mutation hotspot at cDNA 
position 1250. Patient fibroblasts showed a severe decrease in mitochondrial 
respiratory chain complex I, III and IV activities and protein expression, 
albeit with normal RMND1 levels, supporting a generalised disorder of 
mitochondrial translation caused by loss of function.
CONCLUSIONS: The current study implicates RMND1 in the development of 
calcification and dermatological abnormalities, likely due to defective 
ATP-dependent processes in vascular smooth muscle cells and skin. Review of 
reported patients with RMND1 mutations shows intra-familial variability and 
evidence of an evolving phenotype, which may account for the clinical 
variability. We suggest that COXPD11 should be considered in the differential 
for patients with calcification and evidence of a mitochondrial disorder.

DOI: 10.1007/8904_2015_479
PMCID: PMC5580737
PMID: 26238252

Conflict of interest statement: Jillian P. Casey, Ellen Crushell, Kyle Thompson, 
Eilish Twomey, Langping He, Sean Ennis, Roy K. Philip, Robert W. Taylor, Mary D. 
King and Sally Ann Lynch declare that they have no conflict of interest.