1. Breast Cancer Res. 2015 Aug 5;17(1):100. doi: 10.1186/s13058-015-0611-2.

Treatment with insulin (analogues) and breast cancer risk in diabetics; a 
systematic review and meta-analysis of in vitro, animal and human evidence.

Bronsveld HK(1)(2), ter Braak B(3), Karlstad Ø(4), Vestergaard P(5), 
Starup-Linde J(6)(7), Bazelier MT(8), De Bruin ML(9), de Boer A(10), Siezen 
CL(11), van de Water B(12), van der Laan JW(13)(14)(15), Schmidt MK(16).

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular Pathology, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, 
Plesmanlaan 121, 1066 CX, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. h.bronsveld@nki.nl.
(2)Division of Pharmacoepidemiology & Clinical Pharmacology, Utrecht Institute 
for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Utrecht, Netherlands. 
h.bronsveld@nki.nl.
(3)Division of Toxicology, Leiden Academic Centre for Drug Research, Leiden 
University, Leiden, The Netherlands. basterbraak@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Pharmacoepidemiology, Norwegian Institute of Public Health, 
Oslo, Norway. Oystein.Karlstad@fhi.no.
(5)Departments of Clinical Medicine and Endocrinology, Aalborg University, 
Aalborg, Denmark. p-vest@post4.tele.dk.
(6)Departments of Clinical Medicine and Endocrinology, Aalborg University, 
Aalborg, Denmark. Jakob.Linde@auh.rm.dk.
(7)Department of Endocrinology and Internal Medicine (MEA), Aarhus University 
Hospital THG, Aarhus, Denmark. Jakob.Linde@auh.rm.dk.
(8)Division of Pharmacoepidemiology & Clinical Pharmacology, Utrecht Institute 
for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Utrecht, Netherlands. 
M.T.Bazelier@uu.nl.
(9)Division of Pharmacoepidemiology & Clinical Pharmacology, Utrecht Institute 
for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Utrecht, Netherlands. 
M.L.deBruin@uu.nl.
(10)Division of Pharmacoepidemiology & Clinical Pharmacology, Utrecht Institute 
for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Utrecht, Netherlands. 
a.deboer@uu.nl.
(11)Medicines Evaluation Board (MEB), Utrecht, The Netherlands. 
cl.siezen@cbg-meb.nl.
(12)Division of Toxicology, Leiden Academic Centre for Drug Research, Leiden 
University, Leiden, The Netherlands. water_b@lacdr.leidenuniv.nl.
(13)Division of Toxicology, Leiden Academic Centre for Drug Research, Leiden 
University, Leiden, The Netherlands. jw.vd.laan@cbg-meb.nl.
(14)Medicines Evaluation Board (MEB), Utrecht, The Netherlands. 
jw.vd.laan@cbg-meb.nl.
(15)Centre for Health Protection, National Institute for Public Health and the 
Environment (RIVM), Bilthoven, The Netherlands. jw.vd.laan@cbg-meb.nl.
(16)Division of Molecular Pathology, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, 
Plesmanlaan 121, 1066 CX, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. mk.schmidt@nki.nl.

INTRODUCTION: Several studies have suggested that anti-diabetic insulin analogue 
treatment might increase cancer risk. The aim of this study was to review the 
postulated association between insulin and insulin analogue treatment and breast 
cancer development, and plausible mechanisms.
METHOD: A systematic literature search was performed on breast cell-line, animal 
and human studies using the key words 'insulin analogue' and 'breast neoplasia' 
in MEDLINE at PubMed, EMBASE, and ISI Web of Science databases. A quantitative 
and qualitative review was performed on the epidemiological data; due to a 
limited number of reported estimates, a meta-analysis was performed for glargine 
only. A comprehensive overview was composed for in vitro and animal studies. 
Protein and gene expression was analysed for the cell lines most frequently used 
in the included in vitro studies.
RESULTS: In total 16 in vitro, 5 animal, 2 in vivo human and 29 epidemiological 
papers were included. Insulin AspB10 showed mitogenic properties in vitro and in 
animal studies. Glargine was the only clinically available insulin analogue for 
which an increased proliferative potential was found in breast cancer cell 
lines. However, the pooled analysis of 13 epidemiological studies did not show 
evidence for an association between insulin glargine treatment and an increased 
breast cancer risk (HR 1.04; 95 % CI 0.91-1.17; p=0.49) versus no glargine in 
patients with diabetes mellitus. It has to be taken into account that the number 
of animal studies was limited, and epidemiological studies were underpowered and 
suffered from methodological limitations.
CONCLUSION: There is no compelling evidence that any clinically available 
insulin analogue (Aspart, Determir, Glargine, Glulisine or Lispro), nor human 
insulin increases breast cancer risk. Overall, the data suggests that insulin 
treatment is not involved in breast tumour initiation, but might induce breast 
tumour progression by up regulating mitogenic signalling pathways.

DOI: 10.1186/s13058-015-0611-2
PMCID: PMC4531810
PMID: 26242987 [Indexed for MEDLINE]