1. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 10;10(8):e0134428. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0134428. 
eCollection 2015.

Islet Oxygen Consumption Rate (OCR) Dose Predicts Insulin Independence in 
Clinical Islet Autotransplantation.

Papas KK(1), Bellin MD(2), Sutherland DE(2), Suszynski TM(2), Kitzmann JP(1), 
Avgoustiniatos ES(2), Gruessner AC(3), Mueller KR(1), Beilman GJ(4), Balamurugan 
AN(2), Loganathan G(2), Colton CK(5), Koulmanda M(6), Weir GC(7), Wilhelm JJ(2), 
Qian D(8), Niland JC(8), Hering BJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Cellular Transplantation, Department of Surgery, University of 
Arizona, Tucson, Arizona, United States of America; Department of Surgery, 
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, United States of America; 
Schulze Diabetes Institute, Minneapolis, Minnesota, United States of America.
(2)Department of Surgery, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, 
United States of America; Schulze Diabetes Institute, Minneapolis, Minnesota, 
United States of America.
(3)Institute for Cellular Transplantation, Department of Surgery, University of 
Arizona, Tucson, Arizona, United States of America.
(4)Department of Surgery, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, 
United States of America.
(5)Department of Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(6)The Transplant Institute, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center (BIDMC), 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(7)Joslin Diabetes Center, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(8)Information Science, City of Hope, Duarte, California, United States of 
America.

BACKGROUND: Reliable in vitro islet quality assessment assays that can be 
performed routinely, prospectively, and are able to predict clinical transplant 
outcomes are needed. In this paper we present data on the utility of an assay 
based on cellular oxygen consumption rate (OCR) in predicting clinical islet 
autotransplant (IAT) insulin independence (II). IAT is an attractive model for 
evaluating characterization assays regarding their utility in predicting II due 
to an absence of confounding factors such as immune rejection and 
immunosuppressant toxicity.
METHODS: Membrane integrity staining (FDA/PI), OCR normalized to DNA (OCR/DNA), 
islet equivalent (IE) and OCR (viable IE) normalized to recipient body weight 
(IE dose and OCR dose), and OCR/DNA normalized to islet size index (ISI) were 
used to characterize autoislet preparations (n = 35). Correlation between 
pre-IAT islet product characteristics and II was determined using receiver 
operating characteristic analysis.
RESULTS: Preparations that resulted in II had significantly higher OCR dose and 
IE dose (p<0.001). These islet characterization methods were highly correlated 
with II at 6-12 months post-IAT (area-under-the-curve (AUC) = 0.94 for IE dose 
and 0.96 for OCR dose). FDA/PI (AUC = 0.49) and OCR/DNA (AUC = 0.58) did not 
correlate with II. OCR/DNA/ISI may have some utility in predicting outcome (AUC 
= 0.72).
CONCLUSIONS: Commonly used assays to determine whether a clinical islet 
preparation is of high quality prior to transplantation are greatly lacking in 
sensitivity and specificity. While IE dose is highly predictive, it does not 
take into account islet cell quality. OCR dose, which takes into consideration 
both islet cell quality and quantity, may enable a more accurate and prospective 
evaluation of clinical islet preparations.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0134428
PMCID: PMC4530873
PMID: 26258815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.