1. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 10;10(8):e0135228. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0135228. 
eCollection 2015.

Alteration in metabolic signature and lipid metabolism in patients with angina 
pectoris and myocardial infarction.

Park JY(1), Lee SH(2), Shin MJ(3), Hwang GS(4).

Author information:
(1)Integrated Metabolomics Research Group, Western Seoul Center, Korea Basic 
Science Institute, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Cardiology Division, Department of Internal Medicine, Yonsei University 
College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Public Health Sciences, Graduate School, Korea University, 
Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(4)Integrated Metabolomics Research Group, Western Seoul Center, Korea Basic 
Science Institute, Seoul, Republic of Korea; Department of Life Science, Ewha 
Womans University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Lipid metabolites are indispensable regulators of physiological and pathological 
processes, including atherosclerosis and coronary artery disease (CAD). However, 
the complex changes in lipid metabolites and metabolism that occur in patients 
with these conditions are incompletely understood. We performed lipid profiling 
to identify alterations in lipid metabolism in patients with angina and 
myocardial infarction (MI). Global lipid profiling was applied to serum samples 
from patients with CAD (angina and MI) and age-, sex-, and body mass 
index-matched healthy subjects using ultra-performance liquid 
chromatography/quadruple time-of-flight mass spectrometry and multivariate 
statistical analysis. A multivariate analysis showed a clear separation between 
the patients with CAD and normal controls. Lysophosphatidylcholine (lysoPC) and 
lysophosphatidylethanolamine (lysoPE) species containing unsaturated fatty acids 
and free fatty acids were associated with an increased risk of CAD, whereas 
species of lysoPC and lyso-alkyl PC containing saturated fatty acids were 
associated with a decreased risk. Additionally, PC species containing palmitic 
acid, diacylglycerol, sphingomyelin, and ceramide were associated with an 
increased risk of MI, whereas PE-plasmalogen and phosphatidylinositol species 
were associated with a decreased risk. In MI patients, we found strong positive 
correlation between lipid metabolites related to the sphingolipid pathway, 
sphingomyelin, and ceramide and acute inflammatory markers (high-sensitivity 
C-reactive protein). The results of this study demonstrate altered signatures in 
lipid metabolism in patients with angina or MI. Lipidomic profiling could 
provide the information to identity the specific lipid metabolites under the 
presence of disturbed metabolic pathways in patients with CAD.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0135228
PMCID: PMC4530944
PMID: 26258408 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.