1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2015 Oct;136(4):1007-17. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaci.2015.06.007. Epub 2015 Aug 5.

XRCC4 deficiency in human subjects causes a marked neurological phenotype but no 
overt immunodeficiency.

Guo C(1), Nakazawa Y(1), Woodbine L(2), Björkman A(3), Shimada M(4), Fawcett 
H(2), Jia N(1), Ohyama K(5), Li TS(6), Nagayama Y(7), Mitsutake N(8), 
Pan-Hammarström Q(3), Gennery AR(9), Lehmann AR(2), Jeggo PA(10), Ogi T(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Research Institute of Environmental Medicine (RIeM), 
Nagoya University, Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, Japan; Nagasaki University 
Research Centre for Genomic Instability and Carcinogenesis (NRGIC), Nagasaki, 
Japan; Department of Molecular Medicine, Atomic Bomb Disease Institute, Nagasaki 
University, Nagasaki, Japan.
(2)Genome Damage and Stability Centre, University of Sussex, Falmer, Brighton, 
United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska 
University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Nagasaki University Research Centre for Genomic Instability and 
Carcinogenesis (NRGIC), Nagasaki, Japan; Department of Molecular Medicine, 
Atomic Bomb Disease Institute, Nagasaki University, Nagasaki, Japan.
(5)Nagasaki University Research Centre for Genomic Instability and 
Carcinogenesis (NRGIC), Nagasaki, Japan; Course of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki University, Nagasaki, Japan.
(6)Department of Stem Cell Biology, Atomic Bomb Disease Institute, Nagasaki 
University, Nagasaki, Japan.
(7)Department of Molecular Medicine, Atomic Bomb Disease Institute, Nagasaki 
University, Nagasaki, Japan.
(8)Nagasaki University Research Centre for Genomic Instability and 
Carcinogenesis (NRGIC), Nagasaki, Japan; Department of Radiation Medical 
Sciences, Atomic Bomb Disease Institute, Nagasaki University, Nagasaki, Japan.
(9)Institute of Cellular Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne 
Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom.
(10)Genome Damage and Stability Centre, University of Sussex, Falmer, Brighton, 
United Kingdom. Electronic address: p.a.jeggo@sussex.ac.uk.
(11)Department of Genetics, Research Institute of Environmental Medicine (RIeM), 
Nagoya University, Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, Japan; Nagasaki University 
Research Centre for Genomic Instability and Carcinogenesis (NRGIC), Nagasaki, 
Japan; Department of Molecular Medicine, Atomic Bomb Disease Institute, Nagasaki 
University, Nagasaki, Japan; Microbial Genetics Laboratory, Genetic Strains 
Research Center, National Institute of Genetics, Mishima, Japan. Electronic 
address: togi@riem.nagoya-u.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Nonhomologous end-joining (NHEJ) is the major DNA double-strand 
break (DSB) repair mechanism in human cells. The final rejoining step requires 
DNA ligase IV (LIG4) together with the partner proteins X-ray repair 
cross-complementing protein 4 (XRCC4) and XRCC4-like factor. Patients with 
mutations in genes encoding LIG4, XRCC4-like factor, or the other NHEJ proteins 
DNA-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit and Artemis are DSB repair 
defective and immunodeficient because of the requirement for NHEJ during V(D)J 
recombination.
OBJECTIVE: We found a patient displaying microcephaly and progressive ataxia but 
a normal immune response. We sought to determine pathogenic mutations and to 
describe the molecular pathogenesis of the patient.
METHODS: We performed next-generation exome sequencing. We evaluated the DSB 
repair activities and V(D)J recombination capacity of the patient's cells, as 
well as performing a standard blood immunologic characterization.
RESULTS: We identified causal mutations in the XRCC4 gene. The patient's cells 
are radiosensitive and display the most severe DSB repair defect we have 
encountered using patient-derived cell lines. In marked contrast, a V(D)J 
recombination plasmid assay revealed that the patient's cells did not display 
the junction abnormalities that are characteristic of other NHEJ-defective cell 
lines. The mutant protein can interact efficiently with LIG4 and functions 
normally in in vitro assays and when transiently expressed in vivo. However, the 
mutation makes the protein unstable, and it undergoes proteasome-mediated 
degradation.
CONCLUSION: Our findings reveal a novel separation of impact phenotype: there is 
a pronounced DSB repair defect and marked clinical neurological manifestation 
but no clinical immunodeficiency.

Copyright © 2015 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2015.06.007
PMID: 26255102 [Indexed for MEDLINE]