1. Front Plant Sci. 2015 Jul 30;6:534. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2015.00534. eCollection 
2015.

Physiological implications of arginine metabolism in plants.

Winter G(1), Todd CD(2), Trovato M(3), Forlani G(4), Funck D(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Plant Physiology and Biochemistry, Department of Biology, 
University of Konstanz , Konstanz, Germany.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Saskatchewan , Saskatoon, SK, Canada.
(3)Department of Biology and Biotechnology, Sapienza University of Rome , Rome, 
Italy.
(4)Laboratory of Plant Physiology and Biochemistry, Department of Life Science 
and Biotechnology, University of Ferrara , Ferrara, Italy.

Nitrogen is a limiting resource for plant growth in most terrestrial habitats 
since large amounts of nitrogen are needed to synthesize nucleic acids and 
proteins. Among the 21 proteinogenic amino acids, arginine has the highest 
nitrogen to carbon ratio, which makes it especially suitable as a storage form 
of organic nitrogen. Synthesis in chloroplasts via ornithine is apparently the 
only operational pathway to provide arginine in plants, and the rate of arginine 
synthesis is tightly regulated by various feedback mechanisms in accordance with 
the overall nutritional status. While several steps of arginine biosynthesis 
still remain poorly characterized in plants, much wider attention has been paid 
to inter- and intracellular arginine transport as well as arginine-derived 
metabolites. A role of arginine as alternative source besides glutamate for 
proline biosynthesis is still discussed controversially and may be prevented by 
differential subcellular localization of enzymes. Apparently, arginine is a 
precursor for nitric oxide (NO), although the molecular mechanism of NO 
production from arginine remains unclear in higher plants. In contrast, 
conversion of arginine to polyamines is well documented, and in several plant 
species also ornithine can serve as a precursor for polyamines. Both NO and 
polyamines play crucial roles in regulating developmental processes as well as 
responses to biotic and abiotic stress. It is thus conceivable that arginine 
catabolism serves on the one hand to mobilize nitrogen storages, while on the 
other hand it may be used to fine-tune development and defense mechanisms 
against stress. This review summarizes the recent advances in our knowledge 
about arginine metabolism, with a special focus on the model plant Arabidopsis 
thaliana, and pinpoints still unresolved critical questions.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2015.00534
PMCID: PMC4520006
PMID: 26284079