1. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 20;10(8):e0135738. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0135738. 
eCollection 2015.

Platelet Activation and Thrombus Formation over IgG Immune Complexes Requires 
Integrin αIIbβ3 and Lyn Kinase.

Zhi H(1), Dai J(2), Liu J(3), Zhu J(4), Newman DK(5), Gao C(6), Newman PJ(7).

Author information:
(1)Blood Research Institute, BloodCenter of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, 
United States of America.
(2)Ruijing Hospital Affiliated Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, 
Shanghai, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Cell Biology, Shanghai Key 
Laboratory of Tumor Microenvironment and Inflammation, Shanghai JiaoTong 
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(4)Blood Research Institute, BloodCenter of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, 
United States of America; Department of Biochemistry, Medical College of 
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, United States of America.
(5)Blood Research Institute, BloodCenter of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, 
United States of America; Department of Microbiology, Medical College of 
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, United States of America; Department of 
Pharmacology and Toxicology, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, 
United States of America.
(6)Blood Research Institute, BloodCenter of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, 
United States of America; Chronic Disease Research Institute, Department of 
Nutrition and Food Hygiene, Zhejiang University School of Public Health, 
Hangzhou, China.
(7)Blood Research Institute, BloodCenter of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, 
United States of America; Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Medical 
College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, United States of America; Department 
of Cell biology, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, United 
States of America.

IgG immune complexes contribute to the etiology and pathogenesis of numerous 
autoimmune disorders, including heparin-induced thrombocytopenia, systemic lupus 
erythematosus, rheumatoid- and collagen-induced arthritis, and chronic 
glomerulonephritis. Patients suffering from immune complex-related disorders are 
known to be susceptible to platelet-mediated thrombotic events. Though the role 
of the Fc receptor, FcγRIIa, in initiating platelet activation is well 
understood, the role of the major platelet adhesion receptor, integrin αIIbβ3, 
in amplifying platelet activation and mediating adhesion and aggregation 
downstream of encountering IgG immune complexes is poorly understood. The goal 
of this investigation was to gain a better understanding of the relative roles 
of these two receptor systems in immune complex-mediated thrombotic 
complications. Human platelets, and mouse platelets genetically engineered to 
differentially express FcγRIIa and αIIbβ3, were allowed to interact with 
IgG-coated surfaces under both static and flow conditions, and their ability to 
spread and form thrombi evaluated in the presence and absence of clinically-used 
fibrinogen receptor antagonists. Although binding of IgG immune complexes to 
FcγRIIa was sufficient for platelet adhesion and initial signal transduction 
events, platelet spreading and thrombus formation over IgG-coated surfaces 
showed an absolute requirement for αIIbβ3 and its ligands. Tyrosine kinases Lyn 
and Syk were found to play key roles in IgG-induced platelet activation events. 
Taken together, our data suggest a complex functional interplay between FcγRIIa, 
Lyn, and αIIbβ3 in immune complex-induced platelet activation. Future studies 
may be warranted to determine whether patients suffering from immune complex 
disorders might benefit from treatment with anti-αIIbβ3-directed therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0135738
PMCID: PMC4546160
PMID: 26291522 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.