1. PLoS Pathog. 2015 Aug 20;11(8):e1005085. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005085. 
eCollection 2015 Aug.

Evolutionary and Functional Analysis of Old World Primate TRIM5 Reveals the 
Ancient Emergence of Primate Lentiviruses and Convergent Evolution Targeting a 
Conserved Capsid Interface.

McCarthy KR(1), Kirmaier A(2), Autissier P(2), Johnson WE(2).

Author information:
(1)Harvard Program in Virology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, 
United States of America; Biology Department, Boston College, Chestnut Hill, 
Massachusetts, United States of America.
(2)Biology Department, Boston College, Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts, United 
States of America.

The widespread distribution of lentiviruses among African primates, and the lack 
of severe pathogenesis in many of these natural reservoirs, are taken as 
evidence for long-term co-evolution between the simian immunodeficiency viruses 
(SIVs) and their primate hosts. Evidence for positive selection acting on 
antiviral restriction factors is consistent with virus-host interactions 
spanning millions of years of primate evolution. However, many restriction 
mechanisms are not virus-specific, and selection cannot be unambiguously 
attributed to any one type of virus. We hypothesized that the restriction factor 
TRIM5, because of its unique specificity for retrovirus capsids, should 
accumulate adaptive changes in a virus-specific fashion, and therefore, that 
phylogenetic reconstruction of TRIM5 evolution in African primates should reveal 
selection by lentiviruses closely related to modern SIVs. We analyzed complete 
TRIM5 coding sequences of 22 Old World primates and identified a tightly-spaced 
cluster of branch-specific adaptions appearing in the Cercopithecinae lineage 
after divergence from the Colobinae around 16 million years ago. Functional 
assays of both extant TRIM5 orthologs and reconstructed ancestral TRIM5 proteins 
revealed that this cluster of adaptations in TRIM5 specifically resulted in the 
ability to restrict Cercopithecine lentiviruses, but had no effect (positive or 
negative) on restriction of other retroviruses, including lentiviruses of 
non-Cercopithecine primates. The correlation between lineage-specific 
adaptations and ability to restrict viruses endemic to the same hosts supports 
the hypothesis that lentiviruses closely related to modern SIVs were present in 
Africa and infecting the ancestors of Cercopithecine primates as far back as 16 
million years ago, and provides insight into the evolution of TRIM5 specificity.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005085
PMCID: PMC4546234
PMID: 26291613 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.