1. PLoS Pathog. 2015 Aug 21;11(8):e1005107. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005107. 
eCollection 2015 Aug.

Active Transport of Phosphorylated Carbohydrates Promotes Intestinal 
Colonization and Transmission of a Bacterial Pathogen.

Sit B(1), Crowley SM(2), Bhullar K(2), Lai CC(1), Tang C(1), Hooda Y(1), 
Calmettes C(1), Khambati H(3), Ma C(2), Brumell JH(4), Schryvers AB(3), Vallance 
BA(2), Moraes TF(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Department of Pediatrics and the Child and Family Research Institute, 
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, University of Calgary, 
Calgary, Alberta, Canada; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 
University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(4)Department of Molecular Genetics and Institute of Medical Science, University 
of Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Program in Cell Biology, Hospital for Sick 
Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; SickKids Inflammatory Bowel Disease Centre, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Efficient acquisition of extracellular nutrients is essential for bacterial 
pathogenesis, however the identities and mechanisms for transport of many of 
these substrates remain unclear. Here, we investigate the predicted iron-binding 
transporter AfuABC and its role in bacterial pathogenesis in vivo. By 
crystallographic, biophysical and in vivo approaches, we show that AfuABC is in 
fact a cyclic hexose/heptose-phosphate transporter with high selectivity and 
specificity for a set of ubiquitous metabolites (glucose-6-phosphate, 
fructose-6-phosphate and sedoheptulose-7-phosphate). AfuABC is conserved across 
a wide range of bacterial genera, including the enteric pathogens EHEC O157:H7 
and its murine-specific relative Citrobacter rodentium, where it lies adjacent 
to genes implicated in sugar sensing and acquisition. C. rodentium ΔafuA was 
significantly impaired in an in vivo murine competitive assay as well as its 
ability to transmit infection from an afflicted to a naïve murine host. 
Sugar-phosphates were present in normal and infected intestinal mucus and stool 
samples, indicating that these metabolites are available within the intestinal 
lumen for enteric bacteria to import during infection. Our study shows that 
AfuABC-dependent uptake of sugar-phosphates plays a critical role during enteric 
bacterial infection and uncovers previously unrecognized roles for these 
metabolites as important contributors to successful pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005107
PMCID: PMC4546632
PMID: 26295949 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.