1. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 25;10(8):e0136474. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0136474. 
eCollection 2015.

Mutations in the DI-DII Linker of Human Parainfluenza Virus Type 3 Fusion 
Protein Result in Diminished Fusion Activity.

Xie W(1), Wen H(1), Chu F(2), Yan S(3), Lin B(4), Xie W(5), Liu Y(1), Ren G(6), 
Zhao L(1), Song Y(1), Sun C(1), Wang Z(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Virology, School of Public Health, Shandong University, Jinan, 
China.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Provincial Hospital affiliated to Shandong 
University, Jinan, China.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan, 
China.
(4)Shandong Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Jinan, China.
(5)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Shandong Tumor Hospital and Institute, 
Jinan, China.
(6)Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Medicine, Shandong 
University, Jinan, China.
(7)Department of Virology, School of Public Health, Shandong University, Jinan, 
China; The Key Laboratory for Experimental Teratology of the Ministry of 
Education, Shandong University, Jinan, China.

Human parainfluenza virus type 3 (HPIV3) can cause severe respiratory tract 
diseases in infants and young children, but no licensed vaccines or antiviral 
agents are currently available for treatment. Fusing the viral and target cell 
membranes is a prerequisite for its entry into host cells and is directly 
mediated by the fusion (F) protein. Although several domains of F are known to 
have important effects on regulating the membrane fusion activity, the roles of 
the DI-DII linker (residues 369-374) of the HPIV3 F protein in the fusogenicity 
still remains ill-defined. To facilitate our understanding of the role of this 
domain might play in F-induced cell-cell fusion, nine single mutations were 
engineered into this domain by site-directed mutagenesis. A vaccinia virus-T7 
RNA polymerase transient expression system was employed to express the wild-type 
or mutated F proteins. These mutants were analyzed for membrane fusion activity, 
cell surface expression, and interaction between F and HN protein. Each of the 
mutated F proteins in this domain has a cell surface expression level similar to 
that of wild-type F. All of them resulted in a significant reduction in 
fusogenic activity in all steps of membrane fusion. Furthermore, all these 
fusion-deficient mutants reduced the amount of the HN-F complexes at the cell 
surface. Together, the results of our work suggest that this region has an 
important effect on the fusogenic activity of F.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0136474
PMCID: PMC4549179
PMID: 26305905 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.