1. Biores Open Access. 2015 Jan 1;4(1):1-15. doi: 10.1089/biores.2014.0052. 
eCollection 2015.

Differential Effects of IFN-β on the Survival and Growth of Human Vascular 
Smooth Muscle and Endothelial Cells.

Sano E(1), Tashiro S(2), Tsumoto K(3), Ueda T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genome Sciences, Graduate School of Frontier Sciences, 
The University of Tokyo , Chiba, Japan .
(2)Department of Medical Genome Sciences, Graduate School of Frontier Sciences, 
The University of Tokyo , Chiba, Japan . ; Department of Medical Proteomics 
Laboratory, Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo , Tokyo, Japan 
.
(3)Department of Medical Genome Sciences, Graduate School of Frontier Sciences, 
The University of Tokyo , Chiba, Japan . ; Department of Medical Proteomics 
Laboratory, Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo , Tokyo, Japan 
. ; Department of Chemistry and Biotechnology, School of Engineering, The 
University of Tokyo , Tokyo, Japan .

It has been documented that interferon (IFN)-β is effective against the genesis 
of atherosclerosis or hyperplastic arterial disease in animal model. The main 
mechanism of the efficacy was antiproliferative action on the growth of vascular 
smooth muscle cells (SMC). To understand more about the mechanisms that are 
responsible for the efficacy, we examined minutely the effects of IFN-β on the 
apoptosis and growth of vascular SMC and endothelial cells (EC). IFN-β enhanced 
SMC apoptosis in serum starved medium. Conversely, EC apoptosis induced by serum 
and growth factor deprivation was inhibited by IFN-β. The induction of SMC 
apoptosis and anti-apoptotic effect on EC linked to the expression of 
pro-apoptotic bax mRNA and caspase-3 activities. Anti-apoptotic bcl-2 mRNA was 
also up-regulated in EC. IFN-β inhibited SMC growth in a dose dependent manner. 
However, the growth of EC was rather enhanced by a low dose of IFNs. The 
antiproliferative effect on SMC associated with the activation of p21 and 
increase of G0/G1 arrested cells. The growth stimulation on EC was considered to 
link with increase of S and G2/M phase cells. SMC produced IFN-β in response to 
various stimulants. However, IFN-β was not induced in EC. These suggested that 
endogenous IFN-β from SMC may act on EC and affect to EC functions. In this 
study, it was clarified that IFN-β enhances SMC apoptosis and inhibits the EC 
apoptosis, and stimulates the EC growth. These effects were considered to 
contribute to a cure against hyperplastic arterial diseases as the mechanisms in 
the efficacy of IFN-β.

DOI: 10.1089/biores.2014.0052
PMCID: PMC4497630
PMID: 26309778