1. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2016 Feb;24(2):107-16. doi:
10.1016/j.jagp.2015.04.007.  Epub 2015 Jun 21.

Frontotemporal Dementia and Psychiatric Illness: Emerging Clinical and 
Biological Links in Gene Carriers.

Block NR(1), Sha SJ(2), Karydas AM(3), Fong JC(3), De May MG(3), Miller BL(3), 
Rosen HJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Memory and Aging Center, University of California, 
San Francisco, CA. Electronic address: nikolas.block@ucsf.edu.
(2)Department of Neurology, Stanford Center for Memory Disorders, Stanford 
University, Palo Alto, CA.
(3)Department of Neurology, Memory and Aging Center, University of California, 
San Francisco, CA.

OBJECTIVE: To describe psychiatric presentations in individuals with genetic 
mutations causing frontotemporal dementia (FTD).
DESIGN: Case descriptions from five carriers of FTD-related gene mutations with 
symptoms associated with non-neurodegenerative psychiatric disease.
SETTING: A comprehensive research program investigating genetic and non-genetic 
FTD at the University of California, San Francisco Memory and Aging Center.
PARTICIPANTS: Three proband and two non-proband gene carriers.
MEASUREMENTS: Medical history and neurological examination, neuropsychological 
testing, magnetic resonance and/or positron emission tomography imaging, and a 
genetic analysis to screen for dementia-related mutations. Genetic status was 
unknown at the time of initial evaluation.
RESULTS: The chosen cases are illustrative of the variety of presentations of 
psychiatric symptoms in FTD gene carriers. In some cases, a 
non-neurodegenerative psychiatric illness was diagnosed based on specific 
symptoms, but the diagnosis may have been inappropriate based on the overall 
syndrome. In other cases, symptoms closely resembling those seen in 
non-neurodegenerative psychiatric illness did occur, in some cases immediately 
preceding the development of dementia, and in other cases developing a decade 
prior to dementia symptoms.
CONCLUSIONS: Psychiatric symptoms in FTD gene carriers can be very similar to 
those seen in non-neurodegenerative psychiatric illness. Psychiatric symptoms 
with atypical features (e.g., late-life onset, insidiously worsening course) 
should prompt careful assessment for neurodegenerative disease. Guidelines for 
such an assessment should be established.

Copyright © 2016 American Association for Geriatric Psychiatry. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jagp.2015.04.007
PMCID: PMC4686378
PMID: 26324540 [Indexed for MEDLINE]