1. Am J Med Genet A. 2015 Dec;167A(12):3209-13. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37363. Epub 
2015 Sep 8.

Severe CNS involvement in WWOX mutations: Description of five new cases.

Tabarki B(1), AlHashem A(2), AlShahwan S(1), Alkuraya FS(3)(4), Gedela S(5), 
Zuccoli G(6).

Author information:
(1)Divisions of Pediatric Neurology, Prince Sultan Military Medical City, 
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Division of Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Prince Sultan Military 
Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center, 
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Medicine, Alfaisal 
University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(5)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Nationwide Children Hospital, Ohio State 
University, Columbus, Ohio.
(6)Pediatric Neuroradiology, Children Hospital of Pittsburgh of UPMC, University 
of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.

Recently, mutations in WWOX have been identified in the setting of central 
nervous system (CNS) disorders, highlighting a previously unrevealed role of 
this gene in the normal development and function of the CNS. In this report, we 
add five patients from two seemingly unrelated families presenting with a 
primarily neurological phenotype. All the children were product of 
consanguineous marriages. Whole exome sequencing revealed the same homozygous 
mutation (NM_016373.3:c.606-1G>A) of WWOX in all five patients. All patients and 
carriers in the family share the same haplotype indicating the families are in 
fact related to one another. The clinical presentation included progressive 
microcephaly, early onset of spasticity in the first 3 months of life, 
intractable epilepsy, severe failure to thrive, and profound developmental 
delay. Retinopathy was observed in two patients. All five patients died before 
their third birthday. Neuroimaging showed extensive neurodegeneration 
characterized by periventricular white matter volume loss and atrophy of the 
corpus callosum. Additional degeneration selectively affecting the mediodorsal 
nucleus of the thalamus was observed in one patient. Our findings in five new 
patients affected by WWOX mutation with early infantile phenotype confirm the 
features of the disease represented by early infantile epileptic encephalopathy. 
We suggest that neuroimaging in these patients reveals a characteristic pattern 
of neurodegeneration in which the cerebellum is spared that could help with 
early diagnosis in the appropriate clinical setting.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37363
PMID: 26345274 [Indexed for MEDLINE]