1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Nov;1850(11):2377-84. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbagen.2015.08.020. Epub 2015 Sep 2.

Evidence against resveratrol as a viable therapy for the rescue of defective 
ΔF508 CFTR.

Jai Y(1), Shah K(1), Bridges RJ(1), Bradbury NA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Chicago Medical School, Rosalind 
Franklin University of Medicine and Science, North Chicago, IL, USA.
(2)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Chicago Medical School, Rosalind 
Franklin University of Medicine and Science, North Chicago, IL, USA. Electronic 
address: neil.bradbury@rosalindfranklin.edu.

BACKGROUND: Resveratrol, a natural phenolic compound, has been reported to 
rescue mutant ΔF508 CFTR in expression systems and primary epithelial cells. 
Although this implies a therapeutic benefit to patients with CF, investigations 
were performed using resveratrol concentrations greatly in excess of those 
achievable in plasma. We evaluated the efficacy of resveratrol as a CFTR 
corrector in relevant primary airway cells, using physiologically achievable 
resveratrol concentrations.
METHODS: Cells expressing wt or ΔF508 CFTR were exposed to chronic or acute 
resveratrol. CFTR mRNA and protein expression were monitored. The effects of 
resveratrol on primary ΔF508 human airway cells were evaluated by equivalent 
current analysis using modified Ussing chambers.
RESULTS: Consistent with previously published data in heterologous expression 
systems, high doses of resveratrol increased CFTR expression; however 
physiologically relevant concentrations were without effect. In contrast to 
heterologous expression systems, resveratrol was unable to increase mutant CFTR 
channel activity in primary airway cells. Elevated amiloride-sensitive currents, 
indicative of sodium transport and characteristically elevated in CF airway 
cells, were also unaffected by resveratrol.
CONCLUSIONS: High concentrations of resveratrol can increase CFTR mRNA and 
protein in some cell types. In addition, acute resveratrol exposure can 
stimulate CFTR mediated chloride secretion, probably by increasing cellular cAMP 
levels. Resveratrol at physiologically achievable levels yielded no benefit in 
primary ΔF508 airway cells, either in terms of amiloride-sensitive currents of 
CFTR currents.
GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: Taken together, our results do not support the use of 
resveratrol supplements as a therapy for patients with cystic fibrosis. It is 
possible that further modifications of the resveratrol backbone would yield a 
more efficacious compound.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbagen.2015.08.020
PMCID: PMC4587346
PMID: 26342647 [Indexed for MEDLINE]