1. Mol Cancer Ther. 2015 Dec;14(12):2700-11. doi:
10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-15-0136-T.  Epub 2015 Sep 8.

Combined Pan-RAF and MEK Inhibition Overcomes Multiple Resistance Mechanisms to 
Selective RAF Inhibitors.

Whittaker SR(1), Cowley GS(2), Wagner S(3), Luo F(4), Root DE(2), Garraway 
LA(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, 
Massachusetts. The Broad Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts. Division of Cancer 
Therapeutics, Institute of Cancer Research, London, United Kingdom.
(2)The Broad Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
(3)Division of Cancer Therapeutics, Institute of Cancer Research, London, United 
Kingdom.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, 
Massachusetts. The Broad Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
(5)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, 
Massachusetts. The Broad Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts. Center for Cancer 
Genome Discovery, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts. 
Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, Massachusetts. levi_garraway@dfci.harvard.edu.

RAF and MEK inhibitors are effective in BRAF-mutant melanoma but not in 
BRAF-mutant colorectal cancer. To gain additional insights into this difference, 
we performed a genome-scale pooled shRNA enhancer screen in a BRAF-mutant, RAF 
inhibitor-resistant colorectal cancer cell line exposed to the selective RAF 
inhibitor PLX4720. We identified multiple genes along the receptor tyrosine 
kinase (RTK)/mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling axis that, when 
suppressed, either genetically or pharmacologically, sensitized cells to the 
selective RAF inhibitor through sustained inhibition of MAPK signaling. 
Strikingly, CRAF was a key mediator of resistance that could be overcome by the 
use of pan-RAF inhibitors in combination with a MEK inhibitor. Furthermore, the 
combination of pan-RAF and MEK inhibitors displayed strong synergy in melanoma 
and colorectal cancer cell lines with RAS-activating events such as RTK 
activation, KRAS mutation, or NF1 loss-of-function mutations. Combinations of 
selective RAF inhibitors, such as PLX4720 or dabrafenib, with MEK inhibitors did 
not incur such profound synergy, suggesting that inhibition of CRAF by pan-RAF 
inhibitors plays a key role in determining cellular response. Importantly, in 
contrast to the modest activity seen with single-agent treatment, dual pan-RAF 
and MEK inhibition results in the induction of apoptosis, greatly enhancing 
efficacy. Notably, combined pan-RAF and MEK inhibition can overcome intrinsic 
and acquired resistance to single-agent RAF/MEK inhibition, supporting dual 
pan-RAF and MEK inhibition as a novel therapeutic strategy for BRAF- and 
KRAS-mutant cancers.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-15-0136-T
PMCID: PMC4674359
PMID: 26351322 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest Dr. Garraway is a 
consultant to Novartis, Millenium/Takeda, and Boehringer Ingelheim, and a 
recipient of a grant from Novartis.