1. Br J Pharmacol. 2016 Jan;173(1):27-38. doi: 10.1111/bph.13323. Epub 2015 Nov
20.

Species-specific action of (Pro3)GIP - a full agonist at human GIP receptors, 
but a partial agonist and competitive antagonist at rat and mouse GIP receptors.

Sparre-Ulrich AH(1)(2), Hansen LS(1)(2)(3), Svendsen B(2), Christensen M(3), 
Knop FK(3), Hartmann B(2)(4), Holst JJ(2)(4), Rosenkilde MM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Pharmacology, Faculty of Health and Medical 
Sciences, The Panum Institute, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)NNF Center for Basic Metabolic Research, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)Center for Diabetes Research, Gentofte Hospital, University of Copenhagen, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(4)Department of Biomedical Sciences Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, 
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Specific, high potency receptor antagonists are valuable 
tools when evaluating animal and human physiology. Within the glucose-dependent, 
insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) system, considerable attention has been given 
to the presumed GIP receptor antagonist, (Pro3)GIP, and its effect in murine 
studies. We conducted a pharmacological analysis of this ligand including 
interspecies differences between the rodent and human GIP system.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: Transiently transfected COS-7 cells were assessed for 
cAMP accumulation upon ligand stimulation and assayed in competition binding 
using (125) I-human GIP. Using isolated perfused pancreata both from wild type 
and GIP receptor-deficient rodents, insulin-releasing, glucagon-releasing and 
somatostatin-releasing properties in response to species-specific GIP and 
(Pro3)GIP analogues were evaluated.
KEY RESULTS: Human (Pro3)GIP is a full agonist at human GIP receptors with 
similar efficacy (Emax ) for cAMP production as human GIP, while both rat and 
mouse(Pro3)GIP were partial agonists on their corresponding receptors. Rodent 
GIPs are more potent and efficacious at their receptors than human GIP. In 
perfused pancreata in the presence of 7 mM glucose, both rodent (Pro3)GIP 
analogues induced modest insulin, glucagon and somatostatin secretion, 
corresponding to the partial agonist activities observed in cAMP production.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: When evaluating new compounds, it is important to 
consider interspecies differences both at the receptor and ligand level. Thus, 
in rodent models, human GIP is a comparatively weak partial agonist. Human 
(Pro3)GIP was not an antagonist at human GIP receptors, so there is still a need 
for a potent antagonist in order to elucidate the physiology of human GIP.

© 2015 The Authors. British Journal of Pharmacology published by John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd on behalf of British Pharmacological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/bph.13323
PMCID: PMC4737396
PMID: 26359804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]