1. PLoS Genet. 2015 Sep 9;11(9):e1005500. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005500. 
eCollection 2015 Sep.

Outer Hair Cell Lateral Wall Structure Constrains the Mobility of Plasma 
Membrane Proteins.

Yamashita T(1), Hakizimana P(2), Wu S(3), Hassan A(3), Jacob S(4), Temirov J(5), 
Fang J(1), Mellado-Lagarde M(6), Gursky R(5), Horner L(5), Leibiger B(4), Leijon 
S(7), Centonze VE(5), Berggren PO(4), Frase S(5), Auer M(3), Brownell WE(8), 
Fridberger A(2), Zuo J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, St. Jude Children's Research 
Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee, United States of America.
(2)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Neuroscience, Linköping 
University, Linköping, Sweden; Karolinska Institutet, Center for Hearing and 
Communication Research, Department of Clinical Science, Intervention, and 
Technology, M1, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Life Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, 
California, United States of America.
(4)The Rolf Luft Research Center for Diabetes and Endocrinology, Karolinska 
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Cell and Tissue Imaging Facility, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, 
Memphis, Tennessee, United States of America.
(6)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, St. Jude Children's Research 
Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee, United States of America; School of Pharmacy and 
Biomolecular Sciences, University of Brighton, Brighton, United Kingdom.
(7)Karolinska Institutet, Center for Hearing and Communication Research, 
Department of Clinical Science, Intervention, and Technology, M1, Karolinska 
University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(8)Bobby R. Alford Department of Otolaryngology, Head & Neck Surgery, and 
Department of Neuroscience, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, United 
States of America.

Nature's fastest motors are the cochlear outer hair cells (OHCs). These sensory 
cells use a membrane protein, Slc26a5 (prestin), to generate mechanical force at 
high frequencies, which is essential for explaining the exquisite hearing 
sensitivity of mammalian ears. Previous studies suggest that Slc26a5 
continuously diffuses within the membrane, but how can a freely moving motor 
protein effectively convey forces critical for hearing? To provide direct 
evidence in OHCs for freely moving Slc26a5 molecules, we created a knockin mouse 
where Slc26a5 is fused with YFP. These mice and four other strains expressing 
fluorescently labeled membrane proteins were used to examine their lateral 
diffusion in the OHC lateral wall. All five proteins showed minimal diffusion, 
but did move after pharmacological disruption of membrane-associated structures 
with a cholesterol-depleting agent and salicylate. Thus, our results demonstrate 
that OHC lateral wall structure constrains the mobility of plasma membrane 
proteins and that the integrity of such membrane-associated structures are 
critical for Slc26a5's active and structural roles. The structural constraint of 
membrane proteins may exemplify convergent evolution of cellular motors across 
species. Our findings also suggest a possible mechanism for disorders of 
cholesterol metabolism with hearing loss such as Niemann-Pick Type C diseases.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005500
PMCID: PMC4564264
PMID: 26352669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.