1. mBio. 2015 Sep 22;6(5):e01419-15. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01419-15.

Early Generation of New PrPSc on Blood Vessels after Brain Microinjection of 
Scrapie in Mice.

Chesebro B(1), Striebel J(2), Rangel A(2), Phillips K(2), Hughson A(2), Caughey 
B(2), Race B(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Persistent Viral Diseases, Rocky Mountain Laboratories, NIAID, 
NIH, Hamilton, Montana, USA bchesebro@nih.gov.
(2)Laboratory of Persistent Viral Diseases, Rocky Mountain Laboratories, NIAID, 
NIH, Hamilton, Montana, USA.

Aggregation of misfolded host proteins in the central nervous system is believed 
to be important in the pathogenic process in several neurodegenerative diseases 
of humans, including prion diseases, Alzheimer's disease, and Parkinson's 
disease. In these diseases, protein misfolding and aggregation appear to expand 
through a process of seeded polymerization. Prion diseases occur in both humans 
and animals and are experimentally transmissible orally or by injection, thus 
providing a controllable model of other neurodegenerative protein misfolding 
diseases. In rodents and ruminants, prion disease has a slow course, lasting 
months to years. Although prion infectivity has been detected in brain tissue at 
3 to 4 weeks postinfection (p.i.), the details of early prion replication in the 
brain are not well understood. Here we studied the localization and quantitation 
of PrPSc generation in vivo starting at 30 min postmicroinjection of scrapie 
into the brain. In C57BL mice at 3 days p.i., generation of new PrPSc was 
detected by immunohistochemistry and immunoblot assays, and at 7 days p.i., new 
generation was confirmed by real-time quaking-induced conversion assay. The main 
site of new PrPSc generation was near the outer basement membrane of small and 
medium blood vessels. The finding and localization of replication at this site 
so early after injection have not been reported previously. This predominantly 
perivascular location suggested that structural components of the blood vessel 
basement membrane or perivascular astrocytes might act as cofactors in the 
initial generation of PrPSc. The location of PrPSc replication at the basement 
membrane also implies a role for the brain interstitial fluid drainage in the 
early infection process.
IMPORTANCE: Neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer's disease, 
Parkinson's disease, and prion diseases, of humans are characterized by 
misfolding and aggregation of certain proteins, resulting in the destruction of 
brain tissue. In these diseases, the damage process spreads progressively within 
the central nervous system, but only prion diseases are known to be 
transmissible between individuals. Here we used microinjection of infectious 
prion protein (PrPSc) into the mouse brain to model early events of iatrogenic 
prion transmission via surgical instruments or tissue grafts. At 3 and 7 days 
postinjection, we detected the generation of new PrPSc, mostly on the outer 
walls of blood vessels near the injection site. This location and very early 
replication were surprising and unique. Perivascular prion replication suggested 
the transport of injected PrPSc via brain interstitial fluid to the basement 
membranes of blood vessels, where interactions with possible cofactors made by 
astrocytes or endothelia might facilitate the earliest cycles of prion 
infection.

Copyright © 2015 Chesebro et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01419-15
PMCID: PMC4600122
PMID: 26396245 [Indexed for MEDLINE]