1. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 25;10(9):e0138470. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0138470. 
eCollection 2015.

Transcriptome Bioinformatical Analysis of Vertebrate Stages of Schistosoma 
japonicum Reveals Alternative Splicing Events.

Wang X(1), Xu X(1), Lu X(2), Zhang Y(1), Pan W(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Infectious Diseases and Vaccine Development, Tongji University 
School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(2)School of Life Science and Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 
Shanghai, China.
(3)Institute for Infectious Diseases and Vaccine Development, Tongji University 
School of Medicine, Shanghai, China; Department of Tropical Infectious Diseases, 
Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, China.

Alternative splicing is a molecular process that contributes greatly to the 
diversification of proteome and to gene functions. Understanding the mechanisms 
of stage-specific alternative splicing can provide a better understanding of the 
development of eukaryotes and the functions of different genes. Schistosoma 
japonicum is an infectious blood-dwelling trematode with a complex lifecycle 
that causes the tropical disease schistosomiasis. In this study, we analyzed the 
transcriptome of Schistosoma japonicum to discover alternative splicing events 
in this parasite, by applying RNA-seq to cDNA library of adults and 
schistosomula. Results were validated by RT-PCR and sequencing. We found 11,623 
alternative splicing events among 7,099 protein encoding genes and average 
proportion of alternative splicing events per gene was 42.14%. We showed that 
exon skip is the most common type of alternative splicing events as found in 
high eukaryotes, whereas intron retention is the least common alternative 
splicing type. According to intron boundary analysis, the parasite possesses 
same intron boundaries as other organisms, namely the classic "GT-AG" rule. And 
in alternative spliced introns or exons, this rule is less strict. And we have 
attempted to detect alternative splicing events in genes encoding proteins with 
signal peptides and transmembrane helices, suggesting that alternative splicing 
could change subcellular locations of specific gene products. Our results 
indicate that alternative splicing is prevalent in this parasitic worm, and that 
the worm is close to its hosts. The revealed secretome involved in alternative 
splicing implies new perspective into understanding interaction between the 
parasite and its host.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0138470
PMCID: PMC4583307
PMID: 26407301 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.