1. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 30;10(9):e0139360. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0139360. 
eCollection 2015.

Tissue-Specific Enrichment of Lymphoma Risk Loci in Regulatory Elements.

Hayes JE(1), Trynka G(2), Vijai J(3), Offit K(3), Raychaudhuri S(4), Klein 
RJ(5).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Genetics Service, Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan-Kettering 
Cancer Center, New York, New York, United States of America; Program in Cancer 
Biology and Genetics, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New 
York, United States of America; Cell and Developmental Biology Graduate Program, 
Weill Cornell Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Cornell University, New York, 
New York, United States of America; Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, 
Icahn Institute for Genomics and Multiscale Biology, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, New York, United States of America.
(2)Division of Rheumatology, Immunology and Allergy, Department of Medicine, 
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America; 
Division of Genetics, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America; Partners Center for 
Personalized Genetic Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America; 
Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(3)Clinical Genetics Service, Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan-Kettering 
Cancer Center, New York, New York, United States of America; Program in Cancer 
Biology and Genetics, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New 
York, United States of America.
(4)Division of Rheumatology, Immunology and Allergy, Department of Medicine, 
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America; 
Division of Genetics, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America; Partners Center for 
Personalized Genetic Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America; 
Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America; Faculty of Medical and Human 
Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.
(5)Clinical Genetics Service, Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan-Kettering 
Cancer Center, New York, New York, United States of America; Program in Cancer 
Biology and Genetics, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New 
York, United States of America; Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, 
Icahn Institute for Genomics and Multiscale Biology, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, New York, United States of America.

Though numerous polymorphisms have been associated with risk of developing 
lymphoma, how these variants function to promote tumorigenesis is poorly 
understood. Here, we report that lymphoma risk SNPs, especially in the 
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma subtype chronic lymphocytic leukemia, are significantly 
enriched for co-localization with epigenetic marks of active gene regulation. 
These enrichments were seen in a lymphoid-specific manner for numerous ENCODE 
datasets, including DNase-hypersensitivity as well as multiple 
segmentation-defined enhancer regions. Furthermore, we identify putatively 
functional SNPs that are both in regulatory elements in lymphocytes and are 
associated with gene expression changes in blood. We developed an algorithm, 
UES, that uses a Monte Carlo simulation approach to calculate the enrichment of 
previously identified risk SNPs in various functional elements. This multiscale 
approach integrating multiple datasets helps disentangle the underlying biology 
of lymphoma, and more broadly, is generally applicable to GWAS results from 
other diseases as well.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0139360
PMCID: PMC4589387
PMID: 26422229 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.