1. Semin Immunopathol. 2016 Mar;38(2):167-83. doi: 10.1007/s00281-015-0537-x.
Epub  2015 Oct 28.

Host-directed therapy targeting the Mycobacterium tuberculosis granuloma: a 
review.

Kiran D(1), Podell BK(1), Chambers M(2)(3), Basaraba RJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Pathology, Metabolism of 
Infectious Diseases Laboratory and Mycobacteria Research Laboratories, College 
of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Colorado State University, 200 
West Lake Street, 1619 Campus Delivery, Fort Collins, CO, 80523-1619, USA.
(2)Department of Bacteriology, Animal and Plant Health Agency (APHA), Woodham 
Lane, New Haw, Addlestone, Surrey, KT15 3NB, UK.
(3)School of Veterinary Medicine Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, 
University of Surrey, Vet School Main Building, Daphne Jackson Road, Guildford, 
GU2 7AL, UK.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Pathology, Metabolism of 
Infectious Diseases Laboratory and Mycobacteria Research Laboratories, College 
of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Colorado State University, 200 
West Lake Street, 1619 Campus Delivery, Fort Collins, CO, 80523-1619, USA. 
randall.basaraba@colostate.edu.

Infection by the intracellular bacterial pathogen Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
(Mtb) is a major cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide. Slow progress has 
been made in lessening the impact of tuberculosis (TB) on human health, 
especially in parts of the world where Mtb is endemic. Due to the complexity of 
TB disease, there is still an urgent need to improve diagnosis, prevention, and 
treatment strategies to control global spread of disease. Active research 
targeting avenues to prevent infection or transmission through vaccination, to 
diagnose asymptomatic carriers of Mtb, and to improve antimicrobial drug 
treatment responses is ongoing. However, this research is hampered by a 
relatively poor understanding of the pathogenesis of early infection and the 
factors that contribute to host susceptibility, protection, and the development 
of active disease. There is increasing interest in the development of adjunctive 
therapy that will aid the host in responding to Mtb infection appropriately 
thereby improving the effectiveness of current and future drug treatments. In 
this review, we summarize what is known about the host response to Mtb infection 
in humans and animal models and highlight potential therapeutic targets involved 
in TB granuloma formation and resolution. Strategies designed to shift the 
balance of TB granuloma formation toward protective rather than destructive 
processes are discussed based on our current knowledge. These therapeutic 
strategies are based on the assumption that granuloma formation, although 
thought to prevent the spread of the tubercle bacillus within and between 
individuals contributes to manifestations of active TB disease in human patients 
when left unchecked. This effect of granuloma formation favors the spread of 
infection and impairs antimicrobial drug treatment. By gaining a better 
understanding of the mechanisms by which Mtb infection contributes to 
irreversible tissue damage, down regulates protective immune responses, and 
delays tissue healing, new treatment strategies can be rationally designed. 
Granuloma-targeted therapy is advantageous because it allows for the repurpose 
of existing drugs used to treat other communicable and non-communicable diseases 
as adjunctive therapies combined with existing and future anti-TB drugs. Thus, 
the development of adjunctive, granuloma-targeted therapy, like other 
host-directed therapies, may benefit from the availability of approved drugs to 
aid in treatment and prevention of TB. In this review, we have attempted to 
summarize the results of published studies in the context of new innovative 
approaches to host-directed therapy that need to be more thoroughly explored in 
pre-clinical animal studies and in human clinical trials.

DOI: 10.1007/s00281-015-0537-x
PMCID: PMC4779125
PMID: 26510950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]