1. Pediatr Neurol. 2016 Jan;54:49-54. doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2015.09.018. 
Epub 2015 Nov 6.

Choline Kinase Beta-Related Muscular Dystrophy, Appearance of Muscle Involvement 
on Magnetic Resonance Imaging.

De Goede C(1), Oh T(2), Joseph J(3), Muntoni F(4), Sewry C(4), Phadke R(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatric Neurology, Royal Preston Hospital, Preston, United 
Kingdom. Electronic address: Christian.degoede@lthtr.nhs.uk.
(2)Department of Radiology, Royal Preston Hospital, Preston, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Neuropathology, Royal Preston Hospital, Preston, United 
Kingdom.
(4)Dubowitz Neuromuscular Centre, UCL Institute of Child Health and Great Ormond 
Street Hospital, London, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Clinical presentation with motor delay, proximal weakness, and 
learning difficulties raise the possibility of a dystrophinopathy, 
dystroglycanopathy, or myotonic dystrophy. This differential should also include 
the more recently described choline kinase beta-related muscular dystrophy. This 
condition is typically characterized by large and abnormally distributed 
mitochondria on muscle biopsy, which can distinguish this condition from the 
other muscle conditions in the differential.
METHODS: We present a boy with choline kinase beta mutations with relatively 
mild clinical manifestations, including proximal weakness, learning difficulties 
and elevated creatine kinase. Investigations included muscle magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) with T1 axial sequences through thigh and calves, and needle 
muscle biopsy of the left vastus lateralis muscle.
RESULTS: MRI showed involvement mainly of the quadriceps femoris, sartorius, and 
adductor magnus, with selective sparing of the gracilis, hamstrings, and 
adductor longus and brevis. Muscle biopsy revealed chronic dystrophic features. 
Oxidative stains demonstrated enlarged mitochondria accentuated peripherally or 
present diffusely in a few fibres giving a coarsely stippled appearance. A 
homozygous C.722A>G (p.Asn241Ser) mutation was detected in exon 6 of the CHKB 
gene.
CONCLUSION: This selective pattern of skeletal muscle involvement might be 
helpful for identifying other patients with this condition, even in the absence 
of diagnostic muscle pathology.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2015.09.018
PMID: 26548592 [Indexed for MEDLINE]