1. PLoS One. 2015 Nov 12;10(11):e0142598. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0142598. 
eCollection 2015.

Prolonged Subdural Infusion of Kynurenic Acid Is Associated with Dose-Dependent 
Myelin Damage in the Rat Spinal Cord.

Dabrowski W(1), Kwiecien JM(2), Rola R(3), Klapec M(4), Stanisz GJ(5)(6), 
Kotlinska-Hasiec E(1), Oakden W(5), Janik R(5), Coote M(7), Frey BN(7), Turski 
WA(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anaesthesiology and Intensive Therapy Medical University, 
Lublin, Poland.
(2)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, M. deGroote School of 
Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery and Paediatric Neurosurgery Medical University, 
Lublin, Poland.
(4)Department of Orthopaedic and Traumatology Medical University, Lublin, 
Poland.
(5)Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(6)Physical Sciences Platform, Sunnybrook Research Institute, Ontario, Canada.
(7)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioural Neurosciences, M. deGroote School of 
Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
(8)Department of Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology, Medical University, 
Lublin, Poland.

BACKGROUND: Kynurenic acid (KYNA) is the end stage metabolite of tryptophan 
produced mainly by astrocytes in the central nervous system (CNS). It has 
neuroprotective activities but can be elevated in the neuropsychiatric 
disorders. Toxic effects of KYNA in the CNS are unknown. The aim of this study 
was to assess the effect of the subdural KYNA infusion on the spinal cord in 
adult rats.
METHODS: A total of 42 healthy adult rats were randomly assigned into six groups 
and were infused for 7 days with PBS (control) or 0.0002 pmol/min, 0.01 
nmol/min, 0.1 nmol/min, 1 nmol/min, and 10 nmol/min of KYNA per 7 days. The 
effect of KYNA on spinal cord was determined using histological and electron 
microscopy examination. Myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG) was measured 
in the blood serum to assess a degree of myelin damage.
RESULT: In all rats continuous long-lasting subdural KYNA infusion was 
associated with myelin damage and myelin loss that was increasingly widespread 
in a dose-depended fashion in peripheral, sub-pial areas. Damage to myelin 
sheaths was uniquely related to the separation of lamellae at the intraperiod 
line. The damaged myelin sheaths and areas with complete loss of myelin were 
associated with limited loss of scattered axons while vast majority of axons in 
affected areas were morphologically intact. The myelin loss-causing effect of 
KYNA occurred with no necrosis of oligodendrocytes, with locally severe 
astrogliosis and no cellular inflammatory response. Additionally, subdural KYNA 
infusion increased blood MOG concentration. Moreover, the rats infused with the 
highest doses of KYNA (1 and 10 nmol/min) demonstrated adverse neurological 
signs including weakness and quadriplegia.
CONCLUSIONS: We suggest, that subdural infusion of high dose of KYNA can be used 
as an experimental tool for the study of mechanisms of myelin damage and 
regeneration. On the other hand, the administration of low, physiologically 
relevant doses of KYNA may help to discover the role of KYNA in control of 
physiological myelination process.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0142598
PMCID: PMC4643054
PMID: 26562835 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.