1. Front Aging Neurosci. 2015 Oct 29;7:209. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2015.00209. 
eCollection 2015.

C-Reactive Protein, Advanced Glycation End Products, and Their Receptor in Type 
2 Diabetic, Elderly Patients with Mild Cognitive Impairment.

Gorska-Ciebiada M(1), Saryusz-Wolska M(1), Borkowska A(1), Ciebiada M(2), Loba 
J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Diabetology, Medical University of Lodz , 
Lodz , Poland.
(2)Department of General and Oncological Pneumology, Medical University of Lodz 
, Lodz , Poland.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of the study was to evaluate serum levels of advanced 
glycation end products (AGEs), receptor for advanced glycation end products 
(RAGE), and C-reactive protein (CRP) in elderly patients with type 2 diabetes 
mellitus with and without mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and to determine the 
predictors (including AGEs, RAGE, and CRP levels) of having MCI in elderly 
patients with type 2 diabetes.
METHODS: Two hundred seventy-six diabetics elders were screened for MCI (using 
the Montreal Cognitive Assessment: MoCA score). Data of biochemical parameters 
and biomarkers were collected.
RESULTS: Serum AGEs, RAGE, and CRP levels were significantly increased in MCI 
patients compared to controls. In group of patients with MCI, serum RAGE level 
was positively correlated with AGEs level and with CRP level. RAGE, AGEs, and 
CRP concentrations were positively correlated with HbA1c levels and negatively 
correlated with MoCA score. The univariate logistic regression models revealed 
that variables, which increased the likelihood of diagnosis of MCI in elderly 
patients with type 2 diabetes were higher levels of HbA1c, RAGE, AGEs, CRP, TG, 
lower level of HDL cholesterol, previous CVD, HA, or use of HA drugs, 
hyperlipidemia, retinopathy, nephropathy, increased number of co-morbidities, 
older age, and less years of formal education. HA or use of HA drugs, previous 
CVD, higher level of RAGE and CRP, older age and less years of formal education 
are the factors increasing the likelihood of having MCI in elderly patients with 
type 2 diabetes in multivariable model.
CONCLUSION: In summary, serum AGEs, RAGE, and CRP are increased in the 
circulation of MCI elderly diabetic patients compared to controls. A larger 
population-based prospective study needs to be performed to further confirm the 
relationship between AGEs, RAGE, and the cognitive decline or progress to 
dementia.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2015.00209
PMCID: PMC4625092
PMID: 26578953