1. J Chem Theory Comput. 2015 Sep 8;11(9):4500-11. doi: 10.1021/ct501125r. Epub 
2015 Aug 6.

C-Terminal Domain of Integrase Binds between the Two Active Sites.

Roberts VA(1).

Author information:
(1)San Diego Supercomputer Center, University of California, San Diego , La 
Jolla, California 92093, United States.

HIV integrase (HIV-IN), one of three HIV enzymes, is a target for the treatment 
of AIDS, but the full biological assembly has been difficult to characterize, 
hampering inhibitor design. The recent crystallographic structures of integrase 
from prototype foamy virus (PFV-IN) with bound DNA were a breakthrough, 
revealing how viral DNA organizes two integrase dimers into a tetramer that has 
the two active sites appropriately spaced for insertion of the viral DNA into 
host DNA. The organization of domains within each PFV-IN protein chain, however, 
varies significantly from that found in HIV-IN structures. With the goal of 
identifying shared structural characteristics, the interactions among components 
of the PFV-IN and HIV-IN assemblies were investigated with the macromolecular 
docking program DOT. DOT performs an exhaustive, rigid-body search between two 
macromolecules. Computational docking reproduced the crystallographic 
interactions of the PFV-IN catalytic and N-terminal domains with viral DNA and 
found similar viral DNA interactions for HIV-IN. Computational docking did not 
reproduce the crystallographic interactions of the PFV-IN C-terminal domain 
(CTD). Instead, two symmetry-related positions were found for the PFV-IN CTD 
that indicate formation of a CTD dimer between the two active sites. Our 
predicted CTD dimer is consistent with cross-linking studies showing 
interactions of the CTD with viral DNA that appear to be blocked in the PFV-IN 
structures. The CTD dimer can insert two arginine-rich loops between the two 
bound vDNA molecules and the host DNA, a region that is unoccupied in the PFV-IN 
crystallographic structures. The positive potential from these two loops would 
alleviate the large negative potential created by the close proximity of two 
viral vDNA ends, helping to bring together the two active sites and assisting 
host DNA binding. This study demonstrates the ability of computational docking 
to evaluate complex crystallographic assemblies, identify interactions that are 
influenced by the crystal environment, and provide plausible alternatives.

DOI: 10.1021/ct501125r
PMCID: PMC4689733
PMID: 26575940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]