1. mBio. 2015 Nov 17;6(6):e01313-15. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01313-15.

The Complete Genome Sequence of the Emerging Pathogen Mycobacterium haemophilum 
Explains Its Unique Culture Requirements.

Tufariello JM(1), Kerantzas CA(2), Vilchèze C(3), Calder RB(4), Nordberg EK(5), 
Fischer JA(2), Hartman TE(2), Yang E(2), Driscoll T(6), Cole LE(2), Sebra R(7), 
Maqbool SB(8), Wattam AR(5), Jacobs WR Jr(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA Department of Medicine, Albert Einstein College 
of Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA jacobsw@hhmi.org 
joann.tufariello@einstein.yu.edu.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Albert Einstein 
College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA.
(4)Division of Computational Genetics, Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein 
College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA.
(5)Virginia Bioinformatics Institute, Virginia Tech University, Blacksburg, 
Virginia, USA.
(6)Department of Biology (Microbial Metagenomics), West Virginia University, 
Morgantown, Virginia, USA.
(7)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine, Mount 
Sinai, New York, New York, USA.
(8)Epigenomics Shared Facility, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New 
York, USA.
(9)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Albert Einstein 
College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA jacobsw@hhmi.org 
joann.tufariello@einstein.yu.edu.

Mycobacterium haemophilum is an emerging pathogen associated with a variety of 
clinical syndromes, most commonly skin infections in immunocompromised 
individuals. M. haemophilum exhibits a unique requirement for iron 
supplementation to support its growth in culture, but the basis for this 
property and how it may shape pathogenesis is unclear. Using a combination of 
Illumina, PacBio, and Sanger sequencing, the complete genome sequence of 
M. haemophilum was determined. Guided by this sequence, experiments were 
performed to define the basis for the unique growth requirements of 
M. haemophilum. We found that M. haemophilum, unlike many other mycobacteria, is 
unable to synthesize iron-binding siderophores known as mycobactins or to 
utilize ferri-mycobactins to support growth. These differences correlate with 
the absence of genes associated with mycobactin synthesis, secretion, and 
uptake. In agreement with the ability of heme to promote growth, we identified 
genes encoding heme uptake machinery. Consistent with its propensity to infect 
the skin, we show at the whole-genome level the genetic closeness of 
M. haemophilum with Mycobacterium leprae, an organism which cannot be cultivated 
in vitro, and we identify genes uniquely shared by these organisms. Finally, we 
identify means to express foreign genes in M. haemophilum. These data explain 
the unique culture requirements for this important pathogen, provide a 
foundation upon which the genome sequence can be exploited to improve 
diagnostics and therapeutics, and suggest use of M. haemophilum as a tool to 
elucidate functions of genes shared with M. leprae.
IMPORTANCE: Mycobacterium haemophilum is an emerging pathogen with an unknown 
natural reservoir that exhibits unique requirements for iron supplementation to 
grow in vitro. Understanding the basis for this iron requirement is important 
because it is fundamental to isolation of the organism from clinical samples and 
environmental sources. Defining the molecular basis for M. haemophilium's growth 
requirements will also shed new light on mycobacterial strategies to acquire 
iron and can be exploited to define how differences in such strategies influence 
pathogenesis. Here, through a combination of sequencing and experimental 
approaches, we explain the basis for the iron requirement. We further 
demonstrate the genetic closeness of M. haemophilum and Mycobacterium leprae, 
the causative agent of leprosy which cannot be cultured in vitro, and we 
demonstrate methods to genetically manipulate M. haemophilum. These findings 
pave the way for the use of M. haemophilum as a model to elucidate functions of 
genes shared with M. leprae.

Copyright © 2015 Tufariello et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01313-15
PMCID: PMC4659460
PMID: 26578674 [Indexed for MEDLINE]