1. PLoS Genet. 2015 Nov 20;11(11):e1005678. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005678. 
eCollection 2015 Nov.

A Tandem Duplicate of Anti-Müllerian Hormone with a Missense SNP on the Y 
Chromosome Is Essential for Male Sex Determination in Nile Tilapia, Oreochromis 
niloticus.

Li M(1), Sun Y(1), Zhao J(1), Shi H(1), Zeng S(1), Ye K(1), Jiang D(1), Zhou 
L(1), Sun L(1), Tao W(1), Nagahama Y(2), Kocher TD(3), Wang D(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Freshwater Fish Reproduction and Development (Ministry of 
Education), Key Laboratory of Aquatic Science of Chongqing, School of Life 
Science, Southwest University, Chongqing, China.
(2)Solution-Oriented Research for Science and Technology (SORST), Laboratory of 
Reproductive Biology, National Institute for Basic Biology, Okazaki, Japan; 
South Ehime Fisheries Research Center, Ehime University, Matsuyama, Japan.
(3)Department of Biology, University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland, United 
States of America.

Variation in the TGF-β signaling pathway is emerging as an important mechanism 
by which gonadal sex determination is controlled in teleosts. Here we show that 
amhy, a Y-specific duplicate of the anti-Müllerian hormone (amh) gene, induces 
male sex determination in Nile tilapia. amhy is a tandem duplicate located 
immediately downstream of amhΔ-y on the Y chromosome. The coding sequence of 
amhy was identical to the X-linked amh (amh) except a missense SNP (C/T) which 
changes an amino acid (Ser/Leu92) in the N-terminal region. amhy lacks 5608 bp 
of promoter sequence that is found in the X-linked amh homolog. The amhΔ-y 
contains several insertions and deletions in the promoter region, and even a 5 
bp insertion in exonVI that results in a premature stop codon and thus a 
truncated protein product lacking the TGF-β binding domain. Both amhy and amhΔ-y 
expression is restricted to XY gonads from 5 days after hatching (dah) onwards. 
CRISPR/Cas9 knockout of amhy in XY fish resulted in male to female sex reversal, 
while mutation of amhΔ-y alone could not. In contrast, overexpression of Amhy in 
XX fish, using a fosmid transgene that carries the amhy/amhΔ-y haplotype or a 
vector containing amhy ORF under the control of CMV promoter, resulted in female 
to male sex reversal, while overexpression of AmhΔ-y alone in XX fish could not. 
Knockout of the anti-Müllerian hormone receptor type II (amhrII) in XY fish also 
resulted in 100% complete male to female sex reversal. Taken together, these 
results strongly suggest that the duplicated amhy with a missense SNP is the 
candidate sex determining gene and amhy/amhrII signal is essential for male sex 
determination in Nile tilapia. These findings highlight the conserved roles of 
TGF-β signaling pathway in fish sex determination.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005678
PMCID: PMC4654491
PMID: 26588702 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.