1. Genome Biol Evol. 2015 Nov 25;8(1):1-16. doi: 10.1093/gbe/evv233.

Eukaryotic Components Remodeled Chloroplast Nucleoid Organization during the 
Green Plant Evolution.

Kobayashi Y(1), Takusagawa M(2), Harada N(1), Fukao Y(3), Yamaoka S(4), Kohchi 
T(4), Hori K(5), Ohta H(6), Shikanai T(1), Nishimura Y(7).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Plant Molecular Genetics, Department of Botany, Kyoto 
University, Oiwake-Cho, Kita-Shirakawa, Kyoto, Japan.
(2)Laboratory of Plant Molecular Genetics, Department of Botany, Kyoto 
University, Oiwake-Cho, Kita-Shirakawa, Kyoto, Japan Department of Biological 
Science and Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Graduate School of Medicine, 
Yamaguchi University, Yamaguchi, Japan.
(3)Plant Global Educational Project, and Graduate School of Biological Sciences, 
Nara Institute of Science and Technology, Ikoma, Japan Department of 
Bioinformatics, Ritsumeikan University, Kusatsu, Shiga, Japan.
(4)Graduate School of Biostudies, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.
(5)Tokyo Institute of Technology, Graduate School of Bioscience and 
Biotechnology, Yokohama City, Kanagawa, Japan.
(6)Tokyo Institute of Technology, Graduate School of Bioscience and 
Biotechnology, Yokohama City, Kanagawa, Japan Earth-Life Science Institute, 
Tokyo Institute of Technology, Meguro-Ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(7)Laboratory of Plant Molecular Genetics, Department of Botany, Kyoto 
University, Oiwake-Cho, Kita-Shirakawa, Kyoto, Japan 
yoshiki@pmg.bot.kyoto-u.ac.jp.

Chloroplast (cp) DNA is thought to originate from the ancestral endosymbiont 
genome and is compacted to form nucleoprotein complexes, cp nucleoids. The 
structure of cp nucleoids is ubiquitously observed in diverse plants from 
unicellular algae to flowering plants and is believed to be a multifunctional 
platform for various processes, including cpDNA replication, 
repair/recombination, transcription, and inheritance. Despite its fundamental 
functions, the protein composition for cp nucleoids in flowering plants was 
suggested to be divergent from those of bacteria and algae, but the evolutionary 
process remains elusive. In this research, we aimed to reveal the evolutionary 
history of cp nucleoid organization by analyzing the key organisms representing 
the three evolutionary stages of eukaryotic phototrophs: the chlorophyte alga 
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, the charophyte alga Klebsormidium flaccidum, and the 
most basal land plant Marchantia polymorpha. To clarify the core cp nucleoid 
proteins in C. reinhardtii, we performed an LC-MS/MS analysis using highly 
purified cp nucleoid fractions and identified a novel SAP domain-containing 
protein with a eukaryotic origin as a constitutive core component. Then, 
homologous genes for cp nucleoid proteins were searched for in C. reinhardtii, 
K. flaccidum, and M. polymorpha using the genome databases, and their 
intracellular localizations and DNA binding activities were investigated by cell 
biological/biochemical analyses. Based on these results, we propose a model that 
recurrent modification of cp nucleoid organization by eukaryotic factors 
originally related to chromatin organization might have been the driving force 
for the diversification of cp nucleoids since the early stage of green plant 
evolution.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/gbe/evv233
PMCID: PMC4758235
PMID: 26608058 [Indexed for MEDLINE]