1. Front Physiol. 2015 Nov 9;6:312. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2015.00312. eCollection 
2015.

Molecular Regulation of Toll-like Receptors in Asthma and COPD.

Zuo L(1), Lucas K(2), Fortuna CA(3), Chuang CC(1), Best TM(4).

Author information:
(1)Radiologic Sciences and Respiratory Therapy Division, The Ohio State 
University Wexner Medical Center, School of Health and Rehabilitation Sciences, 
The Ohio State University College of Medicine, Columbus, Ohio State University 
Columbus, OH, USA ; Interdisciplinary Biophysics Graduate Program, The Ohio 
State University Columbus, OH, USA.
(2)Multiphase Chemistry Department, Max Planck Institute for Chemistry Mainz, 
Germany.
(3)Radiologic Sciences and Respiratory Therapy Division, The Ohio State 
University Wexner Medical Center, School of Health and Rehabilitation Sciences, 
The Ohio State University College of Medicine, Columbus, Ohio State University 
Columbus, OH, USA.
(4)Division of Sports Medicine, Department of Family Medicine, Sports Health and 
Performance Institute, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center Columbus, 
OH, USA.

Asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) have both been 
historically associated with significant morbidity and financial burden. These 
diseases can be induced by several exogenous factors, such as 
pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) (e.g., allergens and microbes). 
Endogenous factors, including reactive oxygen species, and damage-associated 
molecular patterns (DAMPs) recognized by toll-like receptors (TLRs), can also 
result in airway inflammation. Asthma is characterized by the dominant presence 
of eosinophils, mast cells, and clusters of differentiation (CD)4(+) T cells in 
the airways, while COPD typically results in the excessive formation of 
neutrophils, macrophages, and CD8(+) T cells in the airways. In both asthma and 
COPD, in the respiratory tract, TLRs are the primary proteins of interest 
associated with the innate and adaptive immune responses; hence, multiple 
treatment options targeting TLRs are being explored in an effort to reduce the 
severity of the symptoms of these disorders. TLR-mediated pathways for both COPD 
and asthma have their similarities and differences with regards to cell types 
and the pro-inflammatory cytotoxins present in the airway. Because of the 
complex TLR cascade, a variety of treatments have been used to minimize airway 
hypersensitivity and promote bronchodilation. Although unsuccessful at 
completely alleviating COPD and severe asthmatic symptoms, new studies are 
focused on possible targets within the TLR cascade to ameliorate airway 
inflammation.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2015.00312
PMCID: PMC4637409
PMID: 26617525