1. Eur J Paediatr Neurol. 2016 Jan;20(1):53-60. doi: 10.1016/j.ejpn.2015.10.007. 
Epub 2015 Nov 5.

Two new cases of serine deficiency disorders treated with l-serine.

Brassier A(1), Valayannopoulos V(1), Bahi-Buisson N(2), Wiame E(3), Hubert L(1), 
Boddaert N(4), Kaminska A(2), Habarou F(5), Desguerre I(2), Van Schaftingen 
E(3), Ottolenghi C(5), de Lonlay P(6).

Author information:
(1)Centre de Référence des Maladies Héréditaires du Métabolisme de l'Enfant et 
de l'Adulte (MaMEA), Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, APHP, Université Paris 
Descartes, Institut Imagine, Paris, France.
(2)Service de Neuropédiatrie et explorations fonctionnelles, Hôpital 
Necker-Enfants Malades, Université Paris Descartes, Institut Imagine, Paris, 
France.
(3)de Duve Institute, Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.
(4)Service de Radiologie pédiatrique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Université 
Paris Descartes, Institut Imagine, Paris, France.
(5)Service de Biochimie spécialisée, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Université 
Paris Descartes, Inserm U747, Paris, France.
(6)Centre de Référence des Maladies Héréditaires du Métabolisme de l'Enfant et 
de l'Adulte (MaMEA), Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, APHP, Université Paris 
Descartes, Institut Imagine, Paris, France. Electronic address: 
pascale.delonlay@nck.aphp.fr.

OBJECTIVE AND PATIENTS: We report on two new cases of serine deficiency due 
respectively to 3-phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase (PHGDH) deficiency (Patient 1) 
and phosphoserine aminotransferase (PSAT1) deficiency (Patient 2), presenting 
with congenital microcephaly (<3rd centile at birth) and encephalopathy with 
spasticity. Patient 1 had also intractable seizures. A treatment with oral 
l-serine was started at age 4.5 years and 3 months respectively.
RESULTS: Serine levels were low in plasma and CSF relative to the reference 
population, for which we confirm recently redefined intervals based on a larger 
number of samples. l-Serine treatment led in patient 1 to a significant 
reduction of seizures after one week of treatment and decrease of 
electroencephalographic abnormalities within one year. In patient 2 treatment 
with l-serine led to an improvement of spasticity. However for both patients, 
l-serine failed to improve substantially head circumference (HC) and 
neurocognitive development. In a couple related to patient's 2 family, dosage of 
serine was performed on fetal cord blood when the fetus presented severe 
microcephaly, showing reduced serine levels at 30 weeks of pregnancy.
CONCLUSIONS: l-Serine treatment in patients with 2 different serine synthesis 
defects, led to a significant reduction of seizures and an improvement of 
spasticity, but failed to improve substantially neurocognitive impairment. 
Therefore, CSF and plasma serine levels should be measured in all cases of 
severe microcephaly at birth to screen for serine deficiency, as prompt 
treatment with l-serine may significantly impact the outcome of the disease. 
Reduced serine levels in fetal cord blood may also be diagnostic as early as 30 
weeks of pregnancy.

Copyright © 2015 European Paediatric Neurology Society. Published by Elsevier 
Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejpn.2015.10.007
PMID: 26610677 [Indexed for MEDLINE]