1. Front Plant Sci. 2015 Nov 19;6:1012. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2015.01012. eCollection
 2015.

From Genetics to Functional Genomics: Improvement in Drought Signaling and 
Tolerance in Wheat.

Budak H(1), Hussain B(1), Khan Z(1), Ozturk NZ(2), Ullah N(1).

Author information:
(1)Plant Genomics Group, Molecular Biology, Genetics and Bioengineering Program, 
Faculty of Engineering and Natural Sciences, Sabanci University Istanbul, 
Turkey.
(2)Department of Agricultural Genetic Engineering, Faculty of Agricultural 
Sciences and Technologies, Niǧde University Niǧde, Turkey.

Drought being a yield limiting factor has become a major threat to international 
food security. It is a complex trait and drought tolerance response is carried 
out by various genes, transcription factors (TFs), microRNAs (miRNAs), hormones, 
proteins, co-factors, ions, and metabolites. This complexity has limited the 
development of wheat cultivars for drought tolerance by classical breeding. 
However, attempts have been made to fill the lost genetic diversity by crossing 
wheat with wild wheat relatives. In recent years, several molecular markers 
including single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and quantitative trait loci 
(QTLs) associated with genes for drought signaling pathways have been reported. 
Screening of large wheat collections by marker assisted selection (MAS) and 
transformation of wheat with different genes/TFs has improved drought signaling 
pathways and tolerance. Several miRNAs also provide drought tolerance to wheat 
by regulating various TFs/genes. Emergence of OMICS techniques including 
transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics, and ionomics has helped to identify 
and characterize the genes, proteins, metabolites, and ions involved in drought 
signaling pathways. Together, all these efforts helped in understanding the 
complex drought tolerance mechanism. Here, we have reviewed the advances in wide 
hybridization, MAS, QTL mapping, miRNAs, transgenic technique, genome editing 
system, and above mentioned functional genomics tools for identification and 
utility of signaling molecules for improvement in wheat drought tolerance.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2015.01012
PMCID: PMC4652017
PMID: 26635838