1. PLoS Pathog. 2015 Dec 11;11(12):e1005318. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005318. 
eCollection 2015 Dec.

Respiratory Syncytial Virus Uses CX3CR1 as a Receptor on Primary Human Airway 
Epithelial Cultures.

Johnson SM(1)(2), McNally BA(1)(2), Ioannidis I(1)(2), Flano E(1)(2), Teng 
MN(3), Oomens AG(4), Walsh EE(5), Peeples ME(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Vaccines and Immunity, The Research Institute at Nationwide 
Children's Hospital, Columbus, Ohio, United States of America.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, The Ohio State University College of Medicine, 
Columbus, Ohio, United States of America.
(3)Division of Allergy and Immunology, Department of Internal Medicine, Morsani 
College of Medicine, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida, United States 
of America.
(4)Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, 
Oklahoma, United States of America.
(5)School of Medicine and Dentistry, University of Rochester Medical Center, 
Rochester, New York, United States of America.

Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is the most frequent cause of lower 
respiratory disease in infants, but no vaccine or effective therapy is 
available. The initiation of RSV infection of immortalized cells is largely 
dependent on cell surface heparan sulfate (HS), a receptor for the RSV 
attachment (G) glycoprotein in immortalized cells. However, RSV infects the 
ciliated cells in primary well differentiated human airway epithelial (HAE) 
cultures via the apical surface, but HS is not detectable on this surface. Here 
we show that soluble HS inhibits infection of immortalized cells, but not HAE 
cultures, confirming that HS is not the receptor on HAE cultures. Conversely, a 
"non-neutralizing" monoclonal antibody against the G protein that does not block 
RSV infection of immortalized cells, does inhibit infection of HAE cultures. 
This antibody was previously shown to block the interaction between the G 
protein and the chemokine receptor CX3CR1 and we have mapped the binding site 
for this antibody to the CX3C motif and its surrounding region in the G protein. 
We show that CX3CR1 is present on the apical surface of ciliated cells in HAE 
cultures and especially on the cilia. RSV infection of HAE cultures is reduced 
by an antibody against CX3CR1 and by mutations in the G protein CX3C motif. 
Additionally, mice lacking CX3CR1 are less susceptible to RSV infection. These 
findings demonstrate that RSV uses CX3CR1 as a cellular receptor on HAE cultures 
and highlight the importance of using a physiologically relevant model to study 
virus entry and antibody neutralization.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005318
PMCID: PMC4676609
PMID: 26658574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.