1. Clin Genet. 2016 Aug;90(2):127-33. doi: 10.1111/cge.12712. Epub 2016 Feb 16.

Mutation analysis of genes within the dynactin complex in a cohort of hereditary 
peripheral neuropathies.

Tey S(1), Ahmad-Annuar A(1), Drew AP(2), Shahrizaila N(3), Nicholson GA(2)(4), 
Kennerson ML(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Science, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, 
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(2)Northcott Neuroscience Laboratory, ANZAC Research Institute, and Sydney 
Medical School, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia.
(3)Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, Kuala 
Lumpur, Malaysia.
(4)Molecular Medicine Laboratory, Concord Hospital, Sydney, Australia.

The cytoplasmic dynein-dynactin genes are attractive candidates for 
neurodegenerative disorders given their functional role in retrograde transport 
along neurons. The cytoplasmic dynein heavy chain (DYNC1H1) gene has been 
implicated in various neurodegenerative disorders, and dynactin 1 (DCTN1) genes 
have been implicated in a wide spectrum of disorders including motor neuron 
disease, Parkinson's disease, spinobulbar muscular atrophy and hereditary 
spastic paraplegia. However, the involvement of other dynactin genes with 
inherited peripheral neuropathies (IPN) namely, hereditary sensory neuropathy, 
hereditary motor neuropathy and Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease is under reported. 
We screened eight genes; DCTN1-6 and ACTR1A and ACTR1B in 136 IPN patients using 
whole-exome sequencing and high-resolution melt (HRM) analysis. Eight 
non-synonymous variants (including one novel variant) and three synonymous 
variants were identified. Four variants have been reported previously in other 
studies, however segregation analysis within family members excluded them from 
causing IPN in these families. No variants of disease significance were 
identified in this study suggesting the dynactin genes are unlikely to be a 
common cause of IPNs. However, with the ease of querying gene variants from 
exome data, these genes remain worthwhile candidates to assess unsolved IPN 
families for variants that may affect the function of the proteins.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cge.12712
PMID: 26662454 [Indexed for MEDLINE]