1. Dig Liver Dis. 2016 Feb;48(2):203-5. doi: 10.1016/j.dld.2015.11.002. Epub 2015
 Dec 1.

Elevation of gamma-glutamyl transferase in adult: Should we think about 
progressive familiar intrahepatic cholestasis?

Oliveira HM(1), Pereira C(2), Santos Silva E(3), Pinto-Basto J(4), Pessegueiro 
Miranda H(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Unidade Local de Saúde de Matosinhos - 
Hospital Pedro Hispano, Senhora da Hora Matosinhos, Portugal. Electronic 
address: oliveira.hugom@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Centro Hospitalar do Porto - Hospital de 
Santo António, Porto, Portugal.
(3)Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Department of Child and Adolescent, 
Centro Hospitalar do Porto - Hospital de Santo António, Porto, Portugal.
(4)CGC Genetics/Centro Genética Clinica, Porto, Portugal.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Centro Hospitalar do Porto - Hospital de 
Santo António, Porto, Portugal; Liver and Pancreatic Transplantation Unit, 
Centro Hospitalar do Porto - Hospital de Santo António, Porto, Portugal; 
Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar (ICBAS) - Universidade do Porto, 
Porto, Portugal; Instituto de Saúde Publica da Universidade do Porto (ISPUP) - 
Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal.

BACKGROUND: There are three types of progressive familial intrahepatic 
cholestasis (PFIC). Type 3 is characterized by elevated gamma-glutamyl 
transferase (γ-GT) and it can be diagnosed in adolescence/adulthood. The genetic 
defect of PFIC 3 appears to explain the pathogenesis of intrahepatic cholestasis 
of pregnancy (ICP).
AIMS: Draw attention to this rare disease, especially in adulthood, and clarify 
the association between ICP and PFIC 3.
RESULTS: We describe a series of cases from a Portuguese northern family with 
two brothers presenting chronic cholestasis since adolescence. Brother 1: since 
15-years-old with pruritus and elevated γ-GT ∼6x. Brother 2: pre-term, due to 
severe maternal pruritus and jaundice, since 13-years-old with pruritus, 
jaundice and ∼8x γ-GT elevation. Common causes of cholestasis were excluded and 
liver histologies were nonspecific. Research for mutation on ABCB4 gene showed 
mutations in both alleles.
CONCLUSION: Disease and mechanisms that determine cholestasis are complex and 
their understanding may provide new therapeutics.

Copyright © 2015 Editrice Gastroenterologica Italiana S.r.l. Published by 
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dld.2015.11.002
PMID: 26699824 [Indexed for MEDLINE]