1. PLoS One. 2015 Dec 21;10(12):e0145367. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0145367. 
eCollection 2015.

The Role of the Carboxyl Terminus Helix C-D Linker in Regulating KCNQ3 K+ 
Current Amplitudes by Controlling Channel Trafficking.

Choveau FS(1), Zhang J(1), Bierbower SM(1), Sharma R(2), Shapiro MS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Texas Health Science Center at San 
Antonio, San Antonio, Texas, United States of America.
(2)Department of Cellular and Structural Biology, University of Texas Health 
Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas, United States of America.

In the central and peripheral nervous system, the assembly of KCNQ3 with KCNQ2 
as mostly heteromers, but also homomers, underlies "M-type" currents, a 
slowly-activating voltage-gated K+ current that plays a dominant role in 
neuronal excitability. KCNQ3 homomers yield much smaller currents compared to 
KCNQ2 or KCNQ4 homomers and KCNQ2/3 heteromers. This smaller current has been 
suggested to result either from divergent channel surface expression or from a 
pore that is more unstable in KCNQ3. Channel surface expression has been shown 
to be governed by the distal part of the C-terminus in which helices C and D are 
critical for channel trafficking and assembly. A sequence alignment of this 
region in KCNQ channels shows that KCNQ3 possesses a longer linker between helix 
C and D compared to the other KCNQ subunits. Here, we investigate the role of 
the extra residues of this linker on KCNQ channel expression. Deletion of these 
residues increased KCNQ3 current amplitudes. Total internal reflection 
fluorescence imaging and plasma membrane protein assays suggest that the 
increase in current is due to a higher surface expression of the channels. 
Conversely, introduction of the extra residues into the linker between helices C 
and D of KCNQ4 reduced current amplitudes by decreasing the number of KCNQ4 
channels at the plasma membrane. Confocal imaging suggests a higher fraction of 
channels, which possess the extra residues of helix C-D linker, were retained 
within the endoplasmic reticulum. Such retention does not appear to lead to 
protein accumulation and activation of the unfolded protein response that 
regulates protein folding and maintains endoplasmic reticulum homeostasis. Taken 
together, we conclude that extra helix C-D linker residues play a role in KCNQ3 
current amplitudes by controlling the exit of the channel from the endoplasmic 
reticulum.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0145367
PMCID: PMC4687061
PMID: 26692086 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.