1. PLoS One. 2015 Dec 23;10(12):e0145009. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0145009. 
eCollection 2015.

Expression and Functions of CreD, an Inner Membrane Protein in Stenotrophomonas 
maltophilia.

Huang HH(1), Lin YT(2)(3), Chen WC(1), Huang YW(1), Chen SJ(4), Yang TC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Laboratory Science in Medicine, National 
Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Taipei Veterans 
General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)School of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Life Science, Institute of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology and 
TechComm-5, College of Life Science, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.

CreBC is a highly conserved two-component regulatory system (TCS) in several 
gram-negative bacteria, including Escherichia coli, Aeromonas spp., Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa, and Stenotrophomonas maltophilia. CreD is a conserved gene that 
encodes a predicted inner-membrane protein and is located near the creBC loci. 
Activation of CreBC increases creD expression; therefore, creD expression is 
generally used as a measure of CreBC activation in E. coli, Aeromonas spp., and 
P. aeruginosa systems. In this article, we aim to elucidate the expression of 
creD and further to investigate its functions in S. maltophilia. In spite of a 
short intergenic region of 81 bp between creBC and creD, creD is expressed 
separately from the adjacent creBC operon and from a promoter immediately 
upstream of creD (PcreD) in S. maltophilia. We found that the promoter activity 
of PcreD is negatively regulated by the creBC TCS, positively regulated by the 
bacterial culture density, and not affected by β-lactams. Furthermore, creD 
expression is not significantly altered in the presence of the phosphor-mimic 
variant of CreB, CreB(D55E), which mimics activated CreB. The functions of CreD 
of S. maltophilia were assessed by comparison among the following: wild-type KJ; 
the creD isogenic mutant, KJΔCreD; and the complementary strain, KJΔCreD(pCreD). 
The mutant lacking creD had cell division defects and aberrations in cell 
envelope integrity, which then triggered the σE-mediated envelope stress 
response. Thus, the results indicated that CreD plays a critical role in the 
maintenance of envelope integrity.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0145009
PMCID: PMC4689548
PMID: 26698119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.