1. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth. 2015 Dec 22;15:347. doi: 10.1186/s12884-015-0785-8.

Magnesium sulphate for fetal neuroprotection: benefits and challenges of a 
systematic knowledge translation project in Canada.

Teela KC(1), De Silva DA(2)(3), Chapman K(4), Synnes AR(5), Sawchuck D(6), Basso 
M(7), Liston RM(8), von Dadelszen P(9)(10), Magee LA(11)(12)(13)(14); MAG-CP 
Collaborative Group.

Collaborators: De Silva D, von Dadelszen P, Magee LA, Synnes A, Cooper S, 
Derderer L, Young C, Lux C, Olatunbosun F, Carson G, Natale R, Kennedy L, 
Whittle W, Muller K, Ladhani N, Walker M, Peng M, Bujold E, Gouin K, Tetu A, 
Allen V, Crane J, Hutchens D, Adams S, Andrews J, Butt K, Murphy-Kaulbeck L, 
Gaudet L, Williams C.

Author information:
(1)Seattle University College of Nursing, Seattle, Washington, USA. 
kateteela@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, Canada. Dane.DeSilva@cw.bc.ca.
(3)Child and Family Research Institute, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, Canada. Dane.DeSilva@cw.bc.ca.
(4)Department of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, Canada. kc.healthsci@gmail.com.
(5)Division of Neonatology, Department of Paediatrics, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, Canada. asynnes@cw.bc.ca.
(6)Department of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, Canada. Diane.Sawchuck@viha.ca.
(7)Department of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, Canada. mbasso@cw.bc.ca.
(8)Department of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, Canada. robertliston@shaw.ca.
(9)Department of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, Canada. pvondade@sgul.ac.uk.
(10)Child and Family Research Institute, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, Canada. pvondade@sgul.ac.uk.
(11)Department of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, Canada. LMagee@sgul.ac.uk.
(12)Child and Family Research Institute, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, Canada. LMagee@sgul.ac.uk.
(13)Department of Medicine, University of British Columbia and British Columbia 
Women's Hospital and Health Centre, Vancouver, Canada. LMagee@sgul.ac.uk.
(14)University of London, Cranmer Terrace, Rm J0.27, Jenner Wing, St. George's, 
SW17, London, 0RE, UK. LMagee@sgul.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Administration of magnesium sulphate (MgSO4) to women with imminent 
preterm birth at <34 weeks is an evidence-based antenatal neuroprotective 
strategy to prevent cerebral palsy. Although a Society of Obstetricians and 
Gynaecologists of Canada (SOGC) national guideline with practice recommendations 
based on relevant clinical evidence exists, ongoing controversies about aspects 
of this treatment remain. Given this, we anticipated managed knowledge 
translation (KT) would be needed to facilitate uptake of the guidelines into 
practice. As part of the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR)-funded 
MAG-CP (MAGnesium sulphate to prevent Cerebral Palsy) project, we aimed to 
compare three KT methods designed to impact both individual health care 
providers and the organizational systems in which they work.
METHODS: The KT methods undertaken were an interactive online e-learning module 
available to all SOGC members, and at MAG-CP participating sites, on-site 
educational rounds and focus group discussions, and circulation of an anonymous 
'Barriers and Facilitators' survey for the systematic identification of 
facilitators and barriers for uptake of practice change. We compared these 
strategies according to: (i) breadth of respondents reached; (ii) rates and 
richness of identified barriers, facilitators, and knowledge needed; and (iii) 
cost.
RESULTS: No individual KT method was superior to the others by all criteria, and 
in combination, they provided richer information than any individual method. The 
e-learning module reached the most diverse audience of health care providers, 
the site visits provided opportunity for iterative dialogue, and the survey was 
the least expensive. Although the site visits provided the most detailed 
information around individual and organizational barriers, the 'Barriers and 
Facilitators' survey provided more detail regarding social-level barriers. The 
facilitators identified varied by KT method. The type of knowledge needed was 
further defined by the e-learning module and surveys.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that a multifaceted approach to KT is optimal 
for translating national obstetric guidelines into clinical practice. As audit 
and feedback are essential parts of the process by which evidence to practice 
gaps are closed, MAG-CP is continuing the iterative KT process described in this 
paper concurrent with tracking of MgSO4 use for fetal neuroprotection and 
maternal and child outcomes until September 2015; results are anticipated in 
2016.

DOI: 10.1186/s12884-015-0785-8
PMCID: PMC4688933
PMID: 26694323 [Indexed for MEDLINE]