1. PLoS One. 2015 Dec 22;10(12):e0145456. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0145456. 
eCollection 2015.

Nutrigenomic and Nutritional Analyses Reveal the Effects of Pelleted Feeds on 
Asian Seabass (Lates calcarifer).

Ngoh SY(1)(2), Tan D(1), Shen X(1), Kathiresan P(1), Jiang J(1)(3)(4), Liew 
WC(1), Thevasagayam NM(1), Kwan HY(1), Saju JM(1), Prakki SR(1), Goh CH(5), Wong 
HC(1), Chan TT(1), Mézes M(6), Orbán L(1)(7)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Reproductive Genomics Group, Temasek Life Sciences Laboratory, 1 Research 
Link, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.
(2)School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 60 Nanyang 
Drive, Singapore, Singapore.
(3)Marine Aquaculture Centre, Agri-Food and Veterinary Authority, St. John's 
Island, Singapore.
(4)Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore, 14 
Science Drive, Singapore, Singapore.
(5)Fish Facility, Temasek Life Sciences Laboratory, 1 Research Link, National 
University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.
(6)Department of Nutrition, Szent István University, Gödöllő, Páter Károly utca 
1, Hungary.
(7)Department of Animal Sciences and Breeding, Georgikon Faculty, University of 
Pannonia, Deák Ferenc u. 16, Keszthely, Hungary.
(8)Centre for Comparative Genomics, Murdoch University, 90 South Street, 
Murdoch, Australia.
(9)Department of Aquaculture, Szent István University, Gödöllő, Páter Károly 
utca 1, Hungary.

As nutrition-related expenses constitute the majority of the costs for 
aquaculture farms, it is essential for them to use feeds that provide an ideal 
combination of nutrients for the species of choice. In this study, the relative 
effect of consuming three different pelleted feeds (B, C and D) in comparison to 
frozen baitfish (A; control) were compared on juvenile Asian seabass (77.3 ± 
22.4g) that were selected for increased growth rate over two generations. Our 
objectives were: 1) to evaluate the effects of different pelleted feeds based on 
overall physiological changes and nutritional quality of fillets; 2) improve our 
understanding of the underlying mechanisms with transcriptomic analysis; 3) if 
possible, identify the feed type that supports the growth of these fishes 
without substantially reducing the nutritional quality of fillet. The growth 
performance, fatty acid composition of fillet, hepatic histology and 
transcriptome of the fishes (Groups A-D) were analyzed. The majority of fatty 
acids of the fillets, except γ-linolenic acid (GLA, C18:3n6), correlated 
significantly with the respective diets. Asian seabass fed Feed C showed highest 
specific growth rate (SGR) and feed conversion efficiency (FCE) with closest 
histology and transcriptomic profile to control, but their fillet contained the 
highest n6/n3 ratio. When the liver-based transcriptomes were analyzed, a 
complex set of differentially expressed genes were detected between groups fed 
pelleted feeds and controls as well as among the pellet-fed groups themselves. 
Significant enrichment of genes with growth-related function tallied with the 
morphological data measured. When compared with control (Group A), 'Biosynthesis 
of unsaturated fatty acids' and 'Steroid biosynthesis' pathways were 
significantly enriched in pellet-fed groups. Reduced goblet cell numbers were 
observed in the gut of pellet-fed fish compared to controls and fads6 was found 
to be a suitable candidate gene to separate wild-caught Asian seabass, from 
pellet-fed ones. These results provide insights for researchers on the various 
effects of feeds on the biochemistry and global gene expression of the fish and 
potentially for seabass farms to make more informed feed choices.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0145456
PMCID: PMC4687856
PMID: 26696533 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.