1. Nat Neurosci. 2016 Jan;19(1):10-9. doi: 10.1038/nn.4190.

An epigenetic gateway to brain tumor cell identity.

Mack SC(1), Hubert CG(1), Miller TE(1)(2)(3), Taylor MD(4)(5), Rich JN(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Lerner Research 
Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(2)Department of Genetics and Genome Sciences, Case Western Reserve University 
School of Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, 
Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(4)Arthur and Sonia Labatt Brain Tumour Research Centre, Hospital for Sick 
Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(5)Division of Neurosurgery, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.
(6)Department of Molecular Medicine, Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of Medicine 
of Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.

Precise targeting of genetic lesions alone has been insufficient to extend brain 
tumor patient survival. Brain cancer cells are diverse in their genetic, 
metabolic and microenvironmental compositions, accounting for their phenotypic 
heterogeneity and disparate responses to therapy. These factors converge at the 
level of the epigenome, representing a unified node that can be disrupted by 
pharmacologic inhibition. Aberrant epigenomes define many childhood and adult 
brain cancers, as demonstrated by widespread changes to DNA methylation 
patterns, redistribution of histone marks and disruption of chromatin structure. 
In this Review, we describe the convergence of genetic, metabolic and 
microenvironmental factors on mechanisms of epigenetic deregulation in brain 
cancer. We discuss how aberrant epigenetic pathways identified in brain tumors 
affect cell identity, cell state and neoplastic transformation, as well as 
addressing the potential to exploit these alterations as new therapeutic 
strategies for the treatment of brain cancer.

DOI: 10.1038/nn.4190
PMCID: PMC5568053
PMID: 26713744 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors declare no 
conflict of interest.