1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2015 Dec 22;6:187. doi: 10.3389/fendo.2015.00187.
 eCollection 2015.

Dopamine and Somatostatin Analogues Resistance of Pituitary Tumors: Focus on 
Cytoskeleton Involvement.

Peverelli E(1), Treppiedi D(1), Giardino E(1), Vitali E(2), Lania AG(3), 
Mantovani G(1).

Author information:
(1)Endocrinology and Diabetology Unit, Department of Clinical Sciences and 
Community Health, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, 
University of Milan , Milan , Italy.
(2)Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Endocrinology, IRCCS Clinical and 
Research Institute Humanitas , Milan , Italy.
(3)Endocrine Unit, IRCCS Humanitas Clinical Institute, University of Milan , 
Milan , Italy.

Pituitary tumors, that origin from excessive proliferation of a specific subtype 
of pituitary cell, are mostly benign tumors, but may cause significant morbidity 
in affected patients, including visual and neurologic manifestations from 
mass-effect, or endocrine syndromes caused by hormone hypersecretion. Dopamine 
(DA) receptor DRD2 and somatostatin (SS) receptors (SSTRs) represent the main 
targets of pharmacological treatment of pituitary tumors since they mediate 
inhibitory effects on both hormone secretion and cell proliferation, and their 
expression is retained by most of these tumors. Although long-acting DA and SS 
analogs are currently used in the treatment of prolactin (PRL)- and growth 
hormone (GH)-secreting pituitary tumors, respectively, clinical practice 
indicates a great variability in the frequency and entity of favorable 
responses. The molecular basis of the pharmacological resistance are still 
poorly understood, and several potential molecular mechanisms have been 
proposed, including defective expression or genetic alterations of DRD2 and 
SSTRs, or an impaired signal transduction. Recently, a role for cytoskeleton 
protein filamin A (FLNA) in DRD2 and SSTRs receptors expression and signaling in 
PRL- and GH-secreting tumors, respectively, has been demonstrated, first 
revealing a link between FLNA expression and responsiveness of pituitary tumors 
to pharmacological therapy. This review provides an overview of the known 
molecular events involved in SS and DA resistance, focusing on the role played 
by FLNA.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2015.00187
PMCID: PMC4686608
PMID: 26733942