1. J Biol Chem. 1989 Sep 25;264(27):15988-92.

Isolation and characterization of thiodigalactoside-resistant mutants of the 
lactose permease which possess an enhanced recognition for maltose.

Franco PJ(1), Eelkema JA, Brooker RJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Cell Biology, University of Minnesota, St. Paul 
55108.

In the current study, lactose permease mutants were isolated which exhibited an 
enhanced recognition for maltose (an alpha-glucoside) but a diminished 
recognition for thiodigalactoside, TDG (a beta-galactoside). Maltose/TDGR 
mutants were obtained from four different parental strains encoding either a 
wild-type permease (pTE18), a mutant lactose permease which recognizes maltose 
(pB15) or mutant lactose permeases which recognize maltose but are resistant to 
inhibition by cellobiose (pTG and pBA). A total of 27 independent mutants were 
isolated: 12 from pTE18, 10 from pB15, 3 from pTG, and 2 from pBA. DNA 
sequencing of the 27 mutants revealed that the mutants contain single base pair 
substitutions within the lac Y gene which result in single amino acid 
substitutions within the lactose permease. All of the mutants obtained from 
pTE18, pTG, and pBA involved a change of Tyr-236 to histidine, phenylalanine, or 
asparagine. From pB15, three different types of mutants were obtained: Tyr-236 
to histidine, Ile-303 to phenylalanine, or His-322 to asparagine. When assayed 
for [14C]maltose transport, the maltose/TDGR mutants were seen to transport 
maltose significantly faster than the wild type. Furthermore, although TDG was 
shown to inhibit the uptake of maltose in the four parental strains, all of the 
mutant strains exhibited a dramatic resistance to TDG inhibition. Most of the 
maltose/TDGR mutants were also shown to be very defective in the transport of 
lactose. However, certain mutants (i.e., Asn-322) exhibited moderate lactose 
transport activity. Finally, it was observed that all of the mutant strains were 
unable to facilitate the uphill accumulation of 
beta-methylthiogalactopyranoside. The locations of the amino acid substitutions 
are discussed with regard to their possible role in sugar recognition.

PMID: 2674122 [Indexed for MEDLINE]