1. PLoS One. 2016 Jan 13;11(1):e0141296. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0141296. 
eCollection 2016.

Genetic Variation at Exon 2 of the MHC Class II DQB Locus in Blue Whale 
(Balaenoptera musculus) from the Gulf of California.

Moreno-Santillán DD(1), Lacey EA(2), Gendron D(3), Ortega J(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratorio de Bioconservación y Manejo, Escuela Nacional de Ciencias 
Biológicas, Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Mexico City, Mexico.
(2)Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, University of California, Berkeley, California, 
United States of America.
(3)Laboratorio de Ecología de Cetáceos y Quelonios, Centro Interdisciplinario de 
Ciencias Marinas, Instituto Politécnico Nacional, La Paz, BCS, México.

The genes of the Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC) play an important role 
in the vertebrate immune response and are among the most polymorphic genes known 
in vertebrates. In some marine mammals, MHC genes have been shown to be 
characterized by low levels of polymorphism compared to terrestrial taxa; this 
reduction in variation is often explained as a result of lower pathogen 
pressures in marine habitats. To determine if this same reduction in variation 
applies to the migratory population of blue whales (Balaenoptera musculus) that 
occurs in the Gulf of California, we genotyped a 172 bp fragment of exon 2 of 
the MHC Class II DQB locus for 80 members of this population. Twenty-two 
putatively functional DQB allotypes were identified, all of which were 
homologous with DQB sequences from other cetacean species. Up to 5 putative 
alleles per individual were identified, suggesting that gene duplication has 
occurred at this locus. Rates of non-synonymous to synonymous substitutions (ω) 
and maximum likelihood analyses of models of nucleotide variation provided 
potential evidence of ongoing positive selection at this exon. Phylogenetic 
analyses of DQB alleles from B. musculus and 16 other species of cetaceans 
revealed trans-specific conservation of MHC variants, suggesting that selection 
has acted on this locus over prolonged periods of time. Collectively our 
findings reveal that immunogenic variation in blue whales is comparable to that 
in terrestrial mammals, thereby providing no evidence that marine taxa are 
subject to reduced pathogen-induced selective pressures.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0141296
PMCID: PMC4712016
PMID: 26761201 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.