1. Neuroscience. 2016 Apr 5;319:206-20. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2016.01.022. 
Epub 2016 Jan 14.

Blast exposure causes dynamic microglial/macrophage responses and microdomains 
of brain microvessel dysfunction.

Huber BR(1), Meabon JS(2), Hoffer ZS(3), Zhang J(4), Hoekstra JG(4), Pagulayan 
KF(2), McMillan PJ(2), Mayer CL(2), Banks WA(5), Kraemer BC(5), Raskind MA(2), 
McGavern DB(6), Peskind ER(2), Cook DG(7).

Author information:
(1)VA Jamaica Plain, Department of Neurology, Boston University School of 
Medicine, Jamaica Plain, MA, USA.
(2)Northwest Network Mental Illness, Research, Education, and Clinical Center 
(MIRECC), VA Puget Sound Healthcare Systems, Seattle, WA, USA; Department of 
Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(3)United States Army, Madigan Army Medical Center, Joint Base Lewis-McChord, 
WA, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, University of Washington School of Medicine, 
Seattle, WA, USA.
(5)Geriatric Research, Education, and Clinical Center (GRECC), Veterans Affairs 
Puget Sound Health Care System, Seattle, WA, USA; Division of Gerontology and 
Geriatric Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, 
WA, USA.
(6)National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes 
of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(7)Geriatric Research, Education, and Clinical Center (GRECC), Veterans Affairs 
Puget Sound Health Care System, Seattle, WA, USA; Division of Gerontology and 
Geriatric Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, 
WA, USA; Department of Pharmacology, University of Washington School of 
Medicine, Seattle, WA, USA. Electronic address: dgcook@u.washington.edu.

Exposure to blast overpressure (BOP) is associated with behavioral, cognitive, 
and neuroimaging abnormalities. We investigated the dynamic responses of 
cortical vasculature and its relation to microglia/macrophage activation in mice 
using intravital two-photon microscopy following mild blast exposure. We found 
that blast caused vascular dysfunction evidenced by microdomains of aberrant 
vascular permeability. Microglial/macrophage activation was specifically 
associated with these restricted microdomains, as evidenced by rapid microglial 
process retraction, increased ameboid morphology, and escape of blood-borne 
Q-dot tracers that were internalized in microglial/macrophage cell bodies and 
phagosome-like compartments. Microdomains of cortical vascular disruption and 
microglial/macrophage activation were also associated with aberrant tight 
junction morphology that was more prominent after repetitive (3×) blast 
exposure. Repetitive, but not single, BOPs also caused TNFα elevation two weeks 
post-blast. In addition, following a single BOP we found that aberrantly 
phosphorylated tau rapidly accumulated in perivascular domains, but cleared 
within four hours, suggesting it was removed from the perivascular area, 
degraded, and/or dephosphorylated. Taken together these findings argue that mild 
blast exposure causes an evolving CNS insult that is initiated by discrete 
disturbances of vascular function, thereby setting the stage for more protracted 
and more widespread neuroinflammatory responses.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2016.01.022
PMCID: PMC5274718
PMID: 26777891 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DISCLOSURE/CONFLICT OF INTEREST JSM is Chief 
Operations Officer of Neurogenix Pharmaceuticals. The other authors declare no 
competing interests