1. Front Pharmacol. 2016 Jan 12;6:321. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2015.00321. eCollection
 2015.

c-Jun N-terminal Kinase (JNK) Signaling as a Therapeutic Target for Alzheimer's 
Disease.

Yarza R(1), Vela S(1), Solas M(2), Ramirez MJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Navarra Pamplona, 
Spain.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of NavarraPamplona, 
Spain; Navarra Institute for Health ResearchPamplona, Spain.

c-Jun N-terminal kinases (JNKs) are a family of protein kinases that play a 
central role in stress signaling pathways implicated in gene expression, 
neuronal plasticity, regeneration, cell death, and regulation of cellular 
senescence. It has been shown that there is a JNK pathway activation after 
exposure to different stressing factors, including cytokines, growth factors, 
oxidative stress, unfolded protein response signals or Aβ peptides. Altogether, 
JNKs have become a focus of screening strategies searching for new therapeutic 
approaches to diabetes, cancer or liver diseases. In addition, activation of JNK 
has been identified as a key element responsible for the regulation of apoptosis 
signals and therefore, it is critical for pathological cell death associated 
with neurodegenerative diseases and, among them, with Alzheimer's disease (AD). 
In addition, in vitro and in vivo studies have reported alterations of JNK 
pathways potentially associated with pathogenesis and neuronal death in AD. 
JNK's, particularly JNK3, not only enhance Aβ production, moreover it plays a 
key role in the maturation and development of neurofibrillary tangles. This 
review aims to explain the rationale behind testing therapies based on 
inhibition of JNK signaling for AD in terms of current knowledge about the 
pathophysiology of the disease. Keeping in mind that JNK3 is specifically 
expressed in the brain and activated by stress-stimuli, it is possible to 
hypothesize that inhibition of JNK3 might be considered as a potential target 
for treating neurodegenerative mechanisms associated with AD.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2015.00321
PMCID: PMC4709475
PMID: 26793112