1. PLoS One. 2016 Jan 25;11(1):e0147962. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0147962. 
eCollection 2016.

Surveillance for Western Equine Encephalitis, St. Louis Encephalitis, and West 
Nile Viruses Using Reverse Transcription Loop-Mediated Isothermal Amplification.

Wheeler SS(1), Ball CS(2), Langevin SA(2), Fang Y(1), Coffey LL(1), Meagher 
RJ(2).

Author information:
(1)University of California Davis, School of Veterinary Medicine, Department of 
Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, Davis, California, United States of 
America.
(2)Sandia National Laboratories, Biotechnology and Bioengineering Department, 
Livermore, California, United States of America.

Collection of mosquitoes and testing for vector-borne viruses is a key 
surveillance activity that directly influences the vector control efforts of 
public health agencies, including determining when and where to apply 
insecticides. Vector control districts in California routinely monitor for three 
human pathogenic viruses including West Nile virus (WNV), Western equine 
encephalitis virus (WEEV), and St. Louis encephalitis virus (SLEV). Reverse 
transcription quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) offers highly 
sensitive and specific detection of these three viruses in a single multiplex 
reaction, but this technique requires costly, specialized equipment that is 
generally only available in centralized public health laboratories. We report 
the use of reverse transcription loop-mediated isothermal amplification 
(RT-LAMP) to detect WNV, WEEV, and SLEV RNA extracted from pooled mosquito 
samples collected in California, including novel primer sets for specific 
detection of WEEV and SLEV, targeting the nonstructural protein 4 (nsP4) gene of 
WEEV and the 3' untranslated region (3'-UTR) of SLEV. Our WEEV and SLEV RT-LAMP 
primers allowed detection of <0.1 PFU/reaction of their respective targets in 
<30 minutes, and exhibited high specificity without cross reactivity when tested 
against a panel of alphaviruses and flaviviruses. Furthermore, the SLEV primers 
do not cross-react with WNV, despite both viruses being closely related members 
of the Japanese encephalitis virus complex. The SLEV and WEEV primers can also 
be combined in a single RT-LAMP reaction, with discrimination between amplicons 
by melt curve analysis. Although RT-qPCR is approximately one order of magnitude 
more sensitive than RT-LAMP for all three targets, the RT-LAMP technique is less 
instrumentally intensive than RT-qPCR and provides a more cost-effective method 
of vector-borne virus surveillance.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0147962
PMCID: PMC4726549
PMID: 26807734 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have read the 
journal's policy and have the following competing interest: Authors CSB, RJM, 
and SAL are current or former employees of Sandia National Laboratories. The 
specific roles of these authors are articulated in the Author Contributions 
section. Sandia National Laboratories did not have any additional role in the 
study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation 
of the manuscript. The authors declare no competing interests related to their 
employment with Sandia National Laboratories. This did not alter the authors' 
adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.