1. Med Hypotheses. 2016 Feb;87:69-74. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2015.11.016. Epub 2015 
Nov 26.

Submolecular regulation of cell transformation by deuterium depleting water 
exchange reactions in the tricarboxylic acid substrate cycle.

Boros LG(1), D'Agostino DP(2), Katz HE(3), Roth JP(4), Meuillet EJ(5), Somlyai 
G(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, UCLA School of Medicine Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, 
Torrance, CA, USA; The Los Angeles Biomedical Research Institute (LABiOMED), 
Torrance, CA, USA; SIDMAP, LLC, Los Angeles, CA, USA. Electronic address: 
boros@labiomed.org.
(2)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Physiology, Morsani College of 
Medicine, Hyperbaric Biomedical Research Laboratory, University of South 
Florida, Tampa, FL, USA.
(3)Department of Materials Science & Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(4)Department of Chemistry, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(5)The University of Arizona Comprehensive Cancer Center, The University of 
Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA; Department of Nutritional Sciences, The University of 
Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA.
(6)HYD, LLC for Cancer Research & Drug Development, Budapest, Hungary.

The naturally occurring isotope of hydrogen ((1)H), deuterium ((2)H), could have 
an important biological role. Deuterium depleted water delays tumor progression 
in mice, dogs, cats and humans. Hydratase enzymes of the tricarboxylic acid 
(TCA) cycle control cell growth and deplete deuterium from redox cofactors, 
fatty acids and DNA, which undergo hydride ion and hydrogen atom transfer 
reactions. A model is proposed that emphasizes the terminal complex of 
mitochondrial electron transport chain reducing molecular oxygen to deuterium 
depleted water (DDW); this affects gluconeogenesis as well as fatty acid 
oxidation. In the former, the DDW is thought to diminish the deuteration of 
sugar-phosphates in the DNA backbone, helping to preserve stability of hydrogen 
bond networks, possibly protecting against aneuploidy and resisting strand 
breaks, occurring upon exposure to radiation and certain anticancer 
chemotherapeutics. DDW is proposed here to link cancer prevention and treatment 
using natural ketogenic diets, low deuterium drinking water, as well as DDW 
production as the mitochondrial downstream mechanism of targeted anti-cancer 
drugs such as Avastin and Glivec. The role of (2)H in biology is a potential 
missing link to the elusive cancer puzzle seemingly correlated with cancer 
epidemiology in western populations as a result of excessive (2)H loading from 
processed carbohydrate intake in place of natural fat consumption.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mehy.2015.11.016
PMCID: PMC4733494
PMID: 26826644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]