1. Front Neurosci. 2016 Jan 14;9:507. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2015.00507. eCollection 
2015.

Altered Expression Patterns of Inflammation-Associated and Trophic Molecules in 
Substantia Nigra and Striatum Brain Samples from Parkinson's Disease, Incidental 
Lewy Body Disease and Normal Control Cases.

Walker DG(1), Lue LF(1), Serrano G(2), Adler CH(3), Caviness JN(3), Sue LI(2), 
Beach TG(2).

Author information:
(1)Banner Sun Health Research InstituteSun City, AZ, USA; Neurodegenerative 
Disease Research Center, Biodesign Institute, Arizona State UniversityTempe, AZ, 
USA.
(2)Banner Sun Health Research Institute Sun City, AZ, USA.
(3)Neurology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine Scottsdale, AZ, USA.

Evidence of inflammation has been consistently associated with pathology in 
Parkinson's disease (PD)-affected brains, and has been suggested as a causative 
factor. Dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra (SN) pars compacta, whose 
loss results in the clinical symptoms associated with PD, are particularly 
susceptible to inflammatory damage and oxidative stress. Inflammation in the 
striatum, where SN dopaminergic neurons project, is also a feature of PD brains. 
It is not known whether inflammatory changes occur first in striatum or SN. Many 
animal models of PD have implicated certain inflammatory molecules with 
dopaminergic cell neuronal loss; however, there have been few studies to 
validate these findings by measuring the levels of these and other inflammatory 
factors in human PD brain samples. This study also included samples from 
incidental Lewy body disease (ILBD) cases, since ILBD is considered a 
non-symptomatic precursor to PD, with subjects having significant loss of 
tyrosine hydroxylase-producing neurons. We hypothesized that there may be a 
progressive change in key inflammatory factors in ILBD samples intermediate 
between neurologically normal and PD. To address this, we used a quantitative 
antibody-array platform (Raybiotech-Quantibody arrays) to measure the levels of 
160 different inflammation-associated cytokines, chemokines, growth factors, and 
related molecules in extracts of SN and striatum from clinically and 
neuropathologically characterized PD, ILBD, and normal control cases. Patterns 
of changes in inflammation and related molecules were distinctly different 
between SN and striatum. Our results showed significantly different levels of 
interleukin (IL)-5, IL-15, monokine induced by gamma interferon, and IL-6 
soluble receptor in SN between disease groups. A different panel of 13 proteins 
with significant changes in striatum, with IL-15 as the common feature, was 
identified. Although the ability to detect some proteins was limited by 
sensitivity, patterns of expression indicated involvement of certain T-cell 
cytokines, vascular changes, and loss of certain growth factors, with disease 
progression. The results demonstrate the feasibility of profiling inflammatory 
molecules using diseased human brain samples, and have provided additional 
targets to validate in relation to PD pathology.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2015.00507
PMCID: PMC4712383
PMID: 26834537