1. Int J Nanomedicine. 2016 Jan 27;11:465-78. doi: 10.2147/IJN.S95032.
eCollection  2016.

Local delivery of controlled-release simvastatin to improve the biocompatibility 
of polyethylene terephthalate artificial ligaments for reconstruction of the 
anterior cruciate ligament.

Zhang P(1), Han F(2), Li Y(1), Chen J(1), Chen T(1), Zhi Y(1), Jiang J(1), Lin 
C(2), Chen S(1), Zhao P(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Sports Medicine, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, 
People's Republic of China.
(2)Shanghai East Hospital, The Institute for Biomedical Engineering and 
Nanoscience, School of Medicine, Tongji University, Shanghai, People's Republic 
of China.

The Ligament Advanced Reinforcement System has recently been widely used as the 
primary graft of choice in anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) reconstruction. But 
the biological graft-bone healing still remains a problem. Previous studies have 
shown that simvastatin (SIM) stimulates bone formation. The objective of this 
study was to investigate whether surface coating with collagen containing 
low-dose SIM microsphere could enhance the surface biocompatibility of 
polyethylene terephthalate (PET) artificial ligaments to accelerate 
graft-to-bone healing. The in vitro studies demonstrated that bone marrow 
stromal cells on the collagen-coated PET scaffolds (COL/PET) and 
simvastatin/collagen-coated PET scaffolds (SIM/COL/PET) proliferated vigorously. 
Compared with the PET group and the COL/PET group, SIM could induce bone marrow 
stromal cells' osteoblastic differentiation, high alkaline phosphatase activity, 
more mineralization deposition, and more expression of osteoblast-related genes, 
such as osteocalcin, runt-related transcription factor 2, bone morphogenetic 
protein-2, and vascular endothelial growth factor, in the SIM/COL/PET group. In 
vivo, rabbits received ACL reconstruction with different scaffolds. Histological 
analysis demonstrated that graft-bone healing was significantly greater with 
angiogenesis and osteogenesis in the SIM/COL/PET group than the other groups. In 
addition, biomechanical testing at the eighth week demonstrated a significant 
increase in the ultimate failure load and stiffness in the SIM/COL/PET group. 
The low dose of SIM-sustained release from SIM/COL/PET promoted the graft-bone 
healing via its effect on both angiogenesis and osteogenesis. This study 
suggested that collagen containing low-dose SIM microsphere coating on the 
surface of PET artificial ligaments could be potentially applied for ACL 
reconstruction.

DOI: 10.2147/IJN.S95032
PMCID: PMC4734794
PMID: 26869789 [Indexed for MEDLINE]