1. Mov Disord. 2016 Apr;31(4):501-11. doi: 10.1002/mds.26475. Epub 2016 Feb 12.

Antidyskinetic effect of A2A and 5HT1A/1B receptor ligands in two animal models 
of Parkinson's disease.

Pinna A(1), Ko WK(2)(3), Costa G(4), Tronci E(5), Fidalgo C(5), Simola N(4), Li 
Q(2)(3), Tabrizi MA(6), Bezard E(2)(3)(7)(8), Carta M(5), Morelli M(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)National Research Council of Italy, Neuroscience Institute, Cagliari, Italy.
(2)Motac Neuroscience Ltd, Manchester, UK.
(3)Institute of Laboratory Animal Sciences, China Academy of Medical Sciences, 
Beijing, China.
(4)Department of Biomedical Sciences, section of Neuropsychopharmacology, 
University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy.
(5)Department of Biomedical Sciences, section of Physiology, University of 
Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy.
(6)Department of Chemical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Ferrara, 
Ferrara, Italy.
(7)Université de Bordeaux, Institut des Maladies Neurodégénératives, Bordeaux, 
France.
(8)CNRS, Institut des Maladies Neurodégénératives, Bordeaux, France.

BACKGROUND: The serotonin 5-HT1A/1B receptor agonist eltoprazine suppressed 
dyskinetic-like behavior in animal models of Parkinson's disease (PD) but 
simultaneously reduced levodopa (l-dopa)-induced motility. Moreover, adenosine 
A2A receptor antagonists, such as preladenant, significantly increased l-dopa 
efficacy in PD without exacerbating dyskinetic-like behavior.
OBJECTIVES: We evaluated whether a combination of eltoprazine and preladenant 
may prevent or suppress l-dopa-induced dyskinesia, without impairing l-dopa's 
efficacy in relieving motor signs, in 2 PD models: unilateral 
6-hydroxydopamine-lesioned rats and 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine 
(MPTP)-treated monkeys.
METHODS: Rotational behavior and abnormal involuntary movements, or disability 
and l-dopa-induced dyskinesia were evaluated in 6-hydroxydopamine-lesioned rats 
and MPTP-treated monkeys, respectively. Moreover, in the rodent striatum, 
induction of immediate-early gene zif-268, an index of long-term changes, was 
correlated with dyskinesia.
RESULTS: In 6-hydroxydopamine-lesioned rats, combined administration of l-dopa 
(4 mg/kg) plus eltoprazine (0.6 mg/kg) plus preladenant (0.3 mg/kg) 
significantly prevented or reduced dyskinetic-like behavior without impairing 
motor activity. Zif-268 was increased in the striatum of rats treated with 
l-dopa and l-dopa plus preladenant compared with vehicle. In contrast, rats 
treated with eltoprazine (with or without preladenant) had lower zif-268 
activation after chronic treatment in both the dyskinetic and l-dopa-non-primed 
groups. Moreover, acute l-dopa plus eltoprazine plus preladenant prevented 
worsening of motor performance (adjusting step) and sensorimotor integration 
deficit. Similar results were obtained in MPTP-treated monkeys, where a 
combination of preladenant with eltoprazine was found to counteract dyskinesia 
and maintain the full therapeutic effects of a low dose of l-dopa.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest a promising nondopaminergic pharmacological 
strategy for the treatment of dyskinesia in PD. © 2016 International Parkinson 
and Movement Disorder Society.

© 2016 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.26475
PMID: 26871939 [Indexed for MEDLINE]