1. Oncotarget. 2016 Apr 5;7(14):17991-8005. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7494.

Loss of tumor suppressor Merlin results in aberrant activation of Wnt/β-catenin 
signaling in cancer.

Morrow KA(1), Das S(2), Meng E(2), Menezes ME(1), Bailey SK(2), Metge BJ(2), 
Buchsbaum DJ(3)(4), Samant RS(2)(4), Shevde LA(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Mitchell Cancer Institute, University of South Alabama, Mobile, AL, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, 
USA.
(3)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 
Birmingham, AL, USA.
(4)Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, 
AL, USA.

The expression of the tumor suppressor Merlin is compromised in nervous system 
malignancies due to genomic aberrations. We demonstrated for the first time, 
that in breast cancer, Merlin protein expression is lost due to 
proteasome-mediated elimination. Immunohistochemical analysis of tumor tissues 
from patients with metastatic breast cancer revealed characteristically reduced 
Merlin expression. Importantly, we identified a functional role for Merlin in 
impeding breast tumor xenograft growth and reducing invasive characteristics. We 
sought to determine a possible mechanism by which Merlin accomplishes this 
reduction in malignant activity. We observed that breast and pancreatic cancer 
cells with loss of Merlin show an aberrant increase in the activity of β-catenin 
concomitant with nuclear localization of β-catenin. We discovered that Merlin 
physically interacts with β-catenin, alters the sub-cellular localization of 
β-catenin, and significantly reduces the protein levels of β-catenin by 
targeting it for degradation through the upregulation of Axin1. Consequently, 
restoration of Merlin inhibited β-catenin-mediated transcriptional activity in 
breast and pancreatic cancer cells. We also present evidence that loss of Merlin 
sensitizes tumor cells to inhibition by compounds that target β-catenin-mediated 
activity. Thus, this study provides compelling evidence that Merlin reduces the 
malignant activity of pancreatic and breast cancer, in part by suppressing the 
Wnt/β-catenin pathway. Given the potent role of Wnt/β-catenin signaling in 
breast and pancreatic cancer and the flurry of activity to test β-catenin 
inhibitors in the clinic, our findings are opportune and provide evidence for 
Merlin in restraining aberrant activation of Wnt/β-catenin signaling.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.7494
PMCID: PMC4951266
PMID: 26908451 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.