1. Oncotarget. 2016 Mar 15;7(11):12000-9. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7455.

Ectopic mineralization of cartilage and collagen-rich tendons and ligaments in 
Enpp1asj-2J mice.

Zhang J(1)(2), Dyment NA(3), Rowe DW(3), Siu SY(1), Sundberg JP(4), Uitto J(1), 
Li Q(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Biology, The Sidney Kimmel Medical 
College at Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)Department of Dermatology, The Fourth Military Medical University, Xijing 
Hospital, Xi'an, China.
(3)Center for Regenerative Medicine and Skeletal Development, University of 
Connecticut Health Center, Farmington, CT, USA.
(4)The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME, USA.

Generalized arterial calcification of infancy (GACI), an autosomal recessive 
disorder caused by mutations in the ENPP1 gene, manifests with extensive 
mineralization of the cardiovascular system. A spontaneous asj-2J mutant mouse 
has been characterized as a model for GACI. Previous studies focused on 
phenotypic characterization of skin and vascular tissues. This study further 
examined the ectopic mineralization phenotype of cartilage, collagen-rich 
tendons and ligaments in this mouse model. The mice were placed on either 
control diet or the "acceleration diet" for up to 12 weeks of age. Soft 
connective tissues, such as ear (elastic cartilage) and trachea (hyaline 
cartilage), were processed for standard histology. Assessment of ectopic 
mineralization in articular cartilage and fibrocartilage as well as tendons and 
ligaments which are attached to long bones were performed using a novel 
cryo-histological method without decalcification. These analyses demonstrated 
ectopic mineralization in cartilages as well as tendons and ligaments in the 
homozygous asj-2J mice at 12 weeks of age, with the presence of immature 
osteophytes displaying alkaline phosphatase and tartrate-resistant acid 
phosphatase activities as early as at 6 weeks of age. Alkaline phosphatase 
activity was significantly increased in asj-2J mouse serum as compared to wild 
type mice, indicating increased bone formation rate in these mice. Together, 
these data highlight the key role of ENPP1 in regulating calcification of both 
soft and skeletal tissues.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.7455
PMCID: PMC4914264
PMID: 26910915 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST There are no Conflict of 
Interests to disclose.