1. J Infect Chemother. 2016 May;22(5):273-80. doi: 10.1016/j.jiac.2016.01.010.
Epub  2016 Feb 28.

Fosfomycin: Resurgence of an old companion.

Sastry S(1), Doi Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, 
Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, 
Pittsburgh, PA, USA. Electronic address: yod4@pitt.edu.

Fosfomycin was discovered over four decades ago, yet has drawn renewed interest 
as an agent active against a range of multidrug-resistant (MDR) and extensively 
drug-resistant (XDR) pathogens. Its unique mechanism of action and broad 
spectrum of activity makes it a promising candidate in the treatment of various 
MDR/XDR infections. There has been a surge of in vitro data on its activity 
against MDR/XDR organisms, both when used as a single agent and in combination 
with other agents. In the United States, fosfomycin is only approved in an oral 
formulation for the treatment of acute uncomplicated urinary tract infections 
(UTIs), whereas in some countries both oral and intravenous formulations are 
available for various indications. Fosfomycin has minimal interactions with 
other medications and has a relatively favorable safety profile, with diarrhea 
being the most common adverse reaction. Fosfomycin has low protein binding and 
is excreted primarily unchanged in the urine. The clinical outcomes of patients 
treated with fosfomycin are favorable for uncomplicated UTIs, but data are 
limited for use in other conditions. Fosfomycin maintains activity against most 
Enterobacteriaceae including Escherichia coli, but plasmid-mediated resistance 
due to inactivation have appeared in recent years, which has the potential to 
compromise its use in the future. In this review, we summarize the current 
knowledge of this resurgent agent and its role in our antimicrobial 
armamentarium.

Copyright © 2016 Japanese Society of Chemotherapy and The Japanese Association 
for Infectious Diseases. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jiac.2016.01.010
PMCID: PMC4833629
PMID: 26923259 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Potential conflict of interest S.S has no 
potential conflicts of interest to declare.