1. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 2;11(3):e0149919. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0149919. 
eCollection 2016.

Novel Acylguanidine Derivatives Targeting Smoothened Induce Antiproliferative 
and Pro-Apoptotic Effects in Chronic Myeloid Leukemia Cells.

Chiarenza A(1), Manetti F(2), Petricci E(2), Ruat M(3), Naldini A(1), Taddei 
M(2), Carraro F(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Developmental Medicine, University of Siena, 
Siena, Italy.
(2)Department of Biotechnology Chemistry and Pharmacy, University of Siena, 
Siena, Italy.
(3)CNRS, UMR-9197, Neuroscience Paris- Saclay Institute, Molecules Circuits 
Department, Signal Transduction and Developmental Neuropharmacology Team, 
Gif-sur-Yvette, France.
(4)Istituto Toscano Tumori, Siena, Italy.

The most relevant therapeutic approaches to treat CML rely on the administration 
of tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) like Imatinib, which are able to counteract 
the activity of Bcr-Abl protein increasing patient's life expectancy and 
survival. Unfortunately, there are some issues TKIs are not able to address; 
first of all TKIs are not so effective in increasing survival of patients in 
blast crisis, second they are not able to eradicate leukemic stem cells (LSC) 
which represent the major cause of disease relapse, and third patients often 
develop resistance to TKIs due to mutations in the drug binding site. For all 
these reasons it's of primary interest to find alternative strategies to treat 
CML. Literature shows that Hedgehog signaling pathway is involved in LSC 
maintenance, and pharmacological inhibition of Smoothened (SMO), one of the key 
molecules of the pathway, has been demonstrated to reduce Bcr-Abl positive bone 
marrow cells and LSC. Consequently, targeting SMO could be a promising way to 
develop a new treatment strategy for CML overcoming the limitations of current 
therapies. In our work we have tested some compounds able to inhibit SMO, and 
among them MRT92 appears to be a very potent SMO antagonist. We found that 
almost all our compounds were able to reduce Gli1 protein levels in K-562 and in 
KU-812 CML cell lines. Furthermore, they were also able to increase Gli1 and SMO 
RNA levels, and to reduce cell proliferation and induce apoptosis/autophagy in 
both the tested cell lines. Finally, we demonstrated that our compounds were 
able to modulate the expression of some miRNAs related to Hedgehog pathway such 
as miR-324-5p and miR-326. Being Hedgehog pathway deeply implicated in the 
mechanisms of CML we may conclude that it could be a good therapeutic target for 
CML and our compounds seem to be promising antagonists of such pathway.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0149919
PMCID: PMC4774938
PMID: 26934052 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.