1. Malar J. 2016 Mar 15;15:161. doi: 10.1186/s12936-016-1213-x.

Generation of Plasmodium falciparum parasite-inhibitory antibodies by 
immunization with recombinantly-expressed CyRPA.

Favuzza P(1)(2), Blaser S(1)(2), Dreyer AM(1)(2), Riccio G(1)(2), Tamborrini 
M(1)(2), Thoma R(3), Matile H(3), Pluschke G(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Medical Parasitology and Infection Biology Department, Swiss Tropical and 
Public Health Institute, Basel, Switzerland.
(2)University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(3)Roche Pharmaceutical Research & Early Development, Small Molecule Research, 
Roche Innovation Center Basel, F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd., Basel, Switzerland.
(4)Medical Parasitology and Infection Biology Department, Swiss Tropical and 
Public Health Institute, Basel, Switzerland. gerd.pluschke@unibas.ch.
(5)University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland. gerd.pluschke@unibas.ch.

BACKGROUND: The pathogenesis of malaria is primarily associated with blood-stage 
infection and there is strong evidence that antibodies specific for parasite 
blood-stage antigens can control parasitaemia. This provides a strong rationale 
for incorporation of asexual blood-stage antigen components into an effective 
multivalent malaria subunit vaccine. On the basis of available genome-wide 
transcriptomic and proteomic data, previously uncharacterized Plasmodium 
falciparum open reading frames were screened for new blood stage vaccine 
candidates. This has led to the identification of the cysteine-rich protective 
antigen (PfCyRPA), which forms together with PfRH5 and PfRipr a multiprotein 
complex that is crucial for erythrocyte invasion.
METHODS: Glycosylated and non-glycosylated variants of recombinant PfCyRPA were 
expressed and produced as secreted protein in mammalian cells. Adjuvanted 
formulations of purified PfCyRPA were tested to assess whether they can 
effectively elicit parasite inhibitory antibodies, and to investigate whether or 
not the glycosylation status affects antibody binding. For this purpose, two 
sets of PfCyRPA-specific mouse monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) have been raised and 
evaluated for functional activity.
RESULTS: Generated PfCyRPA-specific mAbs, irrespective of the immunogen's 
glycosylation status, showed substantial parasite in vitro growth-inhibitory 
activity due to inhibition of erythrocyte invasion by merozoites. Furthermore, 
passive immunization experiments in P. falciparum infected NOD-scid IL2Rγ (null) 
mice engrafted with human erythrocytes demonstrated potent in vivo 
growth-inhibitory activity of generated mAbs.
CONCLUSIONS: Recombinantly expressed PfCyRPA tested as adjuvanted vaccine 
formulations in mice elicited antibodies that significantly inhibit P. 
falciparum asexual blood stage parasite growth both in vitro and in vivo. These 
findings render PfCyRPA a promising blood-stage candidate antigen for inclusion 
into a multicomponent malaria subunit vaccine.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-016-1213-x
PMCID: PMC4791974
PMID: 26979066 [Indexed for MEDLINE]