1. Elife. 2016 Mar 14;5:e11491. doi: 10.7554/eLife.11491.

Localized JNK signaling regulates organ size during development.

Willsey HR(1), Zheng X(2), Carlos Pastor-Pareja J(1), Willsey AJ(3), Beachy 
PA(2), Xu T(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Yale University 
School of Medicine, New Haven, United States.
(2)Departments of Biochemistry and Developmental Biology, Institute for Stem 
Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, 
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, United States.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, United States.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering and National Center for 
International Research, Fudan-Yale Biomedical Research Center, Institute of 
Developmental Biology and Molecular Medicine, School of Life Sciences, Fudan 
University, Shanghai, China.

A fundamental question of biology is what determines organ size. Despite 
demonstrations that factors within organs determine their sizes, intrinsic size 
control mechanisms remain elusive. Here we show that Drosophila wing size is 
regulated by JNK signaling during development. JNK is active in a stripe along 
the center of developing wings, and modulating JNK signaling within this stripe 
changes organ size. This JNK stripe influences proliferation in a non-canonical, 
Jun-independent manner by inhibiting the Hippo pathway. Localized JNK activity 
is established by Hedgehog signaling, where Ci elevates dTRAF1 expression. As 
the dTRAF1 homolog, TRAF4, is amplified in numerous cancers, these findings 
provide a new mechanism for how the Hedgehog pathway could contribute to 
tumorigenesis, and, more importantly, provides a new strategy for cancer 
therapies. Finally, modulation of JNK signaling centers in developing antennae 
and legs changes their sizes, suggesting a more generalizable role for JNK 
signaling in developmental organ size control.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.11491
PMCID: PMC4848088
PMID: 26974344 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that no competing interests 
exist.