1. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 17;11(3):e0150259. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0150259. 
eCollection 2016.

User and Provider Acceptability of Intermittent Screening and Treatment and 
Intermittent Preventive Treatment with Dihydroartemisinin-Piperaquine to Prevent 
Malaria in Pregnancy in Western Kenya.

Hill J(1), Hoyt J(1), Achieng F(2), Ouma P(2), L'lanziva A(2), Kariuki S(2), 
Desai M(3), Webster J(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, 
Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(2)Kenya Medical Research Institute/Centers for Disease Control Research and 
Public Health Collaboration, Kisumu, Kenya.
(3)Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, United States 
of America.
(4)Disease Control Department, London School of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 
London, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: The World Health Organization recommends intermittent preventive 
treatment in pregnancy (IPTp) with sulphadoxine-pyrimethamine (SP) alongside 
long-lasting insecticide-treated nets (LLIN) and case management for reducing 
the risks associated with malaria in pregnancy in areas of moderate-to-high 
transmission in sub-Saharan Africa. Due to increasing Plasmodium falciparum 
resistance to SP, the search for alternative drugs or strategies to control 
malaria in pregnancy is a priority. We assessed the acceptability among pregnant 
women and health providers of intermittent screening and treatment (ISTp) and 
IPTp with dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine (DP) as alternative strategies in the 
context of an un-blinded clinical trial.
METHODS: Qualitative data were collected through ten focus group discussions 
with women participating in a randomized controlled trial to evaluate ISTp or 
IPTp with DP (multi-day regimen) versus IPTp with SP (single dose) in western 
Kenya. Individual in-depth interviews were conducted with 26 health providers 
working in the trial facilities and trial staff.
RESULTS: Women appreciated the advantages of being tested with a rapid 
diagnostic test (RDT) at every ANC visit (although a few women disliked finger 
pricks) and accepted that they would not receive any antimalarial when tested 
RDT-negative. There were differences in women's experiences of the efficacy of 
antimalarials between the trial arms, with more women in the IPTp-SP arm 
reporting they had experienced malaria episodes. Side effects were experienced 
among women taking DP and SP. Although women and trial staff reported adherence 
to the full DP regimen within the trial, health providers were not confident 
that women would adhere to multi-day regimens in non-trial settings. Health 
providers recognized the advantages of ISTp in reducing unnecessary exposure to 
drugs, but lacked confidence in the reliability of RDTs compared to microscopy.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate that, within a trial context, ISTp-DP and 
IPTp-DP were generally acceptable among both users and providers and were 
regarded as potentially valuable alternatives to IPTp-SP. Several challenges 
were identified the most important of which was concerns with achieving 
adherence to DP in non-trial settings, requiring operational feasibility studies 
in routine health systems. Policy adoption of ISTp with RDTs would require a 
major shift in thinking among health providers due to lack of confidence in 
RDTs.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0150259
PMCID: PMC4795545
PMID: 26986471 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.