1. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 21;11(3):e0151775. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0151775. 
eCollection 2016.

High-Throughput Microdissection for Next-Generation Sequencing.

Rosenberg AZ(1), Armani MD(2), Fetsch PA(3), Xi L(4), Pham TT(4), Raffeld M(4), 
Chen Y(2)(5), O'Flaherty N(2), Stussman R(2), Blackler AR(2), Du Q(2), Hanson 
JC(1), Roth MJ(3), Filie AC(3), Roh MH(6), Emmert-Buck MR(2)(7), Hipp JD(1), 
Tangrea MA(2)(8).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Pathology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer 
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of 
America.
(2)Pathogenetics Unit, Laboratory of Pathology, Center for Cancer Research, 
National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, 
United States of America.
(3)Cytopathology Section, Laboratory of Pathology, Center for Cancer Research, 
National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, 
United States of America.
(4)Molecular Diagnostics Unit, Laboratory of Pathology, Center for Cancer 
Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, 
Maryland, United States of America.
(5)Department of Mechanical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, 
Maryland, United States of America.
(6)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United 
States of America.
(7)Avoneaux Medical Institute, Oxford, Maryland, United States of America.
(8)Alvin & Lois Lapidus Cancer Institute, Sinai Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland, 
United States of America.

Precision medicine promises to enhance patient treatment through the use of 
emerging molecular technologies, including genomics, transcriptomics, and 
proteomics. However, current tools in surgical pathology lack the capability to 
efficiently isolate specific cell populations in complex tissues/tumors, which 
can confound molecular results. Expression microdissection (xMD) is an 
immuno-based cell/subcellular isolation tool that procures targets of interest 
from a cytological or histological specimen. In this study, we demonstrate the 
accuracy and precision of xMD by rapidly isolating immunostained targets, 
including cytokeratin AE1/AE3, p53, and estrogen receptor (ER) positive cells 
and nuclei from tissue sections. Other targets procured included green 
fluorescent protein (GFP) expressing fibroblasts, in situ hybridization positive 
Epstein-Barr virus nuclei, and silver stained fungi. In order to assess the 
effect on molecular data, xMD was utilized to isolate specific targets from a 
mixed population of cells where the targets constituted only 5% of the sample. 
Target enrichment from this admixed cell population prior to next-generation 
sequencing (NGS) produced a minimum 13-fold increase in mutation allele 
frequency detection. These data suggest a role for xMD in a wide range of 
molecular pathology studies, as well as in the clinical workflow for samples 
where tumor cell enrichment is needed, or for those with a relative paucity of 
target cells.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0151775
PMCID: PMC4801357
PMID: 26999048 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Michael R. Emmert-Buck and 
Michael A. Tangrea are consultants for xMD Diagnostics, LLC. However, this does 
not alter the authors' adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and 
materials.