1. J Alzheimers Dis. 2016 Mar 31;52(3):831-41. doi: 10.3233/JAD-151015.

Insight into the Dissociation of Behavior from Histology in Synucleinopathies 
and in Related Neurodegenerative Diseases.

Sekiyama K(1), Takamatsu Y(1), Koike W(1), Waragai M(1), Takenouchi T(2), Sugama 
S(3), Hashimoto M(1).

Author information:
(1)Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Sciences, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Division of Animal Sciences, National Institute of Agrobiological Sciences, 
Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.
(3)Department of Physiology, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo, Japan.

Recent clinical trials using immunization approaches against Alzheimer's disease 
(AD) have failed to demonstrate improved cognitive functions in patients, 
despite potent suppression in the formation of both senile plaques and other 
amyloid-β deposits in postmortem brains. Similarly, we observed that treatment 
with ibuprofen, a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug, was effective in 
improving the histopathology, such as reducing both protein aggregation and 
glial activation, in the brains of transgenic mice expressing dementia with Lewy 
bodies-linked P123H β-synuclein. In contrast, only a small improvement in 
cognitive functions was observed in these mice. Collectively, it is predicted 
that histology does not correlate with behavior that is resilient and resistant 
to therapeutic stimuli. Notably, such a 'discrepancy between histology and 
behavior' is reminiscent of AD-like pathologies and incidental Lewy bodies, 
which are frequently encountered in postmortem brains of the elderly who had 
been asymptomatic for memory loss and Parkinsonism during their lives. We 
suggest that 'the discrepancy between histology and behavior' may be a universal 
feature that is associated with various aspects of neurodegenerative diseases. 
Furthermore, given that the cognitive reserve is specifically observed in human 
brains, human behavior may be evolutionally distinct from that in other animals, 
thus, contributing to the differential efficiency of therapy between human and 
lower animals, an important issue in the therapy of neurodegenerative diseases. 
Overall, it is important to better understand 'the discrepancy between histology 
and behavior' in the mechanism of neurodegeneration for the development of 
effective therapies against neurodegenerative diseases.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-151015
PMID: 27031478 [Indexed for MEDLINE]