1. PLoS One. 2016 Apr 6;11(4):e0151572. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0151572. 
eCollection 2016.

Specific Elimination of Latently HIV-1 Infected Cells Using HIV-1 
Protease-Sensitive Toxin Nanocapsules.

Wen J(1), Yan M(1), Liu Y(2), Li J(2), Xie Y(1), Lu Y(2)(3), Kamata M(4), Chen 
IS(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Molecular Genetics, David Geffen 
School of Medicine at University of California, University of California Los 
Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United States of America.
(2)Department of Biomolecular and Chemical Engineering, University of California 
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United States of America.
(3)California NanoSystems Institute (CNSI), University of California Los 
Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United States of America.
(4)Division of Hematology-Oncology, David Geffen School of Medicine at 
University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United States of 
America.
(5)UCLA AIDS Institute, Los Angeles, California, United States of America.

Anti-retroviral drugs suppress HIV-1 plasma viremia to undetectable levels; 
however, latent HIV-1 persists in reservoirs within HIV-1-infected patients. The 
silent provirus can be activated through the use of drugs, including protein 
kinase C activators and histone deacetylase inhibitors. This "shock" approach is 
then followed by "kill" of the producing cells either through direct 
HIV-1-induced cell death or natural immune mechanisms. However, these mechanisms 
are relatively slow and effectiveness is unclear. Here, we develop an approach 
to specifically target and kill cells that are activated early in the process of 
virus production. We utilize a novel nanocapsule technology whereby the ricin A 
chain is encapsulated in an inactive form within a polymer shell. Specificity 
for release of the ricin A toxin is conferred by peptide crosslinkers that are 
sensitive to cleavage by HIV-1 protease. By using well-established latent 
infection models, J-Lat and U1 cells, we demonstrate that only within an 
HIV-1-producing cell expressing functional HIV-1 protease will the nanocapsule 
release its ricin A cargo, shutting down viral and cellular protein synthesis, 
and ultimately leading to rapid death of the producer cell. Thus, we provide 
proof of principle for a novel technology to kill HIV-1-producing cells without 
effects on non-target cells.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0151572
PMCID: PMC4822841
PMID: 27049645 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Calimmune, Inc. did not 
play a role in the study design, data collection and analysis, decision to 
publish, or preparation of the manuscript and only provided financial support in 
the form of the author's salary (MY) subsequent to completion of the data 
presented. All other authors have declared that no competing interests exist. 
This does not alter the authors’ adherence to all PLOS ONE policies on sharing 
data and materials.