1. Brain Dev. 2016 Oct;38(9):871-4. doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2016.03.008. Epub
2016  Apr 4.

SSADH deficiency possibly associated with enzyme activity-reducing SNPs.

Akiyama T(1), Osaka H(2), Shimbo H(3), Kuhara T(4), Shibata T(5), Kobayashi 
K(5), Kurosawa K(6), Yoshinaga H(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Child Neurology, Okayama University Hospital, Japan. Electronic 
address: takiyama@okayama-u.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Jichi Medical University, Japan.
(3)Division of Neurology, Kanagawa Children's Medical Center, Japan.
(4)Japan Clinical Metabolomics Institute, Japan.
(5)Department of Child Neurology, Okayama University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Dentistry, and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Japan.
(6)Division of Genetics, Kanagawa Children's Medical Center, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase (SSADH) deficiency is a rare 
autosomal recessive disorder that affects the degradation of gamma-aminobutyric 
acid and leads to the accumulation of gamma-hydroxybutyric acid (GHB) in body 
fluids. Diagnosis of SSADH deficiency is challenging, since the neurological 
symptoms are non-specific.
CASE: The patient is a nine-year-old Japanese boy who presented with 
developmental delay, autism, epilepsy, and episodic gait disturbance. Brain 
magnetic resonance imaging showed hyperintense lesions in the bilateral thalami, 
globus pallidi, substantia nigra, and dentate nuclei. Urine metabolome analysis 
revealed elevated GHB, which led to a biochemical diagnosis of SSADH deficiency. 
Genetic analysis of the ALDH5A1 gene revealed a novel missense mutation 
c.1586G>A inherited from his father. It also demonstrated three single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) (c.106G>C, c.538C>T, and c.545C>T), all of which 
were inherited from his mother and are known to reduce SSADH enzyme activity. 
There were no duplications or deletions in other exons in the patient or his 
parents. No variants in the upstream, intronic, or downstream regions of the 
ALDH5A1 gene were found in the patient. Enzymatic assay revealed a marked 
reduction of SSADH enzyme activity (≈2% of the lower limit of the normal range).
CONCLUSION: Although other mechanisms cannot be fully excluded, the clinical 
manifestation of SSADH deficiency in this patient may be attributed to the 
combined effect of the mutation and the three enzyme activity-reducing SNPs. 
Urine metabolome analysis effectively detected his elevated GHB and is thus 
considered to be a good screening method for this underdiagnosed and potentially 
manageable metabolic disorder.

Copyright © 2016 The Japanese Society of Child Neurology. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.braindev.2016.03.008
PMID: 27056292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]