1. BioData Min. 2016 Apr 6;9:14. doi: 10.1186/s13040-016-0093-5. eCollection
2016.

Detecting gene-gene interactions using a permutation-based random forest method.

Li J(1), Malley JD(2), Andrew AS(3), Karagas MR(3), Moore JH(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Geisel School of Medicine, Dartmouth College, 
Hanover, NH USA.
(2)Division of Computational Bioscience, Center for Information Technology, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD USA.
(3)Department of Epidemiology, Geisel School of Medicine, Dartmouth College, 
Hanover, NH USA.
(4)Institute for Biomedical Informatics, University of Pennsylvania, 
Pennsylvania, PA USA ; Department of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, The 
Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Pennsylvania, PA USA.

BACKGROUND: Identifying gene-gene interactions is essential to understand 
disease susceptibility and to detect genetic architectures underlying complex 
diseases. Here, we aimed at developing a permutation-based methodology relying 
on a machine learning method, random forest (RF), to detect gene-gene 
interactions. Our approach called permuted random forest (pRF) which identified 
the top interacting single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) pairs by estimating how 
much the power of a random forest classification model is influenced by removing 
pairwise interactions.
RESULTS: We systematically tested our approach on a simulation study with 
datasets possessing various genetic constraints including heritability, number 
of SNPs, sample size, etc. Our methodology showed high success rates for 
detecting the interaction SNP pair. We also applied our approach to two bladder 
cancer datasets, which showed consistent results with well-studied 
methodologies, such as multifactor dimensionality reduction (MDR) and 
statistical epistasis network (SEN). Furthermore, we built permuted random 
forest networks (PRFN), in which we used nodes to represent SNPs and edges to 
indicate interactions.
CONCLUSIONS: We successfully developed a scale-invariant methodology to detect 
pure gene-gene interactions based on permutation strategies and the machine 
learning method random forest. This methodology showed great potential to be 
used for detecting gene-gene interactions to study underlying genetic 
architectures in a scale-free way, which could be benefit to uncover the complex 
disease mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1186/s13040-016-0093-5
PMCID: PMC4822295
PMID: 27053949