1. Viruses. 2016 Apr 21;8(4):114. doi: 10.3390/v8040114.

De Novo Transcriptome Analysis Shows That SAV-3 Infection Upregulates Pattern 
Recognition Receptors of the Endosomal Toll-Like and RIG-I-Like Receptor 
Signaling Pathways in Macrophage/Dendritic Like TO-Cells.

Xu C(1), Evensen Ø(2), Munang'andu HM(3).

Author information:
(1)Section of Aquatic Medicine and Nutrition, Department of Basic Sciences and 
Aquatic Medicine, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine and Biosciences, Norwegian 
University of Life Sciences, Ullevålsveien 72, P.O. Box 8146 Dep NO-0033 Oslo, 
Norway. cheng.xu@nmbu.no.
(2)Section of Aquatic Medicine and Nutrition, Department of Basic Sciences and 
Aquatic Medicine, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine and Biosciences, Norwegian 
University of Life Sciences, Ullevålsveien 72, P.O. Box 8146 Dep NO-0033 Oslo, 
Norway. oystein.evensen@nmbu.no.
(3)Section of Aquatic Medicine and Nutrition, Department of Basic Sciences and 
Aquatic Medicine, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine and Biosciences, Norwegian 
University of Life Sciences, Ullevålsveien 72, P.O. Box 8146 Dep NO-0033 Oslo, 
Norway. hetroney.mweemba.munangandu@nmbu.no.

A fundamental step in cellular defense mechanisms is the recognition of "danger 
signals" made of conserved pathogen associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) 
expressed by invading pathogens, by host cell germ line coded pattern 
recognition receptors (PRRs). In this study, we used RNA-seq and the Kyoto 
encyclopedia of genes and genomes (KEGG) to identify PRRs together with the 
network pathway of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) that recognize salmonid 
alphavirus subtype 3 (SAV-3) infection in macrophage/dendritic like TO-cells 
derived from Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar L) headkidney leukocytes. Our findings 
show that recognition of SAV-3 in TO-cells was restricted to endosomal Toll-like 
receptors (TLRs) 3 and 8 together with RIG-I-like receptors (RLRs) and not the 
nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-like receptors NOD-like receptor 
(NLRs) genes. Among the RLRs, upregulated genes included the retinoic acid 
inducible gene I (RIG-I), melanoma differentiation association 5 (MDA5) and 
laboratory of genetics and physiology 2 (LGP2). The study points to possible 
involvement of the tripartite motif containing 25 (TRIM25) and mitochondrial 
antiviral signaling protein (MAVS) in modulating RIG-I signaling being the first 
report that links these genes to the RLR pathway in SAV-3 infection in TO-cells. 
Downstream signaling suggests that both the TLR and RLR pathways use interferon 
(IFN) regulatory factors (IRFs) 3 and 7 to produce IFN-a2. The validity of 
RNA-seq data generated in this study was confirmed by quantitative real time 
qRT-PCR showing that genes up- or downregulated by RNA-seq were also up- or 
downregulated by RT-PCR. Overall, this study shows that de novo transcriptome 
assembly identify key receptors of the TLR and RLR sensors engaged in host 
pathogen interaction at cellular level. We envisage that data presented here can 
open a road map for future intervention strategies in SAV infection of salmon.

DOI: 10.3390/v8040114
PMCID: PMC4848607
PMID: 27110808 [Indexed for MEDLINE]