1. Insect Biochem Mol Biol. 2016 Jun;73:62-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2016.04.007.
Epub  2016 Apr 24.

A CRISPR/Cas9 mediated point mutation in the alpha 6 subunit of the nicotinic 
acetylcholine receptor confers resistance to spinosad in Drosophila 
melanogaster.

Zimmer CT(1), Garrood WT(2), Puinean AM(2), Eckel-Zimmer M(3), Williamson MS(2), 
Davies TG(2), Bass C(3).

Author information:
(1)Rothamsted Research, Biological Chemistry and Crop Protection Department, 
Harpenden, UK; College of Life and Environmental Sciences, Biosciences, 
University of Exeter, Penryn Campus, Penryn, Cornwall TR10 9FE, UK. Electronic 
address: c.t.zimmer@exeter.ac.uk.
(2)Rothamsted Research, Biological Chemistry and Crop Protection Department, 
Harpenden, UK.
(3)Rothamsted Research, Biological Chemistry and Crop Protection Department, 
Harpenden, UK; College of Life and Environmental Sciences, Biosciences, 
University of Exeter, Penryn Campus, Penryn, Cornwall TR10 9FE, UK.

Spinosad, a widely used and economically important insecticide, targets the 
nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChRs) of the insect nervous system. Several 
studies have associated loss of function mutations in the insect nAChR α6 
subunit with resistance to spinosad, and in the process identified this 
particular subunit as the specific target site. More recently a single 
non-synonymous point mutation, that does not result in loss of function, was 
identified in spinosad resistant strains of three insect species that results in 
an amino acid substitution (G275E) of the nAChR α6 subunit. The causal role of 
this mutation has been called into question as, to date, functional evidence 
proving its involvement in resistance has been limited to the study of 
vertebrate receptors. Here we use the CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing platform to 
introduce the G275E mutation into the nAChR α6 subunit of Drosophila 
melanogaster. Reverse transcriptase-PCR and sequencing confirmed the presence of 
the mutation in Dα6 transcripts of mutant flies and verified that it does not 
disrupt the normal splicing of the two exons in close vicinity to the mutation 
site. A marked decrease in sensitivity to spinosad (66-fold) was observed in 
flies with the mutation compared to flies of the same genetic background minus 
the mutation, clearly demonstrating the functional role of this amino acid 
substitution in resistance to spinosad. Although the resistance levels observed 
are 4.7-fold lower than exhibited by a fly strain with a null mutation of Dα6, 
they are nevertheless predicated to be sufficient to result in resistance to 
spinosad at recommended field rates. Reciprocal crossings with susceptible fly 
strains followed by spinosad bioassays revealed G275E is inherited as an 
incompletely recessive trait, thus resembling the mode of inheritance described 
for this mutation in the western flower thrips, Frankliniella occidentalis. This 
study both resolves a debate on the functional significance of a target-site 
mutation and provides an example of how recent advances in genome editing can be 
harnessed to study insecticide resistance.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2016.04.007
PMCID: PMC4876769
PMID: 27117524 [Indexed for MEDLINE]