1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2016 Apr 1;57(4):2344-54. doi:
10.1167/iovs.16-19153.

Antioxidant Treatment Limits Neuroinflammation in Experimental Glaucoma.

Yang X, Hondur G, Tezel G.

PURPOSE: Besides primary neurotoxicity, oxidative stress may compromise the 
glial immune regulation and shift the immune homeostasis toward 
neurodegenerative inflammation in glaucoma. We tested this hypothesis through 
the analysis of neuroinflammatory and neurodegenerative outcomes in mouse 
glaucoma using two experimental paradigms of decreased or increased oxidative 
stress.
METHODS: The first experimental paradigm tested the effects of Tempol, a 
multifunctional antioxidant, given through osmotic mini-pumps for drug delivery 
by constant infusion. Following a 6-week treatment period after 
microbead/viscoelastic injection-induced ocular hypertension, retina and optic 
nerve samples were analyzed for markers of oxidative stress and cytokine 
profiles using specific bioassays. We also analyzed a redox-sensitive 
transcriptional regulator of neuroinflammation, namely NF-κB. The second 
paradigm included a similar analysis of the effects of overloaded oxidative 
stress on retina and optic nerve inflammation in mice knockout for a major 
antioxidant enzyme (SOD1(-/-)).
RESULTS: Increased antioxidant capacity and decreased protein carbonyls and HNE 
adducts with Tempol treatment verified the drug delivery and biological 
function. Among a range of cytokines measured, proinflammatory cytokines, 
including IL-1, IL-2, IFN-γ, and TNF-α, exhibited more than 2-fold decreased 
titers in Tempol-treated ocular hypertensive eyes. Antioxidant treatment also 
resulted in a prominent decrease in NF-κB activation in the ocular hypertensive 
retina and optic nerve. Although pharmacological treatment limiting the 
oxidative stress resulted in decreased neuroinflammation, ocular 
hypertension-induced neuroinflammatory responses were increased in SOD1(-/-) 
mice with defective antioxidant response.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings support the oxidative stress-related mechanisms of 
neuroinflammation and the potential of antioxidant treatment as an 
immunomodulation strategy for neuroprotection in glaucoma.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.16-19153
PMCID: PMC4855827
PMID: 27127934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]