1. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 2016 Jul;26(7):1227-40. doi: 
10.1016/j.euroneuro.2016.04.003. Epub 2016 Apr 28.

Genetic blockade of adenosine A2A receptors induces cognitive impairments and 
anatomical changes related to psychotic symptoms in mice.

Moscoso-Castro M(1), Gracia-Rubio I(1), Ciruela F(2), Valverde O(3).

Author information:
(1)Neurobiology of Behavior Research Group (GReNeC), Department of Experimental 
and Health Sciences, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Unitat de Farmacologia, Departament de Patologia i Terapèutica Experimental, 
Facultat de Medicina, IDIBELL-Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; 
Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Faculty of Sciences, University of 
Ghent, Gent, Belgium.
(3)Neurobiology of Behavior Research Group (GReNeC), Department of Experimental 
and Health Sciences, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain; Neuroscience 
Research Program, IMIM (Hospital del Mar Research Institute), Barcelona, Spain. 
Electronic address: olga.valverde@upf.edu.

Schizophrenia is a chronic severe mental disorder with a presumed 
neurodevelopmental origin, and no effective treatment. Schizophrenia is a 
multifactorial disease with genetic, environmental and neurochemical etiology. 
The main theories on the pathophysiology of this disorder include alterations in 
dopaminergic and glutamatergic neurotransmission in limbic and cortical areas of 
the brain. Early hypotheses also suggested that nucleoside adenosine is a 
putative affected neurotransmitter system, and clinical evidence suggests that 
adenosine adjuvants improve treatment outcomes, especially in poorly responsive 
patients. Hence, it is important to elucidate the role of the neuromodulator 
adenosine in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia. A2A adenosine receptor (A2AR) 
subtypes are expressed in brain areas controlling motivational responses and 
cognition, including striatum, and in lower levels in hippocampus and cerebral 
cortex. The aim of this study was to characterize A2AR knockout (KO) mice with 
complete and specific inactivation of A2AR, as an animal model for 
schizophrenia. We performed behavioral, anatomical and neurochemical studies to 
assess psychotic-like symptoms in adult male and female KO and wild-type (WT) 
littermates. Our results show impairments in inhibitory responses and sensory 
gating in A2AR KO animals. Hyperlocomotion induced by d-amphetamine and MK-801 
was reduced in KO animals when compared to WT littermates. Moreover, A2AR KO 
animals show motor disturbances, social and cognitive alterations. Finally, 
behavioral impairments were associated with enlargement of brain lateral 
ventricles and decreased BDNF levels in the hippocampus. These data highlight 
the role of adenosine in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia and provide new 
possibilities for the therapeutic management of schizophrenia.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. and ECNP. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.euroneuro.2016.04.003
PMID: 27133030 [Indexed for MEDLINE]