1. J Bacteriol. 2016 Jun 13;198(13):1868-1882. doi: 10.1128/JB.01029-15. Print
2016  Jul 1.

Growth Inhibition by External Potassium of Escherichia coli Lacking PtsN 
(EIIANtr) Is Caused by Potassium Limitation Mediated by YcgO.

Sharma R(1)(2), Shimada T(3), Mishra VK(1), Upreti S(1)(2), Sardesai AA(4).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Bacterial Genetics, Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and 
Diagnostics, Hyderabad, India.
(2)Graduate Studies, Manipal University, Manipal, India.
(3)Laboratory for Chemistry and Life Science, Institute of Innovative Research, 
Tokyo Institute of Technology, Nagatsuta, Yokohama, Japan.
(4)Laboratory of Bacterial Genetics, Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and 
Diagnostics, Hyderabad, India abhijit@cdfd.org.in.

The absence of PtsN, the terminal phosphoacceptor of the phosphotransferase 
system comprising PtsP-PtsO-PtsN, in Escherichia coli confers a 
potassium-sensitive (K(s)) phenotype as the external K(+) concentration 
([K(+)]e) is increased above 5 mM. A growth-inhibitory increase in intracellular 
K(+) content, resulting from hyperactivated Trk-mediated K(+) uptake, is thought 
to cause this K(s) We provide evidence that the K(s) of the ΔptsN mutant is 
associated with K(+) limitation. Accordingly, the moderate K(s) displayed by the 
ΔptsN mutant was exacerbated in the absence of the Trk and Kup K(+) uptake 
transporters and was associated with reduced cellular K(+) content. Conversely, 
overproduction of multiple K(+) uptake proteins suppressed the K(s) Expression 
of PtsN variants bearing the H73A, H73D, and H73E substitutions of the 
phosphorylation site histidine of PtsN complemented the K(s) Absence of the 
predicted inner membrane protein YcgO (also called CvrA) suppressed the K(s), 
which was correlated with elevated cellular K(+) content in the ΔptsN mutant, 
but the ΔptsN mutation did not alter YcgO levels. Heterologous overexpression of 
ycgO also led to K(s) that was associated with reduced cellular K(+) content, 
exacerbated by the absence of Trk and Kup and alleviated by overproduction of 
Kup. Our findings are compatible with a model that postulates that K(s) in the 
ΔptsN mutant occurs due to K(+) limitation resulting from activation of K(+) 
efflux mediated by YcgO, which may be additionally stimulated by [K(+)]e, 
implicating a role for PtsN (possibly its dephosphorylated form) as an inhibitor 
of YcgO activity.
IMPORTANCE: This study examines the physiological link between the 
phosphotransferase system comprising PtsP-PtsO-PtsN and K(+) ion metabolism in 
E. coli Studies on the physiological defect that renders an E. coli mutant 
lacking PtsN to be growth inhibited by external K(+) indicate that growth 
impairment results from cellular K(+) limitation that is mediated by YcgO, a 
predicted inner membrane protein. Additional observations suggest that 
dephospho-PtsN may inhibit and external K(+) may stimulate K(+) limitation 
mediated by YcgO. It is speculated that YcgO-mediated K(+) limitation may be an 
output of a response to certain stresses, which by modulating the 
phosphotransfer capacity of the PtsP-PtsO-PtsN phosphorelay leads to growth 
cessation and stress tolerance.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.01029-15
PMCID: PMC4907114
PMID: 27137496 [Indexed for MEDLINE]