1. Cancer Inform. 2016 Apr 27;15:45-64. doi: 10.4137/CIN.S31809. eCollection
2016.

Immunomediated Pan-cancer Regulation Networks are Dominant Fingerprints After 
Treatment of Cell Lines with Demethylation.

El Baroudi M(1), Cinti C(2), Capobianco E(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Integrative Systems Medicine (LISM), Institute of Clinical 
Physiology, National Research Council of Italy (CNR), Pisa, Italy.; Medical 
Oncology Department, MIRO, Institut de Recherche Expérimentale et Clinique 
(IREC), Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.
(2)Cancer Therapy UOS, Institute of Clinical Phsyiology, National Research 
Council of Italy (CNR), Siena, Italy.
(3)Laboratory of Integrative Systems Medicine (LISM), Institute of Clinical 
Physiology, National Research Council of Italy (CNR), Pisa, Italy.; Center for 
Computational Science, Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, 
FL, USA.

Pan-cancer studies are particularly relevant not only for addressing the 
complexity of the inherently observed heterogeneity but also for identifying 
clinically relevant features that may be common to the cancer types. Immune 
system regulations usually reveal synergistic modulation with other cancer 
mechanisms and in combination provide insights on possible advances in cancer 
immunotherapies. Network inference is a powerful approach to decipher pan-cancer 
systems dynamics. The methodology proposed in this study elucidates the impacts 
of epigenetic treatment on the drivers of complex pan-cancer regulation circuits 
involving cell lines of five cancer types. These patterns were observed from 
differential gene expression measurements following demethylation with 
5-azacytidine. Networks were built to establish associations of phenotypes at 
molecular level with cancer hallmarks through both transcriptional and 
post-transcriptional regulation mechanisms. The most prominent feature that 
emerges from our integrative network maps, linking pathway landscapes to disease 
and drug-target associations, refers primarily to a mosaic of immune-system 
crosslinked influences. Therefore, characteristics initially evidenced in single 
cancer maps become motifs well summarized by network cores and fingerprints.

DOI: 10.4137/CIN.S31809
PMCID: PMC4849425
PMID: 27147816