1. BMC Genomics. 2016 May 4;17:334. doi: 10.1186/s12864-016-2638-x.

Temporal Dysynchrony in brain connectivity gene expression following hypoxia.

Milash B(1), Gao J(2), Stevenson TJ(2), Son JH(2), Dahl T(2), Bonkowsky 
JL(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Bioinformatics Shared Resource, Huntsman Cancer Institute, Salt Lake City, 
USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of Utah, 295 Chipeta Way, 84108, Salt 
Lake City, UT, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, University of Utah, 295 Chipeta Way, 84108, Salt 
Lake City, UT, USA. joshua.bonkowsky@hsc.utah.edu.
(4)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, University of Utah School of 
Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT, USA. joshua.bonkowsky@hsc.utah.edu.

BACKGROUND: Despite the fundamental biological importance and clinical relevance 
of characterizing the effects of chronic hypoxia exposure on central nervous 
system (CNS) development, the changes in gene expression from hypoxia are 
unknown. It is not known if there are unifying principles, properties, or logic 
in the response of the developing CNS to hypoxic exposure. Here, we use the 
small vertebrate zebrafish (Danio rerio) to study the effects of hypoxia on 
connectivity gene expression across development. We perform transcriptional 
profiling at high temporal resolution to systematically determine and then 
experimentally validate the response of CNS connectivity genes to hypoxia 
exposure.
RESULTS: We characterized mRNA changes during development, comparing the effects 
of chronic hypoxia exposure at different time-points. We focused on changes in 
expression levels of a subset of 1270 genes selected for their roles in 
development of CNS connectivity, including axon pathfinding and synapse 
formation. We found that the majority of CNS connectivity genes were unaffected 
by hypoxia. However, for a small subset of genes hypoxia significantly affected 
their gene expression profiles. In particular, hypoxia appeared to affect both 
the timing and levels of expression, including altering expression of 
interacting gene pairs in a fashion that would potentially disrupt normal 
function.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, our study identifies the response of CNS connectivity 
genes to hypoxia exposure during development. While for most genes hypoxia did 
not significantly affect expression, for a subset of genes hypoxia changed both 
levels and timing of expression. Importantly, we identified that some genes with 
interacting proteins, for example receptor/ligand pairs, had dissimilar 
responses to hypoxia that would be expected to interfere with their function. 
The observed dysynchrony of gene expression could impair the development of 
normal CNS connectivity maps.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-016-2638-x
PMCID: PMC4857255
PMID: 27146468 [Indexed for MEDLINE]