1. J Intern Med. 2016 Aug;280(2):177-202. doi: 10.1111/joim.12506. Epub 2016 May 
10.

Current and future treatment of amyloid diseases.

Ankarcrona M(1), Winblad B(1), Monteiro C(2)(3), Fearns C(2)(3), Powers ET(2), 
Johansson J(1), Westermark GT(4), Presto J(1), Ericzon BG(5), Kelly JW(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology Care Sciences and Society, Division of 
Neurogeriatrics, Center for Alzheimer Research, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge, 
Sweden.
(2)Department of Chemistry, The Skaggs Institute for Chemical Biology, La Jolla, 
CA, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, The Scripps Research 
Institute, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Medical Cell Biology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(5)Division of Transplantation Surgery, Karolinska University Hospital, 
Stockholm, Sweden.

There are more than 30 human proteins whose aggregation appears to cause 
degenerative maladies referred to as amyloid diseases or amyloidoses. These 
disorders are named after the characteristic cross-β-sheet amyloid fibrils that 
accumulate systemically or are localized to specific organs. In most cases, 
current treatment is limited to symptomatic approaches and thus 
disease-modifying therapies are needed. Alzheimer's disease is a 
neurodegenerative disorder with extracellular amyloid β-peptide (Aβ) fibrils and 
intracellular tau neurofibrillary tangles as pathological hallmarks. Numerous 
clinical trials have been conducted with passive and active immunotherapy, and 
small molecules to inhibit Aβ formation and aggregation or to enhance Aβ 
clearance; so far such clinical trials have been unsuccessful. Novel strategies 
are therefore required and here we will discuss the possibility of utilizing the 
chaperone BRICHOS to prevent Aβ aggregation and toxicity. Type 2 diabetes 
mellitus is symptomatically treated with insulin. However, the underlying 
pathology is linked to the aggregation and progressive accumulation of islet 
amyloid polypeptide as fibrils and oligomers, which are cytotoxic. Several 
compounds have been shown to inhibit islet amyloid aggregation and cytotoxicity 
in vitro. Future animal studies and clinical trials have to be conducted to 
determine their efficacy in vivo. The transthyretin (TTR) amyloidoses are a 
group of systemic degenerative diseases compromising multiple organ systems, 
caused by TTR aggregation. Liver transplantation decreases the generation of 
misfolded TTR and improves the quality of life for a subgroup of this patient 
population. Compounds that stabilize the natively folded, nonamyloidogenic, 
tetrameric conformation of TTR have been developed and the drug tafamidis is 
available as a promising treatment.

© 2016 The Association for the Publication of the Journal of Internal Medicine.

DOI: 10.1111/joim.12506
PMCID: PMC4956553
PMID: 27165517 [Indexed for MEDLINE]