1. J Exp Pharmacol. 2012 Nov 17;4:157-62. doi: 10.2147/JEP.S37135. eCollection 
2012.

The anticancer activity of dichloromethane crude extract obtained from Calea 
pinnatifida.

Marchetti GM(1), Silva KA(2), Santos AN(2), Sousa IM(2), Tinti SV(3), Figueira 
GM(4), Foglio MA(5), Carvalho JE(1).

Author information:
(1)Programa de Pós Graduação em Biologia Celular e Estrutural, Institute of 
Biology, University of Campinas - UNICAMP, Campinas, Brazil; Pharmacology and 
Toxicology Department, Multidisciplinary Center for Chemical, Biological and 
Agricultural Research (CPQBA), University of Campinas - UNICAMP, Campinas, 
Brazil.
(2)Phytochemistry Department, CPQBA, University of Campinas - UNICAMP, Campinas, 
Brazil.
(3)Pharmacology and Toxicology Department, Multidisciplinary Center for 
Chemical, Biological and Agricultural Research (CPQBA), University of Campinas - 
UNICAMP, Campinas, Brazil.
(4)Agrotechnology Department, CPQBA, University of Campinas - UNICAMP, Campinas, 
Brazil.
(5)Programa de Pós Graduação em Biologia Celular e Estrutural, Institute of 
Biology, University of Campinas - UNICAMP, Campinas, Brazil; Phytochemistry 
Department, CPQBA, University of Campinas - UNICAMP, Campinas, Brazil.

The genus Calea is reported for many biological activities such as 
antiinflammatory, antiplasmodial, antifungal, antimicrobial, and cytotoxic 
activities. Most of the pharmacological activities are credited to 
germacranolides, a sesquiterpene lactone common to this genus. Dried aerial 
parts of Calea pinnatifida Banks were extracted with dichloromethane, which 
generated the dichloromethane crude extract (DCE). The main purpose of this 
study was to evaluate the anticancer activity of DCE performed in sulforhodamine 
B cytotoxicity in vitro assay against human cancer cell lines and in vivo 
Ehrlich models. The DCE showed a high potency and selectivity for the melanoma 
and kidney cell line. Two in vivo assays were also conducted in the Ehrlich 
ascites tumor and Ehrlich solid tumor. In the Ehrlich ascites tumor assay, the 
treatment with DCE increased survival rates at the highest dose (200 mg/kg). 
Interestingly, in the Ehrlich solid tumor, by increasing the number of 
treatments from one to three times a week, the tumor growth was inhibited by a 
lower dose (100 mg/kg). These results encouraged follow-up studies with C. 
pinnatifida in order to identify the active principles and to determine the 
anticancer mechanism of action.

DOI: 10.2147/JEP.S37135
PMCID: PMC4863554
PMID: 27186128