1. PLoS One. 2016 May 19;11(5):e0155612. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0155612. 
eCollection 2016.

Standardized Loads Acting in Hip Implants.

Bergmann G(1), Bender A(1), Dymke J(1), Duda G(1), Damm P(1).

Author information:
(1)Julius Wolff Institute, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Augustenburger 
Platz 1, 13353, Berlin, Germany.

With the increasing success of hip joint replacements, the average age of 
patients has decreased, patients have become more active and their expectations 
of the implant durability have risen. Thus, pre-clinical endurance tests on hip 
implants require defining realistic in vivo loads from younger and more active 
patients. These loads require simplifications to be applicable for simulator 
tests and numerical analyses. Here, the contact forces in the joint were 
measured with instrumented hip implants in ten subjects during nine of the most 
physically demanding and frequent activities of daily living. Typical levels and 
directions of average and high joint loads were extracted from the intra- and 
inter-individually widely varying individual data. These data can also be used 
to analyse bone remodelling at the implant-bone interface, evaluate tissue 
straining in finite element studies or validate analytical loading predictions, 
among other uses. The current ISO standards for endurance tests of implant stems 
and necks are based on historic analytical data from the 1970s. Comparisons of 
these test forces with in vivo loads unveiled that their unidirectional 
orientations deviate from the time-dependent in vivo directions during walking 
and most other activities. The ISO force for testing the stem is substantially 
too low while the ISO force for the neck better matches typical in vivo 
magnitudes. Because the magnitudes and orientations of peak forces substantially 
vary among the activities, load scenarios that reflect a collection of 
time-dependent high forces should be applied rather than using unidirectional 
forces. Based on data from ten patients, proposals for the most demanding 
activities, the time courses of the contact forces and the required cycle 
numbers for testing are given here. Friction moments in the joint were measured 
in addition to the contact forces. The moment data were also standardized and 
can be applied to wear tests of the implant. It was shown that friction only 
very slightly influences the stresses in the implant neck and shaft.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0155612
PMCID: PMC4873223
PMID: 27195789 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.