1. J Med Genet. 2016 Oct;53(10):690-6. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2016-103922. Epub 
2016 May 12.

Deficiency of HTRA2/Omi is associated with infantile neurodegeneration and 
3-methylglutaconic aciduria.

Mandel H(1), Saita S(2), Edvardson S(3), Jalas C(4), Shaag A(3), Goldsher D(5), 
Vlodavsky E(6), Langer T(2), Elpeleg O(3).

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Unit, Rambam Health Care Center, Rappaport School of Medicine, 
Technion, Haifa, Israel.
(2)Institute for Genetics, Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress 
Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, Cologne, 
Germany.
(3)The Monique and Jacques Roboh Department of Genetic Research, Hadassah Hebrew 
University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel.
(4)Bonei Olam, Center for Rare Jewish Genetic Disorders, Brooklyn, New York, 
USA.
(5)MRI Unit, Rambam Medical Center, Ruth and Baruch Rappaport School of 
Medicine, Technion, Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel.
(6)Department of Pathology, Rambam Medical Center, Ruth and Baruch Rappaport 
School of Medicine, Technion, Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel.

BACKGROUND: Cell survival critically depends on the integrity of mitochondria, 
which play a pivotal role during apoptosis. Extensive mitochondrial damage 
promotes release of pro-apoptotic factors from the intermembrane space of 
mitochondria. Released mitochondrial proteins include Smac/DIABLO and HTRA2/Omi, 
which inhibit the cytosolic E3 ubiquitin ligase XIAP and other inhibitors of 
apoptosis proteins.
AIMS: Here we investigated the cause of extreme hypertonia at birth, alternating 
with hypotonia, with the subsequent appearance of extrapyramidal symptoms, lack 
of psychomotor development, microcephaly, intractable seizures and early death 
in four patients from two unrelated families. The patients showed lactic 
acidemia, 3-methylglutaconic aciduria, intermittent neutropenia, evolving brain 
atrophy and disturbed cristae structure in muscle mitochondria.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Using whole-exome sequencing, we identified missplicing 
mutation and a 5 bp deletion in HTRA2, encoding HTRA2/Omi. This protein was 
completely absent from the patients' fibroblasts, whose growth was impaired and 
which were hypersensitive to apoptosis. Expression of HtrA2/Omi or of the 
proteolytically inactive HTRA2/Omi protein restored the cells' apoptotic 
resistance. However, cell growth was only restored by the proteolytically active 
protein.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first report of recessive deleterious mutations in 
HTRA2 in human. The clinical phenotype, the increased apoptotic susceptibility 
and the impaired cell growth recapitulate those observed in the Htra2 knockout 
mice and in mutant mice with proteolytically inactive HTRA2/Omi. Together, they 
underscore the importance of both chaperone and proteolytic activities of 
HTRA2/Omi for balanced apoptosis sensitivity and for brain development. Absence 
of HTRA2/Omi is associated with severe neurodegenerative disorder of infancy, 
abnormal mitochondria, 3-methylglutaconic aciduria and increased sensitivity to 
apoptosis.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

DOI: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2016-103922
PMID: 27208207 [Indexed for MEDLINE]