1. Acta Psychiatr Scand. 2016 Sep;134(3):268-74. doi: 10.1111/acps.12587. Epub
2016  May 22.

BDNF Val66Met polymorphism and peripheral protein levels in pediatric bipolar 
disorder and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.

Zeni CP(1)(2), Tramontina S(1), Aguiar BW(3), Salatino-Oliveira A(4), Pheula 
GF(1), Sharma A(2), Stertz L(2)(3), Moreira Maia CR(5), Hutz M(4), Kapczinski 
FP(3), Rohde LA(1)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Juvenile Bipolar Disorder Outpatient Program (Programa para Crianças e 
Adolescentes com Transtorno Bipolar - ProCAB), Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 
Division, Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre, Federal University of Rio Grande 
do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of Texas Health 
Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX, USA.
(3)Bipolar Disorder Unit, Molecular Psychiatry Unit, National Institute for 
Translational Medicine, CNPq, Porto Alegre, Brazil.
(4)Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology, Federal University of Rio 
Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil.
(5)ADHD Outpatient Program (PRODAH), Child and Adolescent Psychiatry Division, 
Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, 
Porto Alegre, Brazil.
(6)National Institute of Developmental Psychiatry for Children and Adolescents, 
Porto Alegre, Brazil.

OBJECTIVE: Frontiers between pediatric bipolar disorder (PBD) and 
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) are not well defined. Few 
studies have addressed potentially different neurobiological factors between the 
two disorders. Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) has been increasingly 
recognized for its etiologic and prognostic role in adult bipolar disorder (BD) 
studies. This study aimed to examine the BDNF gene polymorphism and potential 
alterations in BDNF serum levels in the pediatric ADHD patients with or without 
comorbid BD illness.
METHOD: We assessed the non-synonymous single-nucleotide polymorphism in the 
BDNF gene (rs6265/Val66Met) and its serum levels in children and adolescents 
with BD comorbid with ADHD (BD + ADHD) and ADHD alone. Children and adolescents 
were assessed for psychiatric diagnoses using the Kiddie-Sads-Present and 
Lifetime Version (K-SADS-PL).
RESULTS: Using Analysis of covariance (ancova) we detected a significant group 
effect (patients with BD + ADHD had higher serum levels than those with ADHD - 
F80,3 = 8.73, P = 0.005).
CONCLUSION: Although the Val66Met polymorphism at the BDNF gene does not seem to 
play a significant role in children and adolescents with BD or ADHD, BDNF serum 
levels deserve further attention in future research on neurobiological aspects 
of BD and ADHD.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/acps.12587
PMID: 27209073 [Indexed for MEDLINE]