1. Pediatr Rheumatol Online J. 2016 May 25;14(1):32. doi: 
10.1186/s12969-016-0093-5.

Protein-losing enteropathy in camptodactyly-arthropathy-coxa vara-pericarditis 
(CACP) syndrome.

Peters B(1), Schuurs-Hoeijmakers JH(2), Fuijkschot J(3), Reimer A(4), van der 
Flier M(3)(5), Lugtenberg D(2), Hoppenreijs EP(3)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, 
Radboud umc. Geert Grooteplein Zuid 10, Nijmegen, 6525 GA, The Netherlands. 
Brmpeters@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, 
Radboud umc. Geert Grooteplein Zuid 10, Nijmegen, 6525 GA, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Paediatrics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, 
Radboud umc. Geert Grooteplein Zuid 10, Nijmegen, 6525 GA, The Netherlands.
(4)Department Paediatric Cardiology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, 
Radboud umc. Geert Grooteplein Zuid 10, Nijmegen, 6525 GA, The Netherlands.
(5)Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Nijmegen 
Medical Centre, Radboud umc. Geert Grooteplein Zuid 10, Nijmegen, 6525 GA, The 
Netherlands.
(6)Paediatric Rheumatology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Radboud 
umc. Geert Grooteplein Zuid 10, Nijmegen, 6525 GA, The Netherlands.
(7)Sint Maartenskliniek, Hengstdal 3, Ubbergen, 6574 NA, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Camptodactyly-arthropathy-coxa vara-pericarditis (CACP, OMIM: 
#208250) syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive disease that can be difficult to 
recognise not only because of its wide clinical variability but also because of 
its clinical resemblance to juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA). PRG4 is the 
only gene so far known to be associated with CACP syndrome. Children with CACP 
syndrome lack the glycoprotein lubricin due to recessive mutations in PRG4. 
Lubricin serves as a lubricant in joints, tendons and visceral cavities (pleural 
cavity, pericardium) and inhibits synovial proliferation. Children with CACP 
syndrome suffer from congenital camptodactyly, arthropathy, coxa vara and 
sometimes pericarditis. This report concerns a child with CACP syndrome 
complicated by protein-losing enteropathy (PLE), caused by constrictive 
pericarditis and so contributes to knowledge of the presentation of CACP 
syndrome.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 10- year-old girl with consanguineous parents suffered from 
congenital camptodactyly and progressive swollen and painful joints. Her father 
and his sister had similar childhood-onset joint complaints. Laboratory tests 
showed no signs of inflammation but showed persistent low protein- and IgG- 
levels, indicating a secondary immunodeficiency. Increased alpha antitrypsin 
clearance confirmed PLE. Abdominal ultrasound with Doppler showed hepatomegaly 
and portal hypertension. Echocardiography suggested constrictive pericarditis. 
However, heart catheterization could not confirm this. Ultrasound and X-ray 
examination of the joints combined with a puncture of the synovial fluid were 
performed. These results, combined with the clinical presentation and the 
consanguinity, suggested CACP syndrome. Due to excessive enteral protein losses, 
the patient was treated with Cotrimoxazol prophylaxis and immunoglobulin 
supplements. These supplements were inadequate to achieve normal IgG values. As 
constrictive pericarditis with subsequent PLE was the best explanation for the 
excessive IgG losses, pericardiectomy was performed with good results. Genetic 
testing in our patient was complicated but revealed a pathogenic mutation within 
the repeat sequence in exon 7 of the PRG4 gene.
CONCLUSION: PLE resulting from constrictive pericarditis can be a complication 
of CACP syndrome. As serious complications can arise from the resulting 
secondary immunodeficiency, we recommend regular evaluation of clinical symptoms 
of constrictive pericarditis and PLE in children with CACP syndrome.

DOI: 10.1186/s12969-016-0093-5
PMCID: PMC4880819
PMID: 27224999 [Indexed for MEDLINE]