1. J Neuroinflammation. 2016 May 24;13(1):121. doi: 10.1186/s12974-016-0586-7.

Intraperitoneally administered IgG from patients with amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis or from an immune-mediated goat model increase the levels of TNF-α, 
IL-6, and IL-10 in the spinal cord and serum of mice.

Obál I(1), Klausz G(2), Mándi Y(3), Deli M(4), Siklós L(4), Engelhardt JI(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary.
(2)Second Department of Internal Medicine and Cardiology Center, University of 
Szeged, Szeged, Hungary.
(3)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunobiology, University of Szeged, 
Szeged, Hungary.
(4)Laboratory of Molecular Neurobiology, Institute of Biophysics, Biological 
Research Center of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Szeged, Hungary.
(5)Department of Neurology, University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary. 
eji48dec9@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a neurodegenerative disease 
that involves the selective loss of the upper and lower motor neurons (MNs). 
Neuroinflammation has been implicated in the pathogenesis of the sporadic form 
of the disease. We earlier developed immune-mediated animal models of ALS and 
demonstrated humoral and cellular immune reactions in the nervous system and in 
the sera of patients and animals. The accumulation of immunoglobulin G (IgG), an 
elevated intracellular level of calcium, ultrastructural alterations in the MNs, 
and activation of the microglia were noted in the spinal cord of ALS patients. 
Similar alterations developed in mice inoculated intraperitoneally with IgG from 
ALS patients or from an immune-mediated goat model.
METHODS: We have now examined whether the intraperitoneal injection of mice with 
IgG from sporadic ALS patients or from immunized goats with the homogenate of 
the anterior horn of the bovine spinal cord is associated with changes in the 
pro-inflammatory (TNF-α and IL-6) and anti-inflammatory (IL-10) cytokines in the 
spinal cord and serum of the mice. The levels of cytokines were measured by 
ELISA.
RESULTS: Intraperitoneally administered IgG from the ALS patients induced 
subclinical signs of MN disease, while the injection of IgG from immunized goats 
resulted in a severe respiratory dysfunction and limb paralysis 24 h after the 
injections. Significantly increased levels of TNF-α and IL-10 were detected in 
the spinal cord of the mice injected with the human ALS IgG. The level of IL-6 
increased primarily in the serum. The IgG from the immunized goats induced 
highly significant increases in the levels of all three cytokines in the serum 
and the spinal cord of mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Our earlier experiments had proved that when ALS IgG or IgG from 
immune-mediated animal models was inoculated into mice, it was taken up in the 
MNs and had the ability to initiate damage in them. The pathological process was 
paralleled by microglia recruitment and activation in the spinal cord. The 
present experiment revealed that these forms of IgG cause significant increases 
in certain cytokine levels locally in the spinal cord and in the serum of the 
inoculated mice. These results suggest that IgG directed to the MNs may be an 
initial element in the damage to the MNs both in human ALS and in its 
immune-mediated animal models.

DOI: 10.1186/s12974-016-0586-7
PMCID: PMC4879728
PMID: 27220674 [Indexed for MEDLINE]