1. Front Genet. 2016 May 17;7:70. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2016.00070. eCollection
2016.

The Use of DREADDs to Deconstruct Behavior.

Whissell PD(1), Tohyama S(2), Martin LJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Toronto Toronto, ON, Canada.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Toronto Mississauga Mississauga, ON, 
Canada.

A central goal in understanding brain function is to link specific cell 
populations to behavioral outputs. In recent years, the selective targeting of 
specific neural circuits has been made possible with the development of new 
experimental approaches, including chemogenetics. This technique allows for the 
control of molecularly defined subsets of cells through engineered G 
protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), which have the ability to activate or silence 
neuronal firing. Through chemogenetics, neural circuits are being linked to 
behavioral outputs at an unprecedented rate. Further, the coupling of 
chemogenetics with imaging techniques to monitor neural activity in freely 
moving animals now makes it possible to deconstruct the complex whole-brain 
networks that are fundamental to behavioral states. In this review, we highlight 
a specific chemogenetic application known as DREADDs (designer receptors 
exclusively activated by designer drugs). DREADDs are used ubiquitously to 
modulate GPCR activity in vivo and have been widely applied in the basic 
sciences, particularly in the field of behavioral neuroscience. Here, we focus 
on the impact and utility of DREADD technology in dissecting the neural 
circuitry of various behaviors including memory, cognition, reward, feeding, 
anxiety and pain. By using DREADDs to monitor the electrophysiological, 
biochemical, and behavioral outputs of specific neuronal types, researchers can 
better understand the links between brain activity and behavior. Additionally, 
DREADDs are useful in studying the pathogenesis of disease and may ultimately 
have therapeutic potential.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2016.00070
PMCID: PMC4868840
PMID: 27242888