1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2016 May 20;7:43. doi: 10.3389/fendo.2016.00043. 
eCollection 2016.

T-Type Calcium Channel: A Privileged Gate for Calcium Entry and Control of 
Adrenal Steroidogenesis.

Rossier MF(1).

Author information:
(1)Service of Clinical Chemistry and Toxicology, Hospital of Valais, Sion, 
Switzerland; Department of Human Protein Science, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.

Intracellular calcium plays a crucial role in modulating a variety of functions 
such as muscle contraction, hormone secretion, gene expression, or cell growth. 
Calcium signaling has been however shown to be more complex than initially 
thought. Indeed, it is confined within cell microdomains, and different calcium 
channels are associated with different functions, as shown by various 
channelopathies. Sporadic mutations on voltage-operated L-type calcium channels 
in adrenal glomerulosa cells have been shown recently to be the second most 
prevalent genetic abnormalities present in human aldosterone-producing adenoma. 
The observed modification of the threshold of activation of the mutated channels 
not only provides an explanation for this gain of function but also reminds us 
on the importance of maintaining adequate electrophysiological characteristics 
to make channels able to exert specific cellular functions. Indeed, the 
contribution to steroid production of the various calcium channels expressed in 
adrenocortical cells is not equal, and the reason has been investigated for a 
long time. Given the very negative resting potential of these cells, and the 
small membrane depolarization induced by their physiological agonists, low 
threshold T-type calcium channels are particularly well suited for responding 
under these conditions and conveying calcium into the cell, at the right place 
for controlling steroidogenesis. In contrast, high threshold L-type channels are 
normally activated by much stronger cell depolarizations. The fact that 
dihydropyridine calcium antagonists, specific for L-type channels, are poorly 
efficient for reducing aldosterone secretion either in vivo or in vitro, 
strongly supports the view that these two types of channels differently affect 
steroid biosynthesis. Whether a similar analysis is transposable to fasciculata 
cells and cortisol secretion is one of the questions addressed in the present 
review. No similar mutations on L-type or T-type channels have been described 
yet to affect cortisol secretion or to be linked to the development of Cushing 
syndrome, but several evidences suggest that the function of T channels is also 
crucial in fasciculata cells. Putative molecular mechanisms and cellular 
structural organization making T channels a privileged entry for the 
"steroidogenic calcium" are also discussed.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2016.00043
PMCID: PMC4873500
PMID: 27242667