1. mBio. 2016 May 31;7(3):e01823-15. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01823-15.

Aspergillus Cell Wall Chitin Induces Anti- and Proinflammatory Cytokines in 
Human PBMCs via the Fc-γ Receptor/Syk/PI3K Pathway.

Becker KL(1), Aimanianda V(2), Wang X(1), Gresnigt MS(1), Ammerdorffer A(1), 
Jacobs CW(1), Gazendam RP(3), Joosten LA(1), Netea MG(1), Latgé JP(4), van de 
Veerdonk FL(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Radboud Center for Infectious Diseases 
(RCI), Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(2)Unité des Aspergillus, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.
(3)Sanquin Research and Landsteiner Laboratory, Academic Medical Center, 
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Unité des Aspergillus, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France 
frank.vandeveerdonk@radboudumc.nl jean-paul.latge@pasteur.fr.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine and Radboud Center for Infectious Diseases 
(RCI), Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands 
frank.vandeveerdonk@radboudumc.nl jean-paul.latge@pasteur.fr.

Chitin is an important cell wall component of Aspergillus fumigatus conidia, of 
which hundreds are inhaled on a daily basis. Previous studies have shown that 
chitin has both anti- and proinflammatory properties; however the exact 
mechanisms determining the inflammatory signature of chitin are poorly 
understood, especially in human immune cells. Human peripheral blood mononuclear 
cells were isolated from healthy volunteers and stimulated with chitin from 
Aspergillus fumigatus Transcription and production of the proinflammatory 
cytokine interleukin-1β (IL-1β) and the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-1 receptor 
antagonist (IL-1Ra) were measured from the cell culture supernatant by 
quantitative PCR (qPCR) or enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), 
respectively. Chitin induced an anti-inflammatory signature characterized by the 
production of IL-1Ra in the presence of human serum, which was abrogated in 
immunoglobulin-depleted serum. Fc-γ-receptor-dependent recognition and 
phagocytosis of IgG-opsonized chitin was identified as a novel IL-1Ra-inducing 
mechanism by chitin. IL-1Ra production induced by chitin was dependent on Syk 
kinase and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) activation. In contrast, 
costimulation of chitin with the pattern recognition receptor (PRR) ligands 
lipopolysaccharide, Pam3Cys, or muramyl dipeptide, but not β-glucan, had 
synergistic effects on the induction of proinflammatory cytokines by human 
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). In conclusion, chitin can have both 
pro- and anti-inflammatory properties, depending on the presence of 
pathogen-associated molecular patterns and immunoglobulins, thus explaining the 
various inflammatory signatures reported for chitin.
IMPORTANCE: Invasive aspergillosis and allergic aspergillosis are increasing 
health care problems. Patients get infected by inhalation of the airborne spores 
of Aspergillus fumigatus A profound knowledge of how Aspergillus and its cell 
wall components are recognized by the host cell and which type of immune 
response it induces is necessary to develop target-specific treatment options 
with less severe side effects than the treatment options to date. There is 
controversy in the literature about the receptor for chitin in human cells. We 
identified the Fc-γ receptor and Syk/PI3K pathway via which chitin can induce 
anti-inflammatory immune responses by inducing IL-1 receptor antagonist in the 
presence of human immunoglobulins but also proinflammatory responses in the 
presence of bacterial components. This explains why Aspergillus does not induce 
strong inflammation just by inhalation and rather fulfills an immune-dampening 
function. While in a lung coinfected with bacteria, Aspergillus augments immune 
responses by shifting toward a proinflammatory reaction.

Copyright © 2016 Becker et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01823-15
PMCID: PMC4895119
PMID: 27247234 [Indexed for MEDLINE]