1. Ann Indian Acad Neurol. 2016 Apr-Jun;19(2):272-4. doi:
10.4103/0972-2327.173403.

An unusual case of cerebral autosomal-dominant arteriopathy with subcortical 
infarcts and leukoencephalopathy with occipital lobe involvement.

Trikamji B(1), Thomas M(2), Hathout G(3), Mishra S(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Olive View-UCLA Medical Center, Sylmar, Los Angeles, 
California, USA; Department of Radiology, VA Greater Los Angeles Healthcare 
System, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, Olive View-UCLA Medical Center, Sylmar, Los Angeles, 
California, USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, Olive View-UCLA Medical Center, Sylmar, Los Angeles, 
California, USA; Department of Radiology, VA Greater Los Angeles Healthcare 
System, Los Angeles, California, USA; University of California, Los Angeles 
(UCLA), California, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, Olive View-UCLA Medical Center, Sylmar, Los Angeles, 
California, USA; Department of Radiology, VA Greater Los Angeles Healthcare 
System, Los Angeles, California, USA; University of California, Los Angeles 
(UCLA), California, USA; Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern 
California (USC), Los Angeles, California, USA.

Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and 
leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL) is an autosomal dominant angiopathy caused by a 
mutation in the notch 3 gene on chromosome 19. Clinically, patients may be 
asymptomatic or can present with recurrent ischemic episodes and strokes leading 
to dementia, depression, pseudobulbar palsy, and hemi- or quadraplegia. 
Additional manifestations that have been described include migraine (mostly with 
aura), psychiatric disturbances, and epileptic seizures. Neuroimaging is 
essential to the diagnosis of CADASIL. On imaging CADASIL is characterized by 
symmetric involvement by confluent lesions located subcortically in the frontal 
and temporal lobes as well as in the insula, periventricularly, in the centrum 
semiovale, in the internal and external capsule, basal ganglia, and brain stem; 
with relative sparing of the fronto-orbital and the occipital subcortical 
regions. We describe a 49 year old male with CADASIL with absence of temporal 
lobe findings on MRI but predominant lesions within the periventricular white 
matter, occipital lobes with extension into the subcortical frontal lobes, 
corpus callosum and cerebellar white matter. Although CADASIL characteristically 
presents with anterior temporal lobe involvement, these findings may be absent 
and our case addresses the atypical imaging findings in CADASIL.

DOI: 10.4103/0972-2327.173403
PMCID: PMC4888699
PMID: 27293347