1. Oncotarget. 2016 Aug 16;7(33):54010-54027. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.9833.

New insights into the unfolded protein response in stem cells.

Yang Y(1)(2), Cheung HH(2), Tu J(2), Miu KK(2), Chan WY(2).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Fertility Preservation and Maintenance, Ministry of 
Education, Key Laboratory of Reproduction and Genetics in Ningxia, Department of 
Histology and Embryology, Ningxia Medical University, Yinchuan, Ningxia, P.R. 
China.
(2)The Chinese University of Hong Kong-Shandong University Joint Laboratory on 
Reproductive Genetics, School of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, The 
Chinese University of Hong Kong, HKSAR, P.R. China.

The unfolded protein response (UPR) is an evolutionarily conserved adaptive 
mechanism to increase cell survival under endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress 
conditions. The UPR is critical for maintaining cell homeostasis under 
physiological and pathological conditions. The vital functions of the UPR in 
development, metabolism and immunity have been demonstrated in several cell 
types. UPR dysfunction activates a variety of pathologies, including cancer, 
inflammation, neurodegenerative disease, metabolic disease and immune disease. 
Stem cells with the special ability to self-renew and differentiate into various 
somatic cells have been demonstrated to be present in multiple tissues. These 
cells are involved in development, tissue renewal and certain disease processes. 
Although the role and regulation of the UPR in somatic cells has been widely 
reported, the function of the UPR in stem cells is not fully known, and the 
roles and functions of the UPR are dependent on the stem cell type. Therefore, 
in this article, the potential significances of the UPR in stem cells, including 
embryonic stem cells, tissue stem cells, cancer stem cells and induced 
pluripotent cells, are comprehensively reviewed. This review aims to provide 
novel insights regarding the mechanisms associated with stem cell 
differentiation and cancer pathology.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.9833
PMCID: PMC5288239
PMID: 27304053 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.