1. Front Microbiol. 2016 May 26;7:788. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.00788. eCollection
 2016.

Global Emergence and Dissemination of Enterococci as Nosocomial Pathogens: 
Attack of the Clones?

Guzman Prieto AM(1), van Schaik W(1), Rogers MR(1), Coque TM(2), Baquero F(2), 
Corander J(3), Willems RJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, University Medical Center Utrecht 
Utrecht, Netherlands.
(2)Hospital Universitario Ramon y Cajal, Instituto Ramón y Cajal de 
Investigación SanitariaMadrid, Spain; CIBER Epidemiología y Salud PúblicaMadrid, 
Spain; Unidad de Resistencia a Antibióticos y Virulencia Bacteriana Asociada al 
Consejo Superior de Investigaciones CientíficasMadrid, Spain.
(3)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Helsinki Helsinki, 
Finland.

Enterococci are Gram-positive bacteria that are found in plants, soil and as 
commensals of the gastrointestinal tract of humans, mammals, and insects. 
Despite their commensal nature, they have also become globally important 
nosocomial pathogens. Within the genus Enterococcus, Enterococcus faecium, and 
Enterococcus faecalis are clinically most relevant. In this review, we will 
discuss how E. faecium and E. faecalis have evolved to become a globally 
disseminated nosocomial pathogen. E. faecium has a defined sub-population that 
is associated with hospitalized patients and is rarely encountered in community 
settings. These hospital-associated clones are characterized by the acquisition 
of adaptive genetic elements, including genes involved in metabolism, biofilm 
formation, and antibiotic resistance. In contrast to E. faecium, clones of E. 
faecalis isolated from hospitalized patients, including strains causing clinical 
infections, are not exclusively found in hospitals but are also present in 
healthy individuals and animals. This observation suggests that the division 
between commensals and hospital-adapted lineages is less clear for E. faecalis 
than for E. faecium. In addition, genes that are reported to be associated with 
virulence of E. faecalis are often not unique to clinical isolates, but are also 
found in strains that originate from commensal niches. As a reflection of more 
ancient association of E. faecalis with different hosts, these determinants 
Thus, they may not represent genuine virulence genes but may act as 
host-adaptive functions that are useful in a variety of intestinal environments. 
The scope of the review is to summarize recent trends in the emergence of 
antibiotic resistance and explore recent developments in the molecular 
epidemiology, population structure and mechanisms of adaptation of E. faecium 
and E. faecalis.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.00788
PMCID: PMC4880559
PMID: 27303380