1. G3 (Bethesda). 2016 Aug 9;6(8):2553-61. doi: 10.1534/g3.116.027730.

Using Sequence Variants in Linkage Disequilibrium with Causative Mutations to 
Improve Across-Breed Prediction in Dairy Cattle: A Simulation Study.

van den Berg I(1), Boichard D(2), Guldbrandtsen B(3), Lund MS(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Center for Quantitative 
Genetics and Genomics, Aarhus University, DK-8830 Tjele, Denmark Génétique 
Animale et Biologie Intégrative (GABI), French National Institute for 
Agricultural Research (INRA), AgroParisTech, Université Paris Saclay, 78350 
Jouy-en-Josas, France irene.vandenberg@unimelb.edu.au.
(2)Génétique Animale et Biologie Intégrative (GABI), French National Institute 
for Agricultural Research (INRA), AgroParisTech, Université Paris Saclay, 78350 
Jouy-en-Josas, France.
(3)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Center for Quantitative 
Genetics and Genomics, Aarhus University, DK-8830 Tjele, Denmark.

Sequence data are expected to increase the reliability of genomic prediction by 
containing causative mutations directly, especially in cases where low linkage 
disequilibrium between markers and causative mutations limits prediction 
reliability, such as across-breed prediction in dairy cattle. In practice, the 
causative mutations are unknown, and prediction with only variants in perfect 
linkage disequilibrium with the causative mutations is not realistic, leading to 
a reduced reliability compared to knowing the causative variants. Our objective 
was to use sequence data to investigate the potential benefits of sequence data 
for the prediction of genomic relationships, and consequently reliability of 
genomic breeding values. We used sequence data from five dairy cattle breeds, 
and a larger number of imputed sequences for two of the five breeds. We focused 
on the influence of linkage disequilibrium between markers and causative 
mutations, and assumed that a fraction of the causative mutations was shared 
across breeds and had the same effect across breeds. By comparing the loss in 
reliability of different scenarios, varying the distance between markers and 
causative mutations, using either all genome wide markers from commercial SNP 
chips, or only the markers closest to the causative mutations, we demonstrate 
the importance of using only variants very close to the causative mutations, 
especially for across-breed prediction. Rare variants improved prediction only 
if they were very close to rare causative mutations, and all causative mutations 
were rare. Our results show that sequence data can potentially improve genomic 
prediction, but careful selection of markers is essential.

Copyright © 2016 Berg et al.

DOI: 10.1534/g3.116.027730
PMCID: PMC4978908
PMID: 27317779 [Indexed for MEDLINE]