1. J Cancer. 2016 Jun 6;7(9):1142-51. doi: 10.7150/jca.10047. eCollection 2016.

Liver Label Retaining Cancer Cells Are Relatively Resistant to the Reported 
Anti-Cancer Stem Cell Drug Metformin.

Xin HW(1), Ambe CM(2), Miller TC(2), Chen JQ(3), Wiegand GW(2), Anderson AJ(2), 
Ray S(2), Mullinax JE(2), Hari DM(2), Koizumi T(2), Godbout JD(2), Goldsmith 
PK(3), Stojadinovic A(4), Rudloff U(2), Thorgeirsson SS(5), Avital I(6).

Author information:
(1)1. Surgery Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA;; 2. Laboratory of 
Molecular Oncology, Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research 
(Ministry of Education), Peking University Cancer Hospital and Institute, 
Beijing 100142, China;
(2)1. Surgery Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA;
(3)3. Collaborative Protein Technology Resource, National Cancer Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA;
(4)5. Department of Surgery, Uniformed Services University of the Health 
Sciences, Bethesda, MD, USA;
(5)4. Laboratory for Experimental Carcinogenesis, Center for Cancer Research, 
National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, 
USA;
(6)1. Surgery Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA;; 6. Department of 
Surgery, Saint Peter's Healthcare System, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ 
08901, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Recently, we reported that liver Label Retaining Cancer Cells 
(LRCC) can initiate tumors with only 10 cells and are relatively resistant to 
the targeted drug Sorafenib, a standard of practice in advanced hepatocellular 
carcinoma (HCC). LRCC are the only cancer stem cells (CSC) isolated alive 
according to a stem cell fundamental function, asymmetric cell division. 
Metformin has been reported to preferentially target many other types of CSC of 
different organs, including liver. It's important to know if LRCC, a novel class 
of CSC, are relatively resistant to metformin, unlike other types of CSC. As 
metformin inhibits the Sorafenib-Target-Protein (STP) PI3K, and LRCC are newly 
described CSC, we undertook this study to test the effects of Metformin on 
Sorafenib-treated HCC and HCC-derived-LRCC.
METHODS: We tested various STP levels and phosphorylation status, associated 
genes' expression, proliferation, viability, toxicity, and apoptosis profiles, 
before and after treatment with Sorafenib with/without Metformin.
RESULTS: Metformin enhances the effects of Sorafenib on HCC, and significantly 
decreased viability/proliferation of HCC cells. This insulin-independent effect 
was associated with inhibition of multiple STPs (PKC, ERK, JNK and AKT). 
However, Metformin increased the relative proportion of LRCCs. Comparing LRCC 
vs. non-LRCC, this effect was associated with improved toxicity and apoptosis 
profiles, down-regulation of cell death genes and up-regulation of cell 
proliferation and survival genes in LRCC. Concomitantly, Metformin up-regulated 
pluripotency, Wnt, Notch and SHH pathways genes in LRCC vs. non-LRCC.
CONCLUSIONS: Metformin and Sorafenib have enhanced anti-cancer effects. However, 
in contradistinction to reports on other types of CSC, Metformin is less 
effective against HCC-derived-CSC LRCC. Our results suggest that combining 
Metformin with Sorafenib may be able to repress the bulk of tumor cells, but as 
with other anti-cancer drugs, may leave LRCC behind leading to cancer 
recurrence. Therefore, liver LRCC, unlike other types of CSC, are relatively 
resistant to the reported anti-cancer stem cell drug metformin. This is the 
first report that there is a type of CSC that is not relatively resistant to the 
CSC-targeting drug. Our findings suggest that a drug targeting LRCC may be 
critically needed to target CSC and prevent cancer recurrence. These may 
significantly contribute to the understanding of Metformin's anti-cancer effects 
and the development of novel drugs targeting the relatively resistant LRCC.

DOI: 10.7150/jca.10047
PMCID: PMC4911882
PMID: 27326258

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: The authors who have taken 
part in this study declared that they do not have anything to disclose regarding 
funding or conflict of interest with respect to this manuscript.