1. PLoS One. 2016 Jun 22;11(6):e0158009. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0158009. 
eCollection 2016.

Recombinant AAV Vectors for Enhanced Expression of Authentic IgG.

Fuchs SP(1)(2), Martinez-Navio JM(1), Gao G(3), Desrosiers RC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, 
Miami, Florida, United States of America.
(2)Institut für Klinische und Molekulare Virologie, 
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.
(3)Gene Therapy Center, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, 
Massachusetts, United States of America.

Adeno-associated virus (AAV) has become a vector of choice for the treatment of 
a variety of genetic diseases that require safe and long-term delivery of a 
missing protein. Muscle-directed gene transfer for delivery of protective 
antibodies against AIDS viruses and other pathogens has been used experimentally 
in mice and monkeys. Here we examined a number of variations to AAV vector 
design for the ability to produce authentic immunoglobulin G (IgG) molecules. 
Expression of rhesus IgG from a single single-stranded AAV (ssAAV) vector (one 
vector approach) was compared to expression from two self-complementary AAV 
(scAAV) vectors, one for heavy chain and one for light chain (two vector 
approach). Both the one vector and the two vector approaches yielded 
considerable levels of expressed full-length IgG. A number of modifications to 
the ssAAV expression system were then examined for their ability to increase the 
efficiency of IgG expression. Inclusion of a furin cleavage sequence with a 
linker peptide just upstream of the 2A self-cleaving sequence from 
foot-and-mouth disease virus (F2A) increased IgG expression approximately 2 
fold. Inclusion of these sequences also helped to ensure a proper sequence at 
the C-terminal end of the heavy chain. Inclusion of the post-transcriptional 
regulatory element from woodchuck hepatitis virus (WPRE) further increased IgG 
expression 1.5-2.0 fold. IgG1 versions of the two rhesus IgGs that were examined 
consistently expressed better than the IgG2 forms. In contrast to what has been 
reported for AAV2-mediated expression of other proteins, introduction of capsid 
mutations Y445F and Y731F did not increase ssAAV1-mediated expression of IgG as 
determined by transduction experiments in cell culture. Our findings provide a 
rational basis for AAV vector design for expression of authentic IgG.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0158009
PMCID: PMC4917256
PMID: 27332822 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.