1. Ther Clin Risk Manag. 2016 Jun 3;12:861-72. doi: 10.2147/TCRM.S77788. 
eCollection 2016.

Combination ledipasvir-sofosbuvir for the treatment of chronic hepatitis C virus 
infection: a review and clinical perspective.

Nkuize M(1), Sersté T(2), Buset M(1), Mulkay JP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Saint-Pierre University 
Hospital, Brussels, Belgium.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Saint-Pierre University 
Hospital, Brussels, Belgium; Department of Gastroenterology, Pancreatology and 
Hepatology, Hôpital Academique Erasme, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, 
Belgium.

Chronic hepatitis C treatment has continued to evolve, and interferon-free, oral 
treatment with direct-acting antiviral agents is the current standard of care. 
Recently, a new treatment, which is a combination of two direct-acting antiviral 
agents, ledipasvir 90 mg (anti-NS5A) and sofosbuvir 400 mg (anti-NS5B), has been 
approved in the US and the European Union for the treatment of chronic hepatitis 
C viral infection. In Phase III trials among chronic hepatitis C virus genotype 
1 monoinfected (treatment-naïve, treatment-experienced, and with advanced liver 
disease or posttransplant) patients and HIV-hepatitis C virus coinfected 
patients, the ledipasvir-sofosbuvir fixed-dose combination is associated with a 
higher rate of sustained virologic response at 12 weeks after therapy has 
ceased. According to preliminary data, the ledipasvir-sofosbuvir combination 
also may be effective against hepatitis C genotype 4 virus infection. The 
ledipasvir-sofosbuvir combination taken orally is generally well-tolerated. 
Moreover, the combination treatment may suppress the effect of predictive 
factors of chronic hepatitis C that have historically been known to be 
associated with treatment failure. Thus, the fixed-dose single-tablet 
combination of ledipasvir-sofosbuvir offers a new era for the effective 
treatment of a variety of patients suffering from chronic hepatitis C virus 
infection.

DOI: 10.2147/TCRM.S77788
PMCID: PMC4902143
PMID: 27350749