1. Mol Microbiol. 2016 Oct;102(1):137-51. doi: 10.1111/mmi.13450. Epub 2016 Jul
18.

The genes that encode the gonococcal transferrin binding proteins, TbpB and 
TbpA, are differentially regulated by MisR under iron-replete and iron-depleted 
conditions.

Kandler JL(1), Acevedo RV(2), Dickinson MK(2), Cash DR(2), Shafer WM(1)(3)(4), 
Cornelissen CN(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory University School of 
Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Virginia Commonwealth University 
Health System, Richmond, Virginia.
(3)Emory Antibiotic Resistance Center, Emory University School of Medicine, 
Atlanta, Georgia.
(4)Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Laboratories of Microbial 
Pathogenesis, Decatur, Georgia.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Virginia Commonwealth University 
Health System, Richmond, Virginia. cynthia.cornelissen@vcuhealth.org.

Neisseria gonorrhoeae produces two transferrin binding proteins, TbpA and TbpB, 
which together enable efficient iron transport from human transferrin. We 
demonstrate that expression of the tbp genes is controlled by MisR, a response 
regulator in the two-component regulatory system that also includes the sensor 
kinase MisS. The tbp genes were up-regulated in the misR mutant under 
iron-replete conditions but were conversely down-regulated in the misR mutant 
under iron-depleted conditions. The misR mutant was capable of transferrin-iron 
uptake at only 50% of wild-type levels, consistent with decreased tbp 
expression. We demonstrate that phosphorylated MisR specifically binds to the 
tbpBA promoter and that MisR interacts with five regions upstream of the tbpB 
start codon. These analyses confirm that MisR directly regulates tbpBA 
expression. The MisR binding sites in the gonococcus are only partially 
conserved in Neisseria meningitidis, which may explain why tbpBA was not 
MisR-regulated in previous studies using this related pathogen. This is the 
first report of a trans-acting protein factor other than Fur that can directly 
contribute to gonococcal tbpBA regulation.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.13450
PMCID: PMC5035231
PMID: 27353397 [Indexed for MEDLINE]