1. mBio. 2016 Jun 28;7(3):e00528-16. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00528-16.

Targeting Alpha Toxin and ClfA with a Multimechanistic Monoclonal-Antibody-Based 
Approach for Prophylaxis of Serious Staphylococcus aureus Disease.

Tkaczyk C(1), Hamilton MM(1), Sadowska A(1), Shi Y(1), Chang CS(1), Chowdhury 
P(1), Buonapane R(1), Xiao X(1), Warrener P(1), Mediavilla J(2), Kreiswirth 
B(2), Suzich J(1), Stover CK(1), Sellman BR(3).

Author information:
(1)MedImmune, a member of the AstraZeneca Group, Gaithersburg, Maryland, USA.
(2)Public Health Research Institute, New Jersey Medical School, Rutgers 
University, Newark, New Jersey, USA.
(3)MedImmune, a member of the AstraZeneca Group, Gaithersburg, Maryland, USA 
sellmanb@medimmune.com.

Staphylococcus aureus produces numerous virulence factors, each contributing 
different mechanisms to bacterial pathogenesis in a spectrum of diseases. Alpha 
toxin (AT), a cytolytic pore-forming toxin, plays a key role in skin and soft 
tissue infections and pneumonia, and a human anti-AT monoclonal antibody (MAb), 
MEDI4893*, has been shown to reduce disease severity in dermonecrosis and 
pneumonia infection models. However, interstrain diversity and the complex 
pathogenesis of S. aureus bloodstream infections suggests that MEDI4893* alone 
may not provide adequate protection against S. aureus sepsis. Clumping factor A 
(ClfA), a fibrinogen binding protein, is an important virulence factor 
facilitating S. aureus bloodstream infections. Herein, we report on the 
identification of a high-affinity anti-ClfA MAb, 11H10, that inhibits ClfA 
binding to fibrinogen, prevents bacterial agglutination in human plasma, and 
promotes opsonophagocytic bacterial killing (OPK). 11H10 prophylaxis reduced 
disease severity in a mouse bacteremia model and was dependent on Fc effector 
function and OPK. Additionally, prophylaxis with 11H10 in combination with 
MEDI4893* provided enhanced strain coverage in this model and increased survival 
compared to that obtained with the individual MAbs. The MAb combination also 
reduced disease severity in murine dermonecrosis and pneumonia models, with 
activity similar to that of MEDI4893* alone. These results indicate that an MAb 
combination targeting multiple virulence factors provides benefit over a single 
MAb neutralizing one virulence mechanism by providing improved efficacy, broader 
strain coverage, and protection against multiple infection pathologies.
IMPORTANCE: Alternative strategies to broad-spectrum antibiotics are required to 
combat the antibiotic resistance epidemic. Previous attempts at active or 
passive immunization against Staphylococcus aureus targeting single antigens 
have failed in clinical trials despite positive preclinical data. To provide 
broad disease and isolate coverage, an effective immunization strategy likely 
must target multiple virulence mechanisms of the pathogen. Herein, we tested a 
multimechanistic MAb combination targeting alpha toxin (AT) and clumping factor 
A (ClfA) that neutralizes AT-mediated cytotoxicity, blocks fibrinogen binding by 
ClfA, prevents bacterial agglutination, targets the bacteria for 
opsonophagocytic killing, and provides broad isolate coverage in a 
lethal-bacteremia model. Although each MAb alone was effective in bacteremia 
against some individual isolates, the MAb combination provided improved 
protection against other isolates. These results illustrate the importance of 
targeting multiple virulence mechanisms and highlight the potential for an MAb 
combination targeting AT and ClfA to effectively prevent S. aureus disease.

Copyright © 2016 Tkaczyk et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.00528-16
PMCID: PMC4937210
PMID: 27353753 [Indexed for MEDLINE]