1. PeerJ. 2016 Jun 15;4:e2119. doi: 10.7717/peerj.2119. eCollection 2016.

Integrated microRNA, gene expression and transcription factors signature in 
papillary thyroid cancer with lymph node metastasis.

Ab Mutalib NS(#)(1), Othman SN(#)(1), Mohamad Yusof A(1), Abdullah Suhaimi 
SN(2), Muhammad R(2), Jamal R(1).

Author information:
(1)UKM Medical Molecular Biology Institute, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, 
Cheras, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(2)Department of Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, 
Cheras, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(#)Contributed equally

Background. Papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) is the commonest thyroid 
malignancy originating from the follicle cells in the thyroid. Despite a good 
overall prognosis, certain high-risk cases as in those with lymph node 
metastasis (LNM) have progressive disease and poorer prognosis. MicroRNAs are a 
class of non-protein-coding, 19-24 nucleotides single-stranded RNAs which 
regulate gene expression and these molecules have been shown to play a role in 
LNM. The integrated analysis of miRNAs and gene expression profiles together 
with transcription factors (TFs) has been shown to improve the identification of 
functional miRNA-target gene-TF relationships, providing a more complete view of 
molecular events underlying metastasis process. Objectives. We reanalyzed The 
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) datasets on PTC to identify differentially expressed 
miRNAs/genes in PTC patients with LNM-positive (LNM-P) versus lymph node 
negative (LNN) PTC patients and to investigate the miRNA-gene-TF regulatory 
circuit that regulate LNM in PTC. Results. PTC patients with LNM (PTC LNM-P) 
have a significantly shorter disease-free survival rate compared to PTC patients 
without LNM (PTC LNN) (Log-rank Mantel Cox test, p = 0.0049). We identified 181 
significantly differentially expressed miRNAs in PTC LNM-P versus PTC LNN; 110 
were upregulated and 71 were downregulated. The five topmost deregulated miRNAs 
were hsa-miR-146b, hsa-miR-375, hsa-miR-31, hsa-miR-7-2 and hsa-miR-204. In 
addition, 395 miRNAs were differentially expressed between PTC LNM-P and normal 
thyroid while 400 miRNAs were differentially expressed between PTC LNN and 
normal thyroid. We found four significant enrichment pathways potentially 
involved in metastasis to the lymph nodes, namely oxidative phosphorylation 
(OxPhos), cell adhesion molecules (CAMs), leukocyte transendothelial migration 
and cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction. OxPhos was the most significantly 
perturbed pathway (p = 4.70E-06) involving downregulation of 90 OxPhos-related 
genes. Significant interaction of hsa-miR-301b with HLF, HIF and REL/NFkB 
transcription factors were identified exclusively in PTC LNM-P versus PTC LNN. 
Conclusion. We found evidence of five miRNAs differentially expressed in PTC 
LNM-P. Alteration in OxPhos pathway could be the central event in metastasis to 
the lymph node in PTC. We postulate that hsa-miR-301b might be involved in 
regulating LNM in PTC via interactions with HLF, HIF and REL/NFkB. To the best 
of our knowledge, the roles of these TFs have been studied in PTC but the 
precise role of this miRNA with these TFs in LNM in PTC has not been 
investigated.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.2119
PMCID: PMC4918724
PMID: 27350898

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no competing 
interests.