1. PLoS One. 2016 Jun 30;11(6):e0157881. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0157881. 
eCollection 2016.

DNA Barcoding of Malagasy Rosewoods: Towards a Molecular Identification of 
CITES-Listed Dalbergia Species.

Hassold S(1), Lowry PP 2nd(2)(3), Bauert MR(4), Razafintsalama A(5), 
Ramamonjisoa L(5), Widmer A(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Integrative Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Missouri Botanical Garden, St. Louis, Missouri, United States of America.
(3)ISYEB (UMR 7205), Département Systématique et Evolution, Muséum National 
d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris, France.
(4)Zoo Zurich AG, Zurich, Switzerland.
(5)Silo National des Graines Forestiers, Ambatobe, Antananarivo, Madagascar.

Illegal selective logging of tropical timber is of increasing concern worldwide. 
Madagascar is a biodiversity hotspot and home to some of the world's most sought 
after tropical timber species. Malagasy rosewoods belong to the genus Dalbergia 
(Fabaceae), which is highly diverse and has a pantropical distribution, but 
these timber species are among the most threatened as a consequence of intensive 
illegal selective logging and deforestation. Reliable identification of 
Dalbergia species from Madagascar is important for law enforcement but is almost 
impossible without fertile plant material, which is often unavailable during 
forest inventories or when attempting to identify logged trees of cut wood. DNA 
barcoding has been promoted as a promising tool for species identification in 
such cases. In this study we tested whether DNA barcoding with partial sequences 
of three plastid markers (matK, rbcL and trnL (UAA)) can distinguish between 
Dalbergia from Madagascar and from other areas of its distributional range, and 
whether Malagasy species can be distinguished from one another. Phylogenetic 
analyses revealed that the Malagasy Dalbergia species studied form two 
monophyletic groups, each containing two subgroups, only one of which 
corresponds to a single species. We characterized diagnostic polymorphisms in 
the three DNA barcoding markers that allow rapid discrimination between 
Dalbergia from Madagascar and from other areas of its distribution range. 
Species identification success based on individual barcoding markers or 
combinations was poor, whereas subgroup identification success was much higher 
(up to 98%), revealing both the value and limitations of a DNA barcoding 
approach for the identification of closely related Malagasy rosewoods.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0157881
PMCID: PMC4928830
PMID: 27362258 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.