1. J Thromb Haemost. 2016 Sep;14(9):1803-13. doi: 10.1111/jth.13406. Epub 2016
Aug  24.

High-affinity von Willebrand factor binding does not affect the anatomical or 
hepatocellular distribution of factor VIII in rats.

Øie CI(1), Roepstorff K(2), Behrens C(2), Bøggild Kristensen J(2), Karpf DM(2), 
Bolt G(2), Gudme CN(2), Kjalke M(2), Smedsrød B(1), Appa RS(3).

Author information:
(1)Vascular Biology Research Group, Department of Medical Biology, Faculty of 
Health Sciences, UiT The Arctic University of Norway, Tromsø, Norway.
(2)Novo Nordisk A/S, Novo Nordisk Park, Måløv, Denmark.
(3)Novo Nordisk A/S, Novo Nordisk Park, Måløv, Denmark. rupa@novonordisk.com.

Essentials Von Willebrand factor (VWF) stabilizes factor VIII (FVIII) and 
prevents its premature clearance. Rat anatomical and hepatocellular distribution 
studies assessed the VWF effect on FVIII clearance. Hepatocytes and liver 
sinusoidal endothelial cells play a key role in FVIII clearance. Anatomical and 
hepatocellular distribution of FVIII is independent of high-affinity VWF 
binding.
ABSTRACT: Background Von Willebrand factor (VWF) stabilizes factor VIII in the 
circulation and prevents its premature clearance. Objective To study the effects 
of VWF on FVIII clearance in rats with endogenous VWF. Methods Anatomical and 
hepatocellular distribution studies were performed in rats following intravenous 
administration of glycoiodinated recombinant FVIII (rFVIII) and a FVIII variant, 
FVIII-Y1680F, lacking high-affinity VWF binding. Radioactivity was quantified in 
organs, and in distinct liver cell populations. The role of VWF binding was also 
studied by immunohistochemical staining of rat livers perfused ex vivo with 
rFVIII alone or with a FVIII-binding VWF fragment. Results The liver was the 
predominant organ of rFVIII distribution, and a radioactivity peak was also 
observed in the intestines, suggesting FVIII secretion to the bile by 
hepatocytes. In the liver, ~60% of recovered radioactivity was associated with 
hepatocytes, 32% with liver sinusoidal endothelial cells (LSECs), and 9% with 
Kupffer cells (KCs). When calculated per cell, 1.5-fold to 3-fold more 
radioactivity was associated with LSECs than with hepatocytes. The importance of 
hepatocytes and LSECs was confirmed by immunohistochemical staining; strong 
staining was seen in LSECs, and less intense, punctate staining in hepatocytes. 
Minor staining in KCs was observed. Comparable anatomical and hepatocellular 
distributions were observed with rFVIII and FVIII-Y1680F, and the presence of 
the VWF fragment, D'D3A1, did not change the FVIII staining pattern in intact 
livers. Conclusions The present data support FVIII clearance via the liver, with 
hepatocytes and LSECs playing a key role. High-affinity VWF binding did not 
alter the anatomical or hepatocellular distribution of FVIII.

© 2016 The Authors. Journal of Thrombosis and Haemostasis published by Wiley 
Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of International Society on Thrombosis and 
Haemostasis.

DOI: 10.1111/jth.13406
PMID: 27378673 [Indexed for MEDLINE]