1. Front Pharmacol. 2016 Jun 7;7:133. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2016.00133. eCollection 
2016.

Inhibition of Soluble Epoxide Hydrolase Limits Mitochondrial Damage and 
Preserves Function Following Ischemic Injury.

Akhnokh MK(1), Yang FH(2), Samokhvalov V(1), Jamieson KL(1), Cho WJ(3), Wagg 
C(4), Takawale A(5), Wang X(5), Lopaschuk GD(6), Hammock BD(7), Kassiri Z(5), 
Seubert JM(8).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, 2-020M Katz Group Centre for 
Pharmacy and Health Research, University of Alberta Edmonton, AB, Canada.
(2)Guangdong Laboratory Animal Monitoring Institute Guangdong, China.
(3)Imaging Core Facility, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University of 
Alberta Edmonton, AB, Canada.
(4)Mazankowski Alberta Heart Institute, University of AlbertaEdmonton, AB, 
Canada; Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, 
University of AlbertaEdmonton, AB, Canada.
(5)Mazankowski Alberta Heart Institute, University of AlbertaEdmonton, AB, 
Canada; Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University 
of AlbertaEdmonton, AB, Canada.
(6)Mazankowski Alberta Heart Institute, University of AlbertaEdmonton, AB, 
Canada; Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, 
University of AlbertaEdmonton, AB, Canada; Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of 
Medicine and Dentistry, University of AlbertaEdmonton, AB, Canada.
(7)Department of Entomology and Nematology Comprehensive Cancer Center, 
University of California, Davis Davis, CA, USA.
(8)Faculty of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, 2-020M Katz Group Centre for 
Pharmacy and Health Research, University of AlbertaEdmonton, AB, Canada; 
Mazankowski Alberta Heart Institute, University of AlbertaEdmonton, AB, Canada; 
Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University of 
AlbertaEdmonton, AB, Canada.

AIMS: Myocardial ischemia can result in marked mitochondrial damage leading to 
cardiac dysfunction, as such identifying novel mechanisms to limit mitochondrial 
injury is important. This study investigated the hypothesis that inhibiting 
soluble epoxide hydrolase (sEH), responsible for converting epoxyeicosatrienoic 
acids to dihydroxyeicosatrienoic acids protects mitochondrial from injury caused 
by myocardial infarction.
METHODS: sEH null and WT littermate mice were subjected to surgical occlusion of 
the left anterior descending (LAD) artery or sham operation. A parallel group of 
WT mice received an sEH inhibitor, 
trans-4-[4-(3-adamantan-1-y1-ureido)-cyclohexyloxy]-benzoic acid (tAUCB; 10 
mg/L) or vehicle in the drinking water 4 days prior and 7 days post-MI. Cardiac 
function was assessed by echocardiography prior- and 7-days post-surgery. Heart 
tissues were dissected into infarct, peri-, and non-infarct regions to assess 
ultrastructure by electron microscopy. Complexes I, II, IV, citrate synthase, 
PI3K activities, and mitochondrial respiration were assessed in non-infarct 
regions. Isolated working hearts were used to measure the rates of glucose and 
palmitate oxidation.
RESULTS: Echocardiography revealed that tAUCB treatment or sEH deficiency 
significantly improved systolic and diastolic function post-MI compared to 
controls. Reduced infarct expansion and less adverse cardiac remodeling were 
observed in tAUCB-treated and sEH null groups. EM data demonstrated 
mitochondrial ultrastructure damage occurred in infarct and peri-infarct regions 
but not in non-infarct regions. Inhibition of sEH resulted in significant 
improvements in mitochondrial respiration, ATP content, mitochondrial enzymatic 
activities and restored insulin sensitivity and PI3K activity.
CONCLUSION: Inhibition or genetic deletion of sEH protects against long-term 
ischemia by preserving cardiac function and maintaining mitochondrial 
efficiency.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2016.00133
PMCID: PMC4896112
PMID: 27375480