1. PLoS One. 2016 Jul 6;11(7):e0158470. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0158470. 
eCollection 2016.

Intrinsic Tau Acetylation Is Coupled to Auto-Proteolytic Tau Fragmentation.

Cohen TJ(1)(2), Constance BH(1)(2), Hwang AW(3), James M(3), Yuan CX(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, UNC Neuroscience Center, University of North 
Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, United States of America.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina, United States of America.
(3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Institute on Aging and 
Center for Neurodegenerative Disease Research, University of Pennsylvania School 
of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America.

Tau proteins are abnormally aggregated in a range of neurodegenerative 
tauopathies including Alzheimer's disease (AD). Recently, tau has emerged as an 
extensively post-translationally modified protein, among which lysine 
acetylation is critical for normal tau function and its pathological 
aggregation. Here, we demonstrate that tau isoforms have different propensities 
to undergo lysine acetylation, with auto-acetylation occurring more prominently 
within the lysine-rich microtubule-binding repeats. Unexpectedly, we identified 
a unique intrinsic property of tau in which auto-acetylation induces proteolytic 
tau cleavage, thereby generating distinct N- and C-terminal tau fragments. 
Supporting a catalytic reaction-based mechanism, mapping and mutagenesis studies 
showed that tau cysteines, which are required for acetyl group transfer, are 
also essential for auto-proteolytic tau processing. Further mass spectrometry 
analysis identified the C-terminal 2nd and 4th microtubule binding repeats as 
potential sites of auto-cleavage. The identification of acetylation-mediated 
auto-proteolysis provides a new biochemical mechanism for tau self-regulation 
and warrants further investigation into whether auto-catalytic functions of tau 
are implicated in AD and other tauopathies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0158470
PMCID: PMC4934699
PMID: 27383765 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.