1. Tohoku J Exp Med. 2016 Jul;239(3):231-5. doi: 10.1620/tjem.239.231.

Elevated Urinary Levels of 8-Hydroxy-2'-deoxyguanosine in a Japanese Child of 
Xeroderma Pigmentosum/Cockayne Syndrome Complex with Infantile Onset of 
Nephrotic Syndrome.

Kondo D(1), Noguchi A, Tamura H, Tsuchida S, Takahashi I, Kubota H, Yano T, 
Oyama C, Sawaishi Y, Moriwaki S, Takahashi T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Akita University Graduate School of Medicine.

Nucleotide excision repair (NER) is an essential biological pathway protecting 
against ultraviolet light-induced DNA damage. Deficient NER causes a group of 
rare genetic disorders including two autosomal recessive diseases, xeroderma 
pigmentosum (XP) and Cockayne syndrome (CS). In addition to the cutaneous 
photosensitivity shared in XP and CS, CS is featured by growth failure, 
neurological deterioration, microcephaly, and deep sunken eyes. XP/CS complex is 
an extremely rare type of NER disorder with a distinct phenotype that is 
characterized by the skin and eye pathology of XP and the somatic and 
neurological abnormalities of CS. Some of CS cases have been reported to be 
complicated with renal failure, but the genetic background or the etiology of 
the renal failure has not been reported. We herein report a 1-year-old Japanese 
boy with XP/CS complex, complicated by nephrotic syndrome. Diagnosis was 
confirmed by the presence of compound heterozygous mutations, G47R (c.139G>A) 
and R616G (c.1846C>G), in the excision repair cross-complementation group 2 
(ERCC2) gene. The kidney biopsies, performed at the age of 1 year and 2 months, 
revealed diffuse expansion of the mesangial matrix and segmental 
glomerulosclerosis under light microscopy, and diffused thin capillary walls 
with partially lamellated regions under electron microscopy. Notably, high 
levels of urinary 8-hydroxy-2'-deoxyguanosin, known as an oxidative stress 
marker, were observed during the clinical course. The patient died at the age of 
1 year and 11 months because of renal failure. We suggest the involvement of 
oxidative stress in the pathogenesis of nephrotic syndrome in NER disorders.

DOI: 10.1620/tjem.239.231
PMID: 27396511 [Indexed for MEDLINE]