1. Front Pharmacol. 2016 Jun 23;7:172. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2016.00172. eCollection
 2016.

Colon Cancer Cells Gene Expression Signature As Response to 5- Fluorouracil, 
Oxaliplatin, and Folinic Acid Treatment.

Negrei C(1), Hudita A(2), Ginghina O(3), Galateanu B(2), Voicu SN(2), Stan M(1), 
Costache M(2), Fenga C(4), Drakoulis N(5), Tsatsakis AM(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Toxicology, Faculty of Pharmacy, "Carol Davila" University of 
Medicine and Pharmacy Bucharest, Romania.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Bucharest 
Bucharest, Romania.
(3)Department of Surgery, "Sf. Ioan" Clinical Emergency HospitalBucharest, 
Romania; Department II, Faculty of Dental Medicine, "Carol Davila" University of 
Medicine and PharmacyBucharest, Romania.
(4)Occupational Medicine Section, Department of Biomedical and Dental Sciences 
and Morphofunctional Imaging, University of Messina Messina, Italy.
(5)Research Laboratory of Clinical Pharmacology and Pharmacogenomics, School of 
Health Sciences, Faculty of Pharmacy, National and Kapodistrian University of 
Athens Athens, Greece.
(6)Department of Toxicology and Forensic Sciences, Medical School, University of 
Crete Heraklion, Greece.

5-FU cytotoxicity mechanism has been assigned both to the miss-incorporation of 
fluoronucleotides into RNA and DNA and to the inhibition of thymidylate 
synthase. 5-FU is one of the most widely used chemotherapeutic drugs, although 
it has severe side effects that may vary between patients. Pharmacogenetic 
studies related to 5-FU have been traditionally focused on the rate-limiting 
catabolic enzyme, dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase that breaks 80-85% of 5-FU 
into its inactive metabolite. Choosing the right dosing scheme and chemotherapy 
strategy for each individual patient remains challenging for personalized 
chemotherapy management. In the general effort toward reduction of colorectal 
cancer mortality, in vitro screening studies play a very important role. To 
accelerate translation research, increasing interest has been focused on using 
in vivo-like models such as three-dimensional spheroids. The development of 
higher throughput assays to quantify phenotypic changes in spheroids is an 
active research area. Consequently, in this study we used the microarray 
technology to reveal the HT-29 colorectal adenocarcinoma cells gene expression 
signature as response to 5-FU/OXP/FA treatment in a state of the art 3D culture 
system. We report here an increased reactive oxygen species production under 
treatment, correlated with a decrease in cell viability and proliferation 
potential. With respect to the HT-29 cells gene expression under the treatment 
with 5-FU/OXP/FA, we found 15.247 genes that were significantly differentially 
expressed (p < 0.05) with a fold change higher that two-fold. Among these, 7136 
genes were upregulated and 8111 genes were downregulated under experimental 
conditions as compared to untreated cells. The most relevant and statistic 
significant (p < 0.01) pathways in the experiment are associated with the genes 
that displayed significant differential expression and are related to 
intracellular signaling, oxidative stress, apoptosis, and cancer.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2016.00172
PMCID: PMC4917556
PMID: 27445811