1. J Virol. 2016 Sep 12;90(19):8866-74. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00901-16. Print 2016 Oct
 1.

Modification of Three Amino Acids in Sodium Taurocholate Cotransporting 
Polypeptide Renders Mice Susceptible to Infection with Hepatitis D Virus In 
Vivo.

He W(1), Cao Z(2), Mao F(3), Ren B(2), Li Y(2), Li D(4), Li H(2), Peng B(5), Yan 
H(2), Qi Y(2), Sun Y(2), Wang F(2), Sui J(6), Li W(7).

Author information:
(1)Postdoctoral Program, School of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, 
China National Institute of Biological Sciences, Beijing, China.
(2)National Institute of Biological Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)National Institute of Biological Sciences, Beijing, China Graduate Program, 
School of Life Sciences, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China.
(4)National Institute of Biological Sciences, Beijing, China Graduate Program, 
School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.
(5)National Institute of Biological Sciences, Beijing, China Graduate Program, 
School of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China.
(6)National Institute of Biological Sciences, Beijing, China Graduate Program, 
School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 
suijianhua@nibs.ac.cn liwenhui@nibs.ac.cn.
(7)National Institute of Biological Sciences, Beijing, China Graduate Program, 
School of Life Sciences, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China Graduate 
Program, School of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China 
suijianhua@nibs.ac.cn liwenhui@nibs.ac.cn.

Sodium taurocholate cotransporting polypeptide (NTCP) was identified as a 
functional receptor for hepatitis D virus (HDV) and its helper hepatitis B virus 
(HBV). In cultured cell lines, HDV infection through mouse NTCP is restricted by 
residues 84 to 87 of the receptor. This study shows that mice with these three 
amino acids altered their corresponding human residues (H84R, T86K, and S87N) in 
endogenous mouse NTCP support de novo HDV infection in vivo HDV infection was 
documented by the presence of replicative forms of HDV RNA and HDV proteins in 
liver cells at day 6 after viral inoculation. Monoclonal antibody specifically 
binding to the motif centered on K86 in NTCP partially inhibited HDV infection. 
These studies demonstrated specific interaction between the receptor and the 
viral envelopes in vivo and established a novel mouse model with minimal genetic 
manipulation for studying HDV infection. The model will also be useful for 
evaluating entry inhibitors against HDV and its helper HBV.
IMPORTANCE: NTCP was identified as a functional receptor for both HDV and HBV in 
cell cultures. We recently showed that neonatal C57BL/6 transgenic (Tg) mice 
exogenously expressing human NTCP (hNTCP-Tg) in liver support transient HDV 
infection. In this study, we introduced alterations of three amino acids in the 
endogenous NTCP of FVB mice through genome editing. The mice with the humanized 
NTCP residues (H84R, T86K, and S87N) are susceptible to HDV infection, and the 
infection can be established in both neonatal and adult mice with this editing. 
We also developed a monoclonal antibody specifically targeting the region of 
NTCP centered on lysine residue 86, and it can differentiate the modified mouse 
NTCP from that of the wild type and partially inhibited HDV infection. These 
studies shed new light on NTCP-mediated HDV infection in vivo, and the 
NTCP-modified mice provide a useful animal model for studying HDV infection and 
evaluating antivirals against the infection.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00901-16
PMCID: PMC5021397
PMID: 27466423 [Indexed for MEDLINE]