1. Nefrologia. 2017 Jan-Feb;37(1):5-8. doi: 10.1016/j.nefro.2016.04.008. Epub
2016  Jul 26.

Is the renal kallikrein-kinin system a factor that modulates calciuria?

[Article in English, Spanish]

Negri AL(1).

Author information:
(1)Cátedra de Fisiología y Biofísica, Universidad del Salvador, Buenos Aires, 
Argentina. Electronic address: armando.negri@gmail.com.

Renal tubular calcium reabsorption is one of the principal factors that 
determine serum calcium concentration and calcium excretion. Calcium excretion 
is regulated by the distal convoluted tubule and connecting tubule, where the 
epithelial calcium channel TRPV5 can be found, which limits the rate of 
transcellular calcium transport. The dynamic presence of the TRPV5 channel on 
the surface of the tubular cell is mediated by an endosomal recycling process. 
Different intrarenal factors are involved in calcium channel fixation in the 
apical membrane, including the anti-ageing hormone klotho and tissue kallikrein 
(TK). Both proteins are synthesised in the distal tubule and secreted in the 
tubular fluid. TK stimulates active calcium reabsorption through the bradykinin 
receptor B2 that compromises TRPV5 activation through the protein kinase C 
pathway. TK-deficient mice show hypercalciuria of renal origin comparable to 
that seen in TRPV5 knockout mice. There is a polymorphism with loss of function 
of the human TK gene R53H (allele H) that causes a marked decrease in enzymatic 
activity. The presence of the allele H seems to be common at least in the 
Japanese population (24%). These individuals have a tendency to greater calcium 
and sodium excretion in urine that is more evident during furosemide infusion. 
Future studies should analyse if manipulating the renal kallikrein-kinin system 
can correct idiopathic hypercalciuria with drugs other than thiazide diuretics.

Copyright © 2016 Sociedad Española de Nefrología. Published by Elsevier España, 
S.L.U. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nefro.2016.04.008
PMID: 27469036 [Indexed for MEDLINE]