1. PLoS Pathog. 2016 Aug 3;12(8):e1005805. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005805. 
eCollection 2016 Aug.

Temporal Dynamics of CD8+ T Cell Effector Responses during Primary HIV 
Infection.

Demers KR(1), Makedonas G(1), Buggert M(1)(2), Eller MA(3)(4), Ratcliffe SJ(5), 
Goonetilleke N(6), Li CK(6), Eller LA(3)(4), Rono K(7), Maganga L(8), Nitayaphan 
S(9), Kibuuka H(10), Routy JP(11), Slifka MK(12), Haynes BF(13), McMichael 
AJ(14), Bernard NF(15), Robb ML(3)(4), Betts MR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America.
(2)Center for Infectious Medicine, Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institute, 
Karolinksa University Hospital Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)U.S. Military HIV Research Program, Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, 
Silver Spring, Maryland, United States of America.
(4)Henry M. Jackson Foundation for the Advancement of Military Medicine, 
Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.
(5)Department of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of 
America.
(6)Medical Research Council Human Immunology Unit, Weatherall Institute of 
Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, England.
(7)Walter Reed Project-Kenya, Kenya Medical Research Institute, Kericho, Kenya.
(8)Mbeya Medical Research Centre, Mbeya, Tanzania.
(9)Department of Retrovirology, United States Army Medical Component, Armed 
Forces Research Institute of Medical Sciences (USAMC-AFRIMS), Bangkok, Thailand.
(10)Makerere University Walter Reed Project, Makerere University Medical School, 
Kampala, Uganda.
(11)Division of Hematology & Chronic Viral Illness Service, McGill University 
Health Centre, Montréal, Québec, Canada.
(12)Division of Neuroscience, Oregon National Primate Research Center, Oregon 
Health and Science University, Beaverton, Oregon, United States of America.
(13)Duke Human Vaccine Institute, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, 
United States of America.
(14)NDM Research Building, Old Road Campus, University of Oxford, Oxford, United 
Kingdom.
(15)Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre, Montréal, Québec, 
Canada.

The loss of HIV-specific CD8+ T cell cytolytic function is a primary factor 
underlying progressive HIV infection, but whether HIV-specific CD8+ T cells 
initially possess cytolytic effector capacity, and when and why this may be lost 
during infection, is unclear. Here, we assessed CD8+ T cell functional evolution 
from primary to chronic HIV infection. We observed a profound expansion of 
perforin+ CD8+ T cells immediately following HIV infection that quickly waned 
after acute viremia resolution. Selective expression of the effector-associated 
transcription factors T-bet and eomesodermin in cytokine-producing HIV-specific 
CD8+ T cells differentiated HIV-specific from bulk memory CD8+ T cell effector 
expansion. As infection progressed expression of perforin was maintained in 
HIV-specific CD8+ T cells with high levels of T-bet, but not necessarily in the 
population of T-betLo HIV-specific CD8+ T cells that expand as infection 
progresses. Together, these data demonstrate that while HIV-specific CD8+ T 
cells in acute HIV infection initially possess cytolytic potential, progressive 
transcriptional dysregulation leads to the reduced CD8+ T cell perforin 
expression characteristic of chronic HIV infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005805
PMCID: PMC4972399
PMID: 27486665 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.