1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2016 Sep 23;60(10):6091-9. doi: 
10.1128/AAC.01249-16. Print 2016 Oct.

Glutamate Racemase Is the Primary Target of β-Chloro-d-Alanine in Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis.

Prosser GA(1), Rodenburg A(2), Khoury H(2), de Chiara C(2), Howell S(3), 
Snijders AP(3), de Carvalho LP(1).

Author information:
(1)Mycobacterial Metabolism and Antibiotic Research Laboratory, The Francis 
Crick Institute, London, United Kingdom Luiz.Carvalho@crick.ac.uk 
gareth.prosser@nih.gov.
(2)Mycobacterial Metabolism and Antibiotic Research Laboratory, The Francis 
Crick Institute, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Proteomics Scientific Technology Platform, Mill Hill Laboratory, The Francis 
Crick Institute, London, United Kingdom.

The increasing global prevalence of drug resistance among many leading human 
pathogens necessitates both the development of antibiotics with novel mechanisms 
of action and a better understanding of the physiological activities of 
preexisting clinically effective drugs. Inhibition of peptidoglycan (PG) 
biosynthesis and cross-linking has traditionally enjoyed immense success as an 
antibiotic target in multiple bacterial pathogens, except in Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis, where it has so far been underexploited. d-Cycloserine, a 
clinically approved antituberculosis therapeutic, inhibits enzymes within the 
d-alanine subbranch of the PG-biosynthetic pathway and has been a focus in our 
laboratory for understanding peptidoglycan biosynthesis inhibition and for drug 
development in studies of M. tuberculosis During our studies on alternative 
inhibitors of the d-alanine pathway, we discovered that the canonical alanine 
racemase (Alr) inhibitor β-chloro-d-alanine (BCDA) is a very poor inhibitor of 
recombinant M. tuberculosis Alr, despite having potent antituberculosis 
activity. Through a combination of enzymology, microbiology, metabolomics, and 
proteomics, we show here that BCDA does not inhibit the d-alanine pathway in 
intact cells, consistent with its poor in vitro activity, and that it is instead 
a mechanism-based inactivator of glutamate racemase (MurI), an upstream enzyme 
in the same early stage of PG biosynthesis. This is the first report to our 
knowledge of inhibition of MurI in M. tuberculosis and thus provides a valuable 
tool for studying this essential and enigmatic enzyme and a starting point for 
future MurI-targeted antibacterial development.

Copyright © 2016 Prosser et al.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.01249-16
PMCID: PMC5038272
PMID: 27480853 [Indexed for MEDLINE]