1. J Pathol Clin Res. 2015 Oct 28;2(1):21-31. doi: 10.1002/cjp2.31. eCollection 
2016 Jan.

The infiltration, and prognostic importance, of Th1 lymphocytes vary in 
molecular subgroups of colorectal cancer.

Ling A(1), Lundberg IV(1), Eklöf V(1), Wikberg ML(1), Öberg Å(2), Edin S(1), 
Palmqvist R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biosciences Pathology, Umeå University Umeå Sweden.
(2)Department of Surgical and Perioperative Sciences Surgery, Umeå University 
Umeå Sweden.

Giving strong prognostic information, T-cell infiltration is on the verge of 
becoming an additional component in the routine clinical setting for 
classification of colorectal cancer (CRC). With a view to further improving the 
tools for prognostic evaluation, we have studied how Th1 lymphocyte infiltration 
correlates with prognosis not only by quantity, but also by subsite, within CRCs 
with different molecular characteristics (microsatellite instability, CpG island 
methylator phenotype status, and BRAF and KRAS mutational status). We evaluated 
the Th1 marker T-bet by immunohistochemistry in 418 archival tumour tissue 
samples from patients who underwent surgical resection for CRC. We found that a 
high number of infiltrating Th1 lymphocytes is strongly associated with an 
improved prognosis in patients with CRC, irrespective of intratumoural subsite, 
and that both extent of infiltration and patient outcome differ according to 
molecular subgroup. In brief, microsatellite instability, CpG island methylator 
phenotype-high and BRAF mutated tumours showed increased infiltration of Th1 
lymphocytes, and the most pronounced prognostic effect of Th1 infiltration was 
found in these tumours. Interestingly, BRAF mutated tumours were found to be 
more highly infiltrated by Th1 lymphocytes than BRAF wild-type tumours whereas 
the opposite was seen for KRAS mutated tumours. These differences could be 
explained at least partly by our finding that BRAF mutated, in contrast to KRAS 
mutated, CRC cell lines and tumour specimens expressed higher levels of the 
Th1-attracting chemokine CXCL10, and reduced levels of CCL22 and TGFB1, 
stimulating Th2/Treg recruitment and polarisation. In conclusion, the strong 
prognostic importance of Th1 lymphocyte infiltration in CRC was found at all 
subsites evaluated, and it remained significant in multivariable analyses, 
indicating that T-bet may be a valuable marker in the clinical setting. Our 
results also indicate that T-bet is of value when analysed in molecular 
subgroups of CRC, allowing identification of patients with especially poor 
prognosis who are in need of extended treatment.

DOI: 10.1002/cjp2.31
PMCID: PMC4858126
PMID: 27499912