1. Front Neuroanat. 2016 Jul 21;10:78. doi: 10.3389/fnana.2016.00078. eCollection
 2016.

The Autophagoproteasome a Novel Cell Clearing Organelle in Baseline and 
Stimulated Conditions.

Lenzi P(1), Lazzeri G(1), Biagioni F(2), Busceti CL(2), Gambardella S(2), 
Salvetti A(3), Fornai F(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Translational Research and New Technologies in Medicine and 
Surgery, University of Pisa Pisa, Italy.
(2)Istituti di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico (I.R.C.C.S.), Neuromed 
Pozzilli, Italy.
(3)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Pisa Pisa, 
Italy.
(4)Department of Translational Research and New Technologies in Medicine and 
Surgery, University of PisaPisa, Italy; Istituti di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere 
Scientifico (I.R.C.C.S.), NeuromedPozzilli, Italy.

Protein clearing pathways named autophagy (ATG) and ubiquitin proteasome (UP) 
control homeostasis within eukaryotic cells, while their dysfunction produces 
neurodegeneration. These pathways are viewed as distinct biochemical cascades 
occurring within specific cytosolic compartments owing pathway-specific 
enzymatic activity. Recent data strongly challenged the concept of two 
morphologically distinct and functionally segregated compartments. In fact, 
preliminary evidence suggests the convergence of these pathways to form a novel 
organelle named autophagoproteasome. This is characterized in the present study 
by using a cell line where, mTOR activity is upregulated and autophagy is 
suppressed. This was reversed dose-dependently by administering the mTOR 
inhibitor rapamycin. Thus, we could study autophagoproteasomes when autophagy 
was either suppressed or stimulated. The occurrence of autophagoproteasome was 
shown also in non-human cell lines. Ultrastructural morphometry, based on the 
stochiometric binding of immunogold particles allowed the quantitative 
evaluation of ATG and UP component within autophagoproteasomes. The number of 
autophagoproteasomes increases following mTOR inhibition. Similarly, mTOR 
inhibition produces overexpression of both LC3 and P20S particles. This is 
confirmed by the fact that the ratio of free vs. autophagosome-bound LC3 is 
similar to that measured for P20S, both in baseline conditions and following 
mTOR inhibition. Remarkably, within autophagoproteasomes there is a slight 
prevalence of ATG compared with UP components for low rapamycin doses, whereas 
for higher rapamycin doses UP increases more than ATG. While LC3 is widely 
present within cytosol, UP is strongly polarized within autophagoproteasomes. 
These fine details were evident at electron microscopy but could not be 
deciphered by using confocal microscopy. Despite its morphological novelty 
autophagoproteasomes appear in the natural site where clearing pathways (once 
believed to be anatomically segregated) co-exist and they are likely to interact 
at molecular level. In fact, LC3 and P20S co-immunoprecipitate, suggesting a 
specific binding and functional interplay, which may be altered by inhibiting 
mTOR. In summary, ATG and UP often represent two facets of a single organelle, 
in which unexpected amount of enzymatic activity should be available. Thus, 
autophagoproteasome may represent a sophisticated ultimate clearing apparatus.

DOI: 10.3389/fnana.2016.00078
PMCID: PMC4955296
PMID: 27493626