1. BMC Genomics. 2016 Aug 5;17:560. doi: 10.1186/s12864-016-2842-8.

Disrupted cooperation between transcription factors across diverse cancer types.

Wang J(1), Liu Q(1)(2), Sun J(3), Shyr Y(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Center for Quantitative Sciences, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, 
Nashville, TN, USA.
(2)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Vanderbilt University School of 
Medicine, Nashville, TN, USA.
(3)School of Biomedical Informatics, The University of Texas Health Science 
Center at Houston, Houston, TX, USA.
(4)Center for Quantitative Sciences, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, 
Nashville, TN, USA. yu.shyr@vanderbilt.edu.
(5)Department of Cancer Biology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, 
Nashville, TN, USA. yu.shyr@vanderbilt.edu.
(6)Department of Biostatistics, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, 
Nashville, TN, USA. yu.shyr@vanderbilt.edu.

BACKGROUND: Transcription Factors (TFs), essential for many cellular processes, 
generally work coordinately to induce transcriptional change in response to 
internal and external signals. Disrupted cooperation between TFs, leading to 
dysregulation of target genes, contributes to the pathogenesis of many diseases, 
including cancer. Although the aberrant activation of individual TFs and the 
functional effects have been widely studied, the perturbation of TF 
cooperativity in cancer has rarely been explored.
RESULTS: We used TF co-expression as proxy as cooperativity and performed a 
large-scale study on disrupted TF cooperation across seven cancer types. While 
the connectivity of downstream effectors, like metabolic genes and TF targets, 
were more or similarly disrupted than/with non-TFs, the cooperativity of TFs 
(upstream regulators) were consistently less disturbed in all studied cancer 
types. Highly coordinated TFs in normal, however, generally lost that 
cooperation in cancer. Although different types of cancer shared very few TF 
pairs with highly disrupted cooperation, the cooperativity of interferon 
regulatory factors (IRF) was highly disrupted in six cancer types. Specifically, 
the cooperativity of IRF8 was highly perturbed in lung cancer, which was further 
validated by two independent lung squamous cell carcinoma (LUSC) and lung 
adenocarcinoma (LUAD) datasets. More interestingly, the cooperativity of IRF8 
was markedly associated with tumor progression and even contributed to the 
patient survival independent of tumor stage.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings underscore the far more important role of TF 
cooperativity in tumorigenesis than previously appreciated. Disrupted 
cooperation of TFs provides potential clinical utility as prognostic markers for 
predicting the patient survival.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-016-2842-8
PMCID: PMC4975902
PMID: 27496222 [Indexed for MEDLINE]