1. PLoS One. 2016 Aug 16;11(8):e0161354. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0161354. 
eCollection 2016.

The Lack of the Essential LptC Protein in the Trans-Envelope Lipopolysaccharide 
Transport Machine Is Circumvented by Suppressor Mutations in LptF, an Inner 
Membrane Component of the Escherichia coli Transporter.

Benedet M(1), Falchi FA(1), Puccio S(2)(3), Di Benedetto C(1), Peano C(3), 
Polissi A(4), Dehò G(1).

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Bioscienze, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy.
(2)Scuola di Dottorato in Medicina Molecolare e Traslazionale, Università degli 
Studi di Milano, Segrate, Italy.
(3)Istituto di Tecnologie Biomediche, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Milan, 
Italy.
(4)Dipartimento di Biotecnologie e Bioscienze, Università degli Studi di 
Milano-Bicocca, Milan, Italy.

The lipopolysaccharide (LPS) transport (Lpt) system is responsible for 
transferring LPS from the periplasmic surface of the inner membrane (IM) to the 
outer leaflet of the outer membrane (OM), where it plays a crucial role in OM 
selective permeability. In E. coli seven essential proteins are assembled in an 
Lpt trans-envelope complex, which is conserved in γ-Proteobacteria. LptBFG 
constitute the IM ABC transporter, LptDE form the OM translocon for final LPS 
delivery, whereas LptC, an IM-anchored protein with a periplasmic domain, 
interacts with the IM ABC transporter, the periplasmic protein LptA, and LPS. 
Although essential, LptC can tolerate several mutations and its role in LPS 
transport is unclear. To get insights into the functional role of LptC in the 
Lpt machine we searched for viable mutants lacking LptC by applying a strong 
double selection for lptC deletion mutants. Genome sequencing of viable ΔlptC 
mutants revealed single amino acid substitutions at a unique position in the 
predicted large periplasmic domain of the IM component LptF (LptFSupC). In 
complementation tests, lptFSupC mutants suppress lethality of both ΔlptC and 
lptC conditional expression mutants. Our data show that mutations in a specific 
residue of the predicted LptF periplasmic domain can compensate the lack of the 
essential protein LptC, implicate such LptF domain in the formation of the 
periplasmic bridge between the IM and OM complexes, and suggest that LptC may 
have evolved to improve the performance of an ancestral six-component Lpt 
machine.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0161354
PMCID: PMC4986956
PMID: 27529623 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.