1. Tremor Other Hyperkinet Mov (N Y). 2016 Jul 16;6:368. doi: 10.7916/D8H70FSS. 
eCollection 2016.

More Than Ataxia: Hyperkinetic Movement Disorders in Childhood Autosomal 
Recessive Ataxia Syndromes.

Pearson TS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
MO, USA.

BACKGROUND: The autosomal recessive ataxias are a heterogeneous group of 
disorders that are characterized by complex neurological features in addition to 
progressive ataxia. Hyperkinetic movement disorders occur in a significant 
proportion of patients, and may sometimes be the presenting motor symptom. 
Presentations with involuntary movements rather than ataxia are diagnostically 
challenging, and are likely under-recognized.
METHODS: A PubMed literature search was performed in October 2015 utilizing 
pairwise combinations of disease-related terms (autosomal recessive ataxia, 
ataxia-telangiectasia, ataxia with oculomotor apraxia type 1 (AOA1), ataxia with 
oculomotor apraxia type 2 (AOA2), Friedreich ataxia, ataxia with vitamin E 
deficiency), and symptom-related terms (movement disorder, dystonia, chorea, 
choreoathetosis, myoclonus).
RESULTS: Involuntary movements occur in the majority of patients with 
ataxia-telangiectasia and AOA1, and less frequently in patients with AOA2, 
Friedreich ataxia, and ataxia with vitamin E deficiency. Clinical presentations 
with an isolated hyperkinetic movement disorder in the absence of ataxia include 
dystonia or dystonia with myoclonus with predominant upper limb and cervical 
involvement (ataxia-telangiectasia, ataxia with vitamin E deficiency), and 
generalized chorea (ataxia with oculomotor apraxia type 1, 
ataxia-telangiectasia).
DISCUSSION: An awareness of atypical presentations facilitates early and 
accurate diagnosis in these challenging cases. Recognition of involuntary 
movements is important not only for diagnosis, but also because of the potential 
for effective targeted symptomatic treatment.

DOI: 10.7916/D8H70FSS
PMCID: PMC4950223
PMID: 27536460

Conflict of interest statement: Funding: None. Conflict of Interest: The authors 
report no conflict of interest. Ethics Statement: This study was reviewed by the 
authors’ institutional ethics committee and was considered exempted from further 
review.