1. Front Physiol. 2016 Aug 2;7:314. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2016.00314. eCollection 
2016.

"Oxygen Sensing" by Na,K-ATPase: These Miraculous Thiols.

Bogdanova A(1), Petrushanko IY(2), Hernansanz-Agustín P(3), Martínez-Ruiz A(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Veterinary Physiology, Vetsuisse Faculty and the Zurich Center 
for Integrative Human Physiology (ZIHP), University of Zurich Zurich, 
Switzerland.
(2)Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences 
Moscow, Russia.
(3)Servicio de Inmunología, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Princesa 
(IIS-IP), Hospital Universitario de La PrincesaMadrid, Spain; Departamento de 
Bioquímica, Universidad Autónoma de MadridMadrid, Spain.
(4)Servicio de Inmunología, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Princesa 
(IIS-IP), Hospital Universitario de La Princesa Madrid, Spain.

Control over the Na,K-ATPase function plays a central role in adaptation of the 
organisms to hypoxic and anoxic conditions. As the enzyme itself does not 
possess O2 binding sites its "oxygen-sensitivity" is mediated by a variety of 
redox-sensitive modifications including S-glutathionylation, S-nitrosylation, 
and redox-sensitive phosphorylation. This is an overview of the current 
knowledge on the plethora of molecular mechanisms tuning the activity of the 
ATP-consuming Na,K-ATPase to the cellular metabolic activity. Recent findings 
suggest that oxygen-derived free radicals and H2O2, NO, and oxidized glutathione 
are the signaling messengers that make the Na,K-ATPase "oxygen-sensitive." This 
very ancient signaling pathway targeting thiols of all three subunits of the 
Na,K-ATPase as well as redox-sensitive kinases sustains the enzyme activity at 
the "optimal" level avoiding terminal ATP depletion and maintaining the 
transmembrane ion gradients in cells of anoxia-tolerant species. We acknowledge 
the complexity of the underlying processes as we characterize the sources of 
reactive oxygen and nitrogen species production in hypoxic cells, and identify 
their targets, the reactive thiol groups which, upon modification, impact the 
enzyme activity. Structured accordingly, this review presents a summary on (i) 
the sources of free radical production in hypoxic cells, (ii) localization of 
regulatory thiols within the Na,K-ATPase and the role reversible thiol 
modifications play in responses of the enzyme to a variety of stimuli (hypoxia, 
receptors' activation) (iii) redox-sensitive regulatory phosphorylation, and 
(iv) the role of fine modulation of the Na,K-ATPase function in survival success 
under hypoxic conditions. The co-authors attempted to cover all the 
contradictions and standing hypotheses in the field and propose the possible 
future developments in this dynamic area of research, the importance of which is 
hard to overestimate. Better understanding of the processes underlying 
successful adaptation strategies will make it possible to harness them and use 
for treatment of patients with stroke and myocardial infarction, sleep apnoea 
and high altitude pulmonary oedema, and those undergoing surgical interventions 
associated with the interruption of blood perfusion.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2016.00314
PMCID: PMC4970491
PMID: 27531981