1. Front Microbiol. 2016 Aug 5;7:1231. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.01231. eCollection
 2016.

Lichen-Associated Fungal Community in Hypogymnia hypotrypa (Parmeliaceae, 
Ascomycota) Affected by Geographic Distribution and Altitude.

Wang Y(1), Zheng Y(1), Wang X(2), Wei X(1), Wei J(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Mycology, Institute of Microbiology - Chinese Academy 
of Sciences Beijing, China.
(2)Key Laboratory for Plant Diversity and Biogeography of East Asia, Kunming 
Institute of Botany - Chinese Academy of Sciences Kunming, China.

Lichen-associated fungal species have already been investigated in almost all 
the main growth forms of lichens, however, whether or not they are homogeneous 
and constant within each lichen species are still inconclusive. Moreover, the 
related ecological factors to affect and structure the fungal composition have 
been poorly studied. In order to answer these questions, we took Hypogymnia 
hypotrypa as a model to study the relationship between the lichen-associated 
fungal composition and two ecological factors, i.e., site and altitude, using 
the method of IlluminaMiSeq sequencing. Four different sites and two levels of 
altitude were included in this study, and the effects of site and altitude on 
fungal community composition were assessed at three levels, i.e., operational 
taxonomic unit (OTU), class and phylum. The results showed that a total of 50 
OTUs were identified and distributed in 4 phyla, 13 classes, and 20 orders. The 
lichen-associated fungal composition within H. hypotrypa were significantly 
affected by both site and altitude at OTU and class levels, while at the phylum 
level, it was only affected by altitude. While the lichen associated fungal 
communities were reported to be similar with endophytic fungi of the moss, our 
results indicated the opposite results in some degree. But whether there exist 
specific OTUs within this lichen species corresponding to different sites and 
altitudes is still open. More lichen species and ecological factors would be 
taken into the integrated analyses to address these knowledge gaps in the near 
future.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.01231
PMCID: PMC4975045
PMID: 27547204