1. PLoS One. 2016 Aug 31;11(8):e0161009. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0161009. 
eCollection 2016.

Identification of IGFBP2 and IGFBP3 As Compensatory Biomarkers for CA19-9 in 
Early-Stage Pancreatic Cancer Using a Combination of Antibody-Based and 
LC-MS/MS-Based Proteomics.

Yoneyama T(1), Ohtsuki S(2)(3), Honda K(4)(3), Kobayashi M(4), Iwasaki M(5), 
Uchida Y(1), Okusaka T(6), Nakamori S(7), Shimahara M(8), Ueno T(8), Tsuchida 
A(9), Sata N(10), Ioka T(11), Yasunami Y(12), Kosuge T(13), Kaneda T(14), Kato 
T(15), Yagihara K(16), Fujita S(17), Huang W(18), Yamada T(4), Tachikawa M(1), 
Terasaki T(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Membrane Transport and Drug Targeting, Graduate School of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Microbiology, Faculty of Life Sciences, Kumamoto 
University, Kumamoto, Japan.
(3)Japan Agency for Medical Research and Development (AMED) CREST, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Division of Chemotherapy and Clinical Research, National Cancer Center 
Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Division of Epidemiology, Research Center for Cancer Prevention and 
Screening, National Cancer Center, Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Department of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Oncology, National Cancer Center 
Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(7)Departments of Hepato-Biliary-Pancreatic Surgery, Osaka National Hospital, 
National Hospital Organization, Osaka, Japan.
(8)Department of Oral Surgery, Osaka Medical College, Osaka, Japan.
(9)Department of Gastrointestinal and Pediatric Surgery, Tokyo Medical 
University, Tokyo, Japan.
(10)Department of Surgery, Jichi Medical University, Tochigi, Japan.
(11)Department of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Oncology, Osaka Medical Center 
for Cancer and Cardiovascular Diseases, Osaka, Japan.
(12)Islet Institute, Fukuoka University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(13)Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery Division, National Cancer Center 
Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(14)Department of Radiology, Nihon University School of Dentistry at Matsudo, 
Chiba, Japan.
(15)Department of Oral Implant, Nihon University School of Dentistry at Matsudo, 
Chiba, Japan.
(16)Department of Oral Surgery, Saitama Cancer Center, Saitama, Japan.
(17)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Wakayama Medical University, 
Wakayama, Japan.
(18)Abnova, Taipei City, Taiwan.

Pancreatic cancer is one of the most lethal tumors, and reliable detection of 
early-stage pancreatic cancer and risk diseases for pancreatic cancer is 
essential to improve the prognosis. As 260 genes were previously reported to be 
upregulated in invasive ductal adenocarcinoma of pancreas (IDACP) cells, 
quantification of the corresponding proteins in plasma might be useful for IDACP 
diagnosis. Therefore, the purpose of the present study was to identify plasma 
biomarkers for early detection of IDACP by using two proteomics strategies: 
antibody-based proteomics and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry 
(LC-MS/MS)-based proteomics. Among the 260 genes, we focused on 130 encoded 
proteins with known function for which antibodies were available. Twenty-three 
proteins showed values of the area under the curve (AUC) of more than 0.8 in 
receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis of reverse-phase protein array 
(RPPA) data of IDACP patients compared with healthy controls, and these proteins 
were selected as biomarker candidates. We then used our high-throughput selected 
reaction monitoring or multiple reaction monitoring (SRM/MRM) methodology, 
together with an automated sample preparation system, micro LC and auto analysis 
system, to quantify these candidate proteins in plasma from healthy controls and 
IDACP patients on a large scale. The results revealed that insulin-like growth 
factor-binding protein (IGFBP)2 and IGFBP3 have the ability to discriminate 
IDACP patients at an early stage from healthy controls, and IGFBP2 appeared to 
be increased in risk diseases of pancreatic malignancy, such as intraductal 
papillary mucinous neoplasms (IPMNs). Furthermore, diagnosis of IDACP using the 
combination of carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9), IGFBP2 and IGFBP3 is 
significantly more effective than CA19-9 alone. This suggests that IGFBP2 and 
IGFBP3 may serve as compensatory biomarkers for CA19-9. Early diagnosis with 
this marker combination may improve the prognosis of IDACP patients.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0161009
PMCID: PMC5007017
PMID: 27579675 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest. One of our authors, W.H., is a CEO of Abnova and receives salary from 
Abnova. He also owns stock in Abnova. This does not alter the authors’ adherence 
to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.