1. Transl Psychiatry. 2016 Aug 30;6(8):e876. doi: 10.1038/tp.2016.135.

Klotho: a humeral mediator in CSF and plasma that influences longevity and 
susceptibility to multiple complex disorders, including depression.

Pavlatou MG(1), Remaley AT(2), Gold PW(1).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Neuroendocrinology Branch, National Institute of Mental Health, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(2)Lipoprotein Metabolism Section, Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Branch, National 
Institute of Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD, USA.

Klotho is a hormone secreted into human cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), plasma and 
urine that promotes longevity and influences the onset of several premature 
senescent phenotypes in mice and humans, including atherosclerosis, 
cardiovascular disease, stroke and osteoporosis. Preliminary studies also 
suggest that Klotho possesses tumor suppressor properties. Klotho's roles in 
these phenomena were first suggested by studies demonstrating that a defect in 
the Klotho gene in mice results in a significant decrease in lifespan. The 
Klotho-deficient mouse dies prematurely at 8-9 weeks of age. At 4-5 weeks of 
age, a syndrome resembling human ageing emerges consisting of atherosclerosis, 
osteoporosis, cognitive disturbances and alterations of hippocampal 
architecture. Several deficits in Klotho-deficient mice are likely to contribute 
to these phenomena. These include an inability to defend against oxidative 
stress in the central nervous system and periphery, decreased capacity to 
generate nitric oxide to sustain normal endothelial reactivity, defective 
Klotho-related mediation of glycosylation and ion channel regulation, increased 
insulin/insulin-like growth factor signaling and a disturbed calcium and 
phosphate homeostasis accompanied by altered vitamin D levels and ectopic 
calcification. Identifying the mechanisms by which Klotho influences multiple 
important pathways is an emerging field in human biology that will contribute 
significantly to understanding basic physiologic processes and targets for the 
treatment of complex diseases. Because many of the phenomena seen in 
Klotho-deficient mice occur in depressive illness, major depression and bipolar 
disorder represent illnesses potentially associated with Klotho dysregulation. 
Klotho's presence in CSF, blood and urine should facilitate its study in 
clinical populations.

DOI: 10.1038/tp.2016.135
PMCID: PMC5022081
PMID: 27576165 [Indexed for MEDLINE]