1. Brain Behav Immun. 2017 Jan;59:158-172. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2016.08.021. Epub 
2016 Sep 2.

Chronic psychological stress and high-fat high-fructose diet disrupt metabolic 
and inflammatory gene networks in the brain, liver, and gut and promote 
behavioral deficits in mice.

de Sousa Rodrigues ME(1), Bekhbat M(2), Houser MC(3), Chang J(4), Walker DI(5), 
Jones DP(6), Oller do Nascimento CMP(7), Barnum CJ(8), Tansey MG(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine at Emory University, United 
States; Department of Physiology of Nutrition, Federal University of Sao Paulo, 
SP, Brazil. Electronic address: mdesou2@emory.edu.
(2)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine at Emory University, United 
States. Electronic address: mandakh.bekhbat@emory.edu.
(3)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine at Emory University, United 
States. Electronic address: mcrawf4@emory.edu.
(4)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine at Emory University, United 
States. Electronic address: jchan47@emory.edu.
(5)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, School of Medicine 
at Emory University, United States. Electronic address: 
Douglas.Walker@emory.edu.
(6)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, School of Medicine 
at Emory University, United States. Electronic address: dpjones@emory.edu.
(7)Department of Physiology of Nutrition, Federal University of Sao Paulo, SP, 
Brazil. Electronic address: claudia.oller@unifesp.br.
(8)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine at Emory University, United 
States. Electronic address: cjbarnum@me.com.
(9)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine at Emory University, United 
States. Electronic address: malu.tansey@emory.edu.

The mechanisms underlying the association between chronic psychological stress, 
development of metabolic syndrome (MetS), and behavioral impairment in obesity 
are poorly understood. The aim of the present study was to assess the effects of 
mild chronic psychological stress on metabolic, inflammatory, and behavioral 
profiles in a mouse model of diet-induced obesity. We hypothesized that (1) 
high-fat high-fructose diet (HFHF) and psychological stress would synergize to 
mediate the impact of inflammation on the central nervous system in the presence 
of behavioral dysfunction, and that (2) HFHF and stress interactions would 
impact insulin and lipid metabolism. C57Bl/6 male mice underwent a combination 
of HFHF and two weeks of chronic psychological stress. MetS-related conditions 
were assessed using untargeted plasma metabolomics, and structural and immune 
changes in the gut and liver were evaluated. Inflammation was measured in 
plasma, liver, gut, and brain. Our results show a complex interplay of diet and 
stress on gut alterations, energetic homeostasis, lipid metabolism, and plasma 
insulin levels. Psychological stress and HFHF diet promoted changes in 
intestinal tight junctions proteins and increases in insulin resistance and 
plasma cholesterol, and impacted the RNA expression of inflammatory factors in 
the hippocampus. Stress promoted an adaptive anti-inflammatory profile in the 
hippocampus that was abolished by diet treatment. HFHF increased hippocampal and 
hepatic Lcn2 mRNA expression as well as LCN2 plasma levels. Behavioral changes 
were associated with HFHF and stress. Collectively, these results suggest that 
diet and stress as pervasive factors exacerbate MetS-related conditions through 
an inflammatory mechanism that ultimately can impact behavior. This rodent model 
may prove useful for identification of possible biomarkers and therapeutic 
targets to treat metabolic syndrome and mood disorders.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbi.2016.08.021
PMCID: PMC5154856
PMID: 27592562 [Indexed for MEDLINE]