1. PLoS One. 2016 Sep 7;11(9):e0161968. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0161968. 
eCollection 2016.

Stabilization of Transfected Cells Expressing Low-Incidence Blood Group 
Antigens: Novel Methods Facilitating Their Use as Reagent-Cells.

González C(1), Esteban R(1), Canals C(1), Muñiz-Díaz E(1), Nogués N(1).

Author information:
(1)Immunohematology Laboratory, Banc de Sang i Teixits, Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: The identification of erythrocyte antibodies in the serum of 
patients rely on panels of human red blood cells (RBCs), which coexpress many 
antigens and are not easily available for low-incidence blood group phenotypes. 
These problems have been addressed by generating cell lines expressing unique 
blood group antigens, which may be used as an alternative to human RBCs. 
However, the use of cell lines implies several drawbacks, like the requirement 
of cell culture facilities and the high cost of cryopreservation. The 
application of cell stabilization methods could facilitate their use as reagent 
cells in clinical laboratories.
METHODS: We generated stably-transfected cells expressing low-incidence blood 
group antigens (Dia and Lua). High-expresser clones were used to assess the 
effect of TransFix® treatment and lyophilization as cell preservation methods. 
Cells were kept at 4°C and cell morphology, membrane permeability and antigenic 
properties were evaluated at several time-points after treatment.
RESULTS: TransFix® addition to cell suspensions allows cell stabilization and 
proper antigen detection for at least 120 days, despite an increase in membrane 
permeability and a reduction in antigen expression levels. Lyophilized cells 
showed minor morphological changes and antigen expression levels were rather 
conserved at days 1, 15 and 120, indicating a high stability of the freeze-dried 
product. These stabilized cells have been proved to react specifically with 
human sera containing alloantibodies.
CONCLUSIONS: Both stabilization methods allow long-term preservation of the 
transfected cells antigenic properties and may facilitate their distribution and 
use as reagent-cells expressing low-incidence antigens, overcoming the limited 
availability of such rare RBCs.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0161968
PMCID: PMC5014343
PMID: 27603310 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.