1. J Med Genet. 2017 Jan;54(1):54-62. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2016-103988. Epub
2016  Sep 6.

SLC13A5 is the second gene associated with Kohlschütter-Tönz syndrome.

Schossig A(1), Bloch-Zupan A(2)(3)(4), Lussi A(5), Wolf NI(6), Raskin S(7)(8), 
Cohen M(9), Giuliano F(10), Jurgens J(11), Krabichler B(1), Koolen DA(12), de 
Macena Sobreira NL(11), Maurer E(1), Muller-Bolla M(13)(14), Penzien J(15), 
Zschocke J(1), Kapferer-Seebacher I(16).

Author information:
(1)Division of Human Genetics, Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, 
Austria.
(2)Faculté de Chirurgie Dentaire, Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France.
(3)Pôle de Médecine et Chirurgie Bucco-dentaires, Centre de Référence des 
Manifestations Odontologiques des Maladies Rares, Hôpitaux Universitaires de 
Strasbourg (HUS), Strasbourg, France.
(4)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire and Cellulaire-Centre 
Européen de Recherche en Biologie et en Médecine, Université de Strasbourg, 
IGBMC-CERBM CNRS UMR7104, INSERM U964, Illkirch, France.
(5)Department of Preventive, Restorative and Pediatric Dentistry, School of 
Dental Medicine, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(6)Department of Child Neurology, VU University Medical Center, Neuroscience 
Campus Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(7)Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Paraná (PUCPR), Curitiba, Brazil.
(8)Genetika-Centro de Aconselhamento e Laboratório de Genética, Curitiba, 
Brazil.
(9)kbo-Kinderzentrum München gGmbH, Munich, Germany.
(10)Centre de Référence Anomalies du Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs 
PACA, Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU Nice, Nice, France.
(11)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(12)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences 
and Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University 
Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(13)UFR Odontologie, Département d'Odontologie Pédiatrique, Université de Nice 
Sophia-Antipolis, UCA, Nice, France.
(14)CHU de Nice, Pôle Odontologie, UF soins pour enfants; Laboratory URB2i-EA 
4462, Paris Descartes, France.
(15)Department of Neuropaediatrics, Klinikum Augsburg, Augsburg, Germany.
(16)Department of Operative and Restorative Dentistry, Medical University of 
Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.

BACKGROUND: Kohlschütter-Tönz syndrome (KTZS) is a rare autosomal-recessive 
disease characterised by epileptic encephalopathy, intellectual disability and 
amelogenesis imperfecta (AI). It is frequently caused by biallelic mutations in 
ROGDI. Here, we report on individuals with ROGDI-negative KTZS carrying 
biallelic SLC13A5 mutations.
METHODS: In the present cohort study, nine individuals from four families with 
the clinical diagnosis of KTZS and absence of ROGDI mutations as well as one 
patient with unexplained epileptic encephalopathy were investigated by clinical 
and dental evaluation, parametric linkage analysis (one family), and exome 
and/or Sanger sequencing. Dental histological investigations were performed on 
teeth from individuals with SLC13A5-associated and ROGDI-associated KTZS.
RESULTS: Biallelic mutations in SLC13A5 were identified in 10 affected 
individuals. Epileptic encephalopathy usually presents in the neonatal and (less 
frequently) early infantile period. Yellowish to orange discolouration of both 
deciduous and permanent teeth, as well as wide interdental spaces and abnormal 
crown forms are major clinical signs of individuals with biallelic SLC13A5 
mutations. Histological dental investigations confirmed the clinical diagnosis 
of hypoplastic AI. In comparison, the histological evaluation of a molar 
assessed from an individual with ROGDI-associated KTZS revealed hypocalcified 
AI.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that SLC13A5 is the second major gene associated with 
the clinical diagnosis of KTZS, characterised by neonatal epileptic 
encephalopathy and hypoplastic AI. Careful clinical and dental delineation 
provides clues whether ROGDI or SLC13A5 is the causative gene. Hypersensitivity 
of teeth as well as high caries risk requires individual dental prophylaxis and 
attentive dental management.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/.

DOI: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2016-103988
PMID: 27600704 [Indexed for MEDLINE]