1. Mol Vis. 2016 Aug 29;22:1062-76. eCollection 2016.

Whole exome sequencing of extreme age-related macular degeneration phenotypes.

Sardell RJ(1), Bailey JN(2), Courtenay MD(1), Whitehead P(1), Laux RA(2), Adams 
LD(1), Fortun JA(3), Brantley MA Jr(4), Kovach JL(3), Schwartz SG(3), Agarwal 
A(4), Scott WK(1), Haines JL(2), Pericak-Vance MA(1).

Author information:
(1)John P. Hussman Institute for Human Genomics, University of Miami Miller 
School of Medicine, Miami, FL.
(2)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Case Western Reserve 
University, Cleveland, OH.
(3)Bascom Palmer Eye Institute, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, 
Miami, FL.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Vanderbilt University School 
of Medicine, Nashville, TN.

PURPOSE: Demographic, environmental, and genetic risk factors for age-related 
macular degeneration (AMD) have been identified; however, a substantial portion 
of the variance in AMD disease risk and heritability remains unexplained. To 
identify AMD risk variants and generate hypotheses for future studies, we 
performed whole exome sequencing for 75 individuals whose phenotype was not well 
predicted by their genotype at known risk loci. We hypothesized that these 
phenotypically extreme individuals were more likely to carry rare risk or 
protective variants with large effect sizes.
METHODS: A genetic risk score was calculated in a case-control set of 864 
individuals (467 AMD cases, 397 controls) based on 19 common (≥1% minor allele 
frequency, MAF) single nucleotide variants previously associated with the risk 
of advanced AMD in a large meta-analysis of advanced cases and controls. We then 
selected for sequencing 39 cases with bilateral choroidal neovascularization 
with the lowest genetic risk scores to detect risk variants and 36 unaffected 
controls with the highest genetic risk score to detect protective variants. 
After minimizing the influence of 19 common genetic risk loci on case-control 
status, we targeted single variants of large effect and the aggregate effect of 
weaker variants within genes and pathways. Single variant tests were conducted 
on all variants, while gene-based and pathway analyses were conducted on three 
subsets of data: 1) rare (≤1% MAF in the European population) stop, splice, or 
damaging missense variants, 2) all rare variants, and 3) all variants. All 
analyses controlled for the effects of age and sex.
RESULTS: No variant, gene, or pathway outside regions known to be associated 
with risk for advanced AMD reached genome-wide significance. However, we 
identified several variants with substantial differences in allele frequency 
between cases and controls with strong additive effects on affection status 
after controlling for age and sex. Protective effects trending toward 
significance were detected at two loci identified in single-variant analyses: an 
intronic variant in FBLN7 (the gene encoding fibulin 7) and at three variants 
near pyridoxal (pyridoxine, vitamin B6) kinase (PDXK). Aggregate rare-variant 
analyses suggested evidence for association at ASRGL1, a gene previously linked 
to photoreceptor cell death, and at BSDC1. In known AMD loci we also identified 
29 novel or rare damaging missense or stop/splice variants in our sample of 
cases and controls.
CONCLUSIONS: Identified variants and genes may highlight regions important in 
the pathogenesis of AMD and are key targets for replication.

PMCID: PMC5007100
PMID: 27625572 [Indexed for MEDLINE]