1. Sci Rep. 2016 Sep 19;6:33598. doi: 10.1038/srep33598.

A contaminant-free assessment of Endogenous Retroviral RNA in human plasma.

Karamitros T(1), Paraskevis D(2), Hatzakis A(2), Psichogiou M(3), Elefsiniotis 
I(4), Hurst T(1), Geretti AM(5), Beloukas A(5), Frater J(6), Klenerman P(6), 
Katzourakis A(1), Magiorkinis G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Hygiene, Epidemiology and Medical Statistics, Medical School, 
University of Athens, Athens, Greece.
(3)First Department of Internal Medicine, Medical School, University of Athens, 
Athens, Greece.
(4)Academic Department of Internal Medicine-Hepatogastroenterology, General and 
Oncology Hospital 'Agioi Anargyroi', Athens, Greece.
(5)Institute of Infection and Global Health, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, 
United Kingdom.
(6)Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United 
Kingdom.

Endogenous retroviruses (ERVs) comprise 6-8% of the human genome. HERVs are 
silenced in most normal tissues, up-regulated in stem cells and in placenta but 
also in cancer and HIV-1 infection. Crucially, there are conflicting reports on 
detecting HERV RNA in non-cellular clinical samples such as plasma that suggest 
the study of HERV RNA can be daunting. Indeed, we find that the use of real-time 
PCR in a quality assured clinical laboratory setting can be sensitive to 
low-level proviral contamination. We developed a mathematical model for 
low-level contamination that allowed us to design a laboratory protocol and 
standard operating procedures for robust measurement of HERV RNA. We focus on 
one family, HERV-K HML-2 (HK2) that has been most recently active even though 
they invaded our ancestral genomes almost 30 millions ago. We extensively 
validated our experimental design on a model cell culture system showing high 
sensitivity and specificity, totally eliminating the proviral contamination. We 
then tested 236 plasma samples from patients infected with HIV-1, HCV or HBV and 
found them to be negative. The study of HERV RNA for human translational studies 
should be performed with extensively validated protocols and standard operating 
procedures to control the widespread low-level human DNA contamination.

DOI: 10.1038/srep33598
PMCID: PMC5027517
PMID: 27640347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]