1. Transl Lung Cancer Res. 2016 Aug;5(4):401-12. doi: 10.21037/tlcr.2016.07.10.

Histopathological transformation to small-cell lung carcinoma in non-small cell 
lung carcinoma tumors.

Dorantes-Heredia R(1), Ruiz-Morales JM(2), Cano-García F(1).

Author information:
(1)Anatomical Pathology Department, Hospital Médica Sur, México City, México ;
(2)Oncology Center, Hospital Médica Sur, México City, México.

Lung cancer is the principal cause of cancer-related death worldwide. The use of 
targeted therapies, especially tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), in specific 
groups of patients has dramatically improved the prognosis of this disease, 
although inevitably some patients will develop resistance to these drugs during 
active treatment. The most common cancer-associated acquired mutation is the 
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) Thr790Met (T790M) mutation. During 
active treatment with targeted therapies, histopathological transformation to 
small-cell lung carcinoma (SCLC) can occur in 3-15% of patients with 
non-small-cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) tumors. By definition, SCLC is a 
high-grade tumor with specific histological and genetic characteristics. In the 
majority of cases, a good-quality hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stain is enough to 
establish a diagnosis. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) is used to confirm the 
diagnosis and exclude other neoplasia such as sarcomatoid carcinomas, large-cell 
carcinoma, basaloid squamous-cell carcinoma, chronic inflammation, malignant 
melanoma, metastatic carcinoma, sarcoma, and lymphoma. A loss of the 
tumor-suppressor protein retinoblastoma 1 (RB1) is found in 100% of human SCLC 
tumors; therefore, it has an essential role in tumorigenesis and tumor 
development. Other genetic pathways probably involved in the histopathological 
transformation include neurogenic locus notch homolog (NOTCH) and achaete-scute 
homolog 1 (ASCL1). Histological transformation to SCLC can be suspected in NSCLC 
patients who clinically deteriorate during active treatment. Biopsy of any new 
lesion in this clinical setting is highly recommended to rule out a SCLC 
transformation. New studies are trying to assess this histological 
transformation by noninvasive measures such as measuring the concentration of 
serum neuron-specific enolase.

DOI: 10.21037/tlcr.2016.07.10
PMCID: PMC5009079
PMID: 27652204

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.