1. Int J Endocrinol Metab. 2016 Apr 23;14(2):e35424. doi: 10.5812/ijem.35424. 
eCollection 2016 Apr.

Recurrence of Hyperparathyroid Hypercalcemia in a Patient With the HRPT-2 
Mutation and a Previous Parathyroid Carcinoma in Hyperparathyroidism-Jaw Tumor 
Syndrome.

Mele M(1), Rolighed L(1), Jespersen M(2), Rejnmark L(3), Christiansen P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery P, Breast and Endocrine Unit, Aarhus University 
Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.
(2)Department of Pathology, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.
(3)Department of Endocrinology and Internal Medicine MEA, Aarhus University 
Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.

INTRODUCTION: Cancer in the parathyroid gland is rare, but parathyroid cancer is 
occasionally seen in relation to genetic abnormalities. Due to a limited amount 
of evidence, the optimal handling of these cases is not clear. Furthermore, the 
presence of a malignant parathyroid tumor is rarely known at the time of the 
initial operation; therefore, re-operations are often necessary. The aim of this 
study was to present the case of a patient with a previously diagnosed jaw tumor 
and parathyroid carcinoma that presents as a recurrence of hyperparathyroid 
hypercalcemia.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 41-year-old patient who was already diagnosed with a 
parathyroid carcinoma and a jaw tumor caused by a CDC73 mutation, presented with 
biochemical evidence of increasing parathyroid hormone (PTH) and calcium levels 
after a previous total parathyroidectomy. The patient's ionized calcium 
increased to 1.55 mmol/L and PTH increased to 16.0 pmol/L. A previous genetic 
analysis revealed a mutation in the CDC73 gene. There was no family history of 
hyperparathyroidism. We performed a sestamibi scintigraphy and an 11-C 
methionine (MET) positron emission tomography (PET) scan that showed a 
recurrence on the left side of the trachea. The patient underwent a third neck 
operation for the removal of a tumor on the left side of the trachea. The 
pathology report revealed that the tumor was a lymph node metastasis from the 
previous parathyroid carcinoma. The patient is currently enrolled in our 
follow-up regime. Hyperparathyroidism-jaw tumor (HPT-JT) syndrome is a rare 
autosomal dominant disorder characterized by a parathyroid adenoma or carcinoma, 
fibro-osseous lesions (ossifying fibroma) of the mandible and maxilla, and renal 
cysts and tumors. This autosomal dominant familial cancer syndrome has been 
reported with a variable and incomplete penetrance, and up to 10% of gene 
carriers do not show any clinical manifestations. Here we present a patient's 
case and discuss the literature related to this condition.
CONCLUSIONS: The recurrence of hyperparathyroid hypercalcemia in HTP-JT syndrome 
after an initial total parathyroidectomy is a well-known condition necessitating 
careful management, an evaluation of any underlying genetic abnormality, and a 
family examination. A surgical treatment and surveillance of calcium and PTH 
measurements are necessary to prevent a recurrence.

DOI: 10.5812/ijem.35424
PMCID: PMC5035774
PMID: 27679651