1. World J Gastroenterol. 2016 Sep 28;22(36):8078-93. doi: 
10.3748/wjg.v22.i36.8078.

Pediatric non-alcoholic fatty liver disease: Recent solutions, unresolved 
issues, and future research directions.

Clemente MG(1), Mandato C(1), Poeta M(1), Vajro P(1).

Author information:
(1)Maria Grazia Clemente, Pediatric Clinic, Department of Surgical, 
Microsurgical and Medical Sciences, University of Sassari, 07100 Sassari, Italy.

Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) in children is becoming a major health 
concern. A "multiple-hit" pathogenetic model has been suggested to explain the 
progressive liver damage that occurs among children with NAFLD. In addition to 
the accumulation of fat in the liver, insulin resistance (IR) and oxidative 
stress due to genetic/epigenetic background, unfavorable lifestyles, gut 
microbiota and gut-liver axis dysfunction, and perturbations of trace element 
homeostasis have been shown to be critical for disease progression and the 
development of more severe inflammatory and fibrotic stages [non-alcoholic 
steatohepatitis (NASH)]. Simple clinical and laboratory parameters, such as age, 
history, anthropometrical data (BMI and waist circumference percentiles), blood 
pressure, surrogate clinical markers of IR (acanthosis nigricans), abdominal 
ultrasounds, and serum transaminases, lipids and glucose/insulin profiles, allow 
a clinician to identify children with obesity and obesity-related conditions, 
including NAFLD and cardiovascular and metabolic risks. A liver biopsy (the 
"imperfect" gold standard) is required for a definitive NAFLD/NASH diagnosis, 
particularly to exclude other treatable conditions or when advanced liver 
disease is expected on clinical and laboratory grounds and preferably prior to 
any controlled trial of pharmacological/surgical treatments. However, a biopsy 
clearly cannot represent a screening procedure. Advancements in diagnostic serum 
and imaging tools, especially for the non-invasive differentiation between NAFLD 
and NASH, have shown promising results, e.g., magnetic resonance elastography. 
Weight loss and physical activity should be the first option of intervention. 
Effective pharmacological treatments are still under development; however, drugs 
targeting IR, oxidative stress, proinflammatory pathways, dyslipidemia, gut 
microbiota and gut liver axis dysfunction are an option for patients who are 
unable to comply with the recommended lifestyle changes. When morbid obesity 
prevails, bariatric surgery should be considered.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v22.i36.8078
PMCID: PMC5037077
PMID: 27688650 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: The authors 
declare there are no conflicts of interest in the content of this review.