1. Front Psychiatry. 2016 Sep 14;7:156. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2016.00156.
eCollection  2016.

Childhood Trauma and COMT Genotype Interact to Increase Hippocampal Activation 
in Resilient Individuals.

van Rooij SJ(1), Stevens JS(1), Ely TD(1), Fani N(1), Smith AK(1), Kerley KA(1), 
Lori A(1), Ressler KJ(2), Jovanovic T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Emory University School of 
Medicine , Atlanta, GA , USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Emory University School of 
Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA; McLean Hospital, Department of Psychiatry, Harvard 
Medical School, Belmont, MA, USA.

Both childhood trauma and a functional catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) 
genetic polymorphism have been associated with posttraumatic stress disorder 
(PTSD) and depression; however, it is still unclear whether the two interact and 
how this interaction relates to long-term risk or resilience. Imaging and 
genotype data were collected on 73 highly traumatized women. DNA extracted from 
saliva was used to determine COMT genotype (Val/Val, n = 38, Met carriers, 
n = 35). Functional MRI data were collected during a Go/NoGo task to investigate 
the neurocircuitry underlying response inhibition. Self-report measures of adult 
and childhood trauma exposure, PTSD and depression symptom severity, and 
resilience were collected. Childhood trauma was found to interact with COMT 
genotype to impact inhibition-related hippocampal activation. In Met carriers, 
more childhood trauma was associated with decreased hippocampal activation, 
whereas in the Val/Val group childhood trauma was related to increased 
hippocampal activation. Second, hippocampal activation correlated negatively 
with PTSD and depression symptoms and positively with trait resilience. 
Moreover, hippocampal activation mediated the relationship between childhood 
trauma and psychiatric risk or resilience in the Val/Val, but not in the Met 
carrier group. These data reveal a potential mechanism by which childhood trauma 
and COMT genotype interact to increase risk for trauma-related psychopathology 
or resilience. Hippocampal recruitment during inhibition may improve the ability 
to use contextual information to guide behavior, thereby enhancing resilience in 
trauma-exposed individuals. This finding may contribute to early identification 
of individuals at risk and suggests a mechanism that can be targeted in future 
studies aiming to prevent or limit negative outcomes.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyt.2016.00156
PMCID: PMC5021680
PMID: 27683563