1. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2017 Apr;174(3):235-250. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.b.32494. Epub 2016 Oct 1.

Highly polygenic architecture of antidepressant treatment response: Comparative 
analysis of SSRI and NRI treatment in an animal model of depression.

Malki K(1), Tosto MG(1)(2), Mouriño-Talín H(3), Rodríguez-Lorenzo S(4), Pain 
O(5)(6), Jumhaboy I(1), Liu T(7), Parpas P(7), Newman S(1), Malykh A(2), Carboni 
L(8), Uher R(1)(9), McGuffin P(1), Schalkwyk LC(10), Bryson K(3), Herbster M(3).

Author information:
(1)King's College London, MRC Social, Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry 
Centre at the Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience (IOPPN), 
London, United Kingdom.
(2)LCIBG, Tomsk State University, Tomsk, Russia.
(3)Department of Computer Science, UCL, London, United Kingdom.
(4)Division of Medicine, UCL, London, United Kingdom.
(5)Birkbeck, University of London, United Kingdom.
(6)London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, United Kingdom.
(7)Department of Computer Science Imperial College London, United Kingdom.
(8)Department of Pharmacy and Biotechnology, Alma Mater Studiorum University of 
Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(9)Department of Psychiatry, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.
(10)School of Biological Sciences, University of Essex, Colchester, United 
Kingdom.

Response to antidepressant (AD) treatment may be a more polygenic trait than 
previously hypothesized, with many genetic variants interacting in yet unclear 
ways. In this study we used methods that can automatically learn to detect 
patterns of statistical regularity from a sparsely distributed signal across 
hippocampal transcriptome measurements in a large-scale animal pharmacogenomic 
study to uncover genomic variations associated with AD. The study used four 
inbred mouse strains of both sexes, two drug treatments, and a control group 
(escitalopram, nortriptyline, and saline). Multi-class and binary classification 
using Machine Learning (ML) and regularization algorithms using iterative and 
univariate feature selection methods, including InfoGain, mRMR, ANOVA, and Chi 
Square, were used to uncover genomic markers associated with AD response. 
Relevant genes were selected based on Jaccard distance and carried forward for 
gene-network analysis. Linear association methods uncovered only one gene 
associated with drug treatment response. The implementation of ML algorithms, 
together with feature reduction methods, revealed a set of 204 genes associated 
with SSRI and 241 genes associated with NRI response. Although only 10% of genes 
overlapped across the two drugs, network analysis shows that both drugs 
modulated the CREB pathway, through different molecular mechanisms. Through 
careful implementation and optimisations, the algorithms detected a weak signal 
used to predict whether an animal was treated with nortriptyline (77%) or 
escitalopram (67%) on an independent testing set. The results from this study 
indicate that the molecular signature of AD treatment may include a much broader 
range of genomic markers than previously hypothesized, suggesting that response 
to medication may be as complex as the pathology. The search for biomarkers of 
antidepressant treatment response could therefore consider a higher number of 
genetic markers and their interactions. Through predominately different 
molecular targets and mechanisms of action, the two drugs modulate the same 
Creb1 pathway which plays a key role in neurotrophic responses and in 
inflammatory processes. © 2016 The Authors. American Journal of Medical Genetics 
Part B: Neuropsychiatric Genetics Published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2016 The Authors. American Journal of Medical Genetics Part B: 
Neuropsychiatric Genetics Published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.b.32494
PMCID: PMC5434854
PMID: 27696737 [Indexed for MEDLINE]