1. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2016 Nov;46(10):845-875. doi: 10.1080/10408444.2016.1220916.
 Epub 2016 Oct 5.

Sarin (GB, O-isopropyl methylphosphonofluoridate) neurotoxicity: critical 
review.

Abou-Donia MB(1), Siracuse B(1), Gupta N(1), Sobel Sokol A(1).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology , Duke University , Durham , 
NC , USA.

Sarin (GB, O-isopropyl methylphosphonoﬂuoridate) is a potent organophosphorus 
(OP) nerve agent that inhibits acetylcholinesterase (AChE) irreversibly. The 
subsequent build-up of acetylcholine (ACh) in the central nervous system (CNS) 
provokes seizures and, at sufficient doses, centrally-mediated respiratory 
arrest. Accumulation of ACh at peripheral autonomic synapses leads to peripheral 
signs of intoxication and overstimulation of the muscarinic and nicotinic 
receptors, which is described as "cholinergic crisis" (i.e. diarrhea, sweating, 
salivation, miosis, bronchoconstriction). Exposure to high doses of sarin can 
result in tremors, seizures, and hypothermia. More seriously, build-up of ACh at 
neuromuscular junctions also can cause paralysis and ultimately 
peripherally-mediated respiratory arrest which can lead to death via respiratory 
failure. In addition to its primary action on the cholinergic system, sarin 
possesses other indirect effects. These involve the activation of several 
neurotransmitters including gamma-amino-butyric acid (GABA) and the alteration 
of other signaling systems such as ion channels, cell adhesion molecules, and 
inflammatory regulators. Sarin exposure is associated with symptoms of 
organophosphate-induced delayed neurotoxicity (OPIDN) and 
organophosphate-induced chronic neurotoxicity (OPICN). Moreover, sarin has been 
involved in toxic and immunotoxic effects as well as organophosphate-induced 
endocrine disruption (OPIED). The standard treatment for sarin-like nerve agent 
exposure is post-exposure injection of atropine, a muscarinic receptor 
antagonist, accompanied by an oxime, an AChE reactivator, and diazepam.

DOI: 10.1080/10408444.2016.1220916
PMCID: PMC5764759
PMID: 27705071 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interest This manuscript was 
prepared by the authors who are affiliated with Duke University, aimed at 
engaging scientists from academia, government, industry, research institutes, 
and the public to identify and resolve health and environmental issues related 
to OP compounds and sarin exposure in particular. This is a significant issue 
considering that an estimated 200 000 American military personnel were suspected 
to have been exposed to low-level sarin that was released following the 
destruction of Iraqi weapon stockpile in Khamisiyah, Iraq in 1991. Many of these 
soldiers still complain of symptoms of the Gulf War illness. Recent attacks 
against civilian populations by terrorists ranging from fanatic religious cult 
members in Japan and dictators in Iraq and Syria have resulted in the death of 
thousands of people, including children. The authors have sole responsibility 
for this paper that reflects their views and of the writing and content of the 
paper. The views and opinions expressed in the paper do not necessarily reflect 
the views of the author’s employers. Mention of trade names does not constitute 
endorsement. The senior author, MBA investigated health effects of sarin through 
the Department of Defence grants. He testified of its involvement of chemical 
exposure, including sarin in the Gulf War illness before the U.S. Senate 
Veterans’ Committee and presented his research in DOD meetings. None of the 
authors has recently or is currently been involved as an expert witness in 
litigation on the subject of this paper. The authors declare that there is no 
conflict of interest.