1. Clin Biochem. 2017 Feb;50(3):155-158. doi: 10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2016.10.003. 
Epub 2016 Oct 10.

A new missense mutation in UMOD gene leads to severely reduced serum uromodulin 
concentrations - A tool for the diagnosis of uromodulin-associated kidney 
disease.

Satanovskij R(1), Bader A(2), Block M(3), Herbst V(3), Schlumberger W(3), Haack 
T(2), Nockher WA(4), Heemann U(5), Renders L(5), Schmaderer C(5), Angermann 
S(5), Wen M(5), Meitinger T(2), Scherberich J(6), Steubl D(7).

Author information:
(1)Abteilung für Nephrologie, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technische Universität 
München, München, Germany; Institut für Humangenetik, Klinikum rechts der Isar, 
Technische Universität München, München, Germany.
(2)Institut für Humangenetik, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technische Universität 
München, München, Germany; Institut für Humangenetik, Helmholtz Zentrum München, 
Neuherberg, Germany.
(3)Euroimmun Medizinische Labordiagnostika AG, Lübeck, Germany.
(4)Institut für Institut für Laboratoriumsmedizin und Pathobiochemie, Molekulare 
Diagnostik, Universitätsklinikum Marburg, Philipps-Universität Marburg, Marburg, 
Germany.
(5)Abteilung für Nephrologie, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technische Universität 
München, München, Germany.
(6)Klinikum München-Harlaching, Teaching-hospital of the 
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, München, Germany.
(7)Abteilung für Nephrologie, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technische Universität 
München, München, Germany. Electronic address: dominik.steubl@lrz.tum.de.

BACKGROUND: Uromodulin-associated Autosomal Dominant Tubulointerstitial Kidney 
Disease (ADTKD-UMOD) belongs to a group of autosomal dominant inherited diseases 
caused by mutations in the UMOD gene, which codes for uromodulin, a protein 
exclusively expressed in renal tubular cells of the ascending limb of the loop 
of Henle. The diagnosis is hampered by non-specific clinical, laboratory and 
histological findings. In this study, we evaluated serum uromodulin as 
diagnostic marker for ADTKD-UMOD in a family with a novel mutation in UMOD.
METHODS: We investigated a family with five members suffering from chronic 
kidney disease of unknown origin (CKD) and three healthy members using whole 
exome sequencing. Serum uromodulin was measured by ELISA. The uromodulin 
concentration of each CKD family member was compared to reference CKD groups 
with similar eGFR and to non-CKD individuals in case of the healthy family 
members, respectively.
RESULTS: Whole exome sequencing revealed novel missense mutation c.457T>G, 
p.(Cys153Gly) in UMOD. Serum uromodulin concentration was lower in all affected 
patients compared to all patients of the reference CKD groups, while healthy 
family members showed normal values comparable to those of the non-CKD reference 
group.
CONCLUSIONS: The mutation detected in our family leads to severely reduced serum 
uromodulin concentrations, distinguishing these patients clearly from CKD 
patients with comparable eGFR. Therefore, serum uromodulin could serve as a 
simple, new diagnostic marker to identify patients with ADTKD-UMOD.

Copyright © 2016 The Canadian Society of Clinical Chemists. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2016.10.003
PMID: 27729211 [Indexed for MEDLINE]