1. Front Microbiol. 2016 Sep 27;7:1528. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.01528.
eCollection  2016.

The qacC Gene Has Recently Spread between Rolling Circle Plasmids of 
Staphylococcus, Indicative of a Novel Gene Transfer Mechanism.

Wassenaar TM(1), Ussery DW(2), Ingmer H(3).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Microbiology and Genomics Consultants Zotzenheim, Germany.
(2)Department of Biomedical Informatics, University of Arkansas for Medical 
Sciences Little Rock, AR, USA.
(3)Department of Veterinary Disease Biology, Faculty of Health and Medical 
Sciences, University of Copenhagen Copenhagen, Denmark.

Resistance of Staphylococcus species to quaternary ammonium compounds, 
frequently used as disinfectants and biocides, can be attributed to qac genes. 
Most qac gene products belong to the Small Multidrug Resistant (SMR) protein 
family, and are often encoded by rolling-circle (RC) replicating plasmids. Four 
classes of SMR-type qac gene families have been described in Staphylococcus 
species: qacC, qacG, qacJ, and qacH. Within their class, these genes are highly 
conserved, but qacC genes are extremely conserved, although they are found in 
variable plasmid backgrounds. The lower degree of sequence identity of these 
plasmids compared to the strict nucleotide conservation of their qacC means that 
this gene has recently spread. In the absence of insertion sequences or other 
genetic elements explaining the mobility, we sought for an explanation of 
mobilization by sequence comparison. Publically available sequences of qac 
genes, their flanking genes and the replication gene that is invariably present 
in RC-plasmids were compared to reconstruct the evolutionary history of these 
plasmids and to explain the recent spread of qacC. Here we propose a new model 
that explains how qacC is mobilized and transferred to acceptor RC-plasmids 
without assistance of other genes, by means of its location in between the 
Double Strand replication Origin (DSO) and the Single-Strand replication Origin 
(SSO). The proposed mobilization model of this DSO-qacC-SSO element represents a 
novel mechanism of gene mobilization in RC-plasmids, which has also been 
employed by other genes, such as lnuA (conferring lincomycin resistance). The 
proposed gene mobility has aided to the wide spread of clinically relevant 
resistance genes in Staphylococcus populations.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.01528
PMCID: PMC5037232
PMID: 27729906