1. Leukemia. 2017 Apr;31(4):821-828. doi: 10.1038/leu.2016.277. Epub 2016 Oct 13.

Germline activating TYK2 mutations in pediatric patients with two primary acute 
lymphoblastic leukemia occurrences.

Waanders E(1), Scheijen B(2)(3), Jongmans MC(1)(4), Venselaar H(5), van 
Reijmersdal SV(1), van Dijk AH(1), Pastorczak A(6), Weren RD(1), van der Schoot 
CE(7), van de Vorst M(1), Sonneveld E(8), Hoogerbrugge N(1), van der Velden 
VH(9), Gruhn B(10), Hoogerbrugge PM(11), van Dongen JJ(9), Geurts van Kessel 
A(1), van Leeuwen FN(2), Kuiper RP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Radboud 
Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(2)Laboratory of Pediatric Oncology, Radboud University Medical Center, Radboud 
Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Pathology, Radboud University Medical Center, Radboud Institute 
for Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, 
The Netherlands.
(5)Center for Molecular and Biomolecular Informatics, Radboud University Medical 
Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Oncology, Hematology and Diabetology, Medical 
University of Lodz, Lodz, Poland.
(7)Department of Experimental Immunohematology, Sanquin Research and Landsteiner 
Laboratory, Amsterdam Medical Centre, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(8)Dutch Childhood Oncology Group, The Hague, The Netherlands.
(9)Department of Immunology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam, 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, Jena University Hospital, Jena, Germany.
(11)Princess Máxima Center for Pediatric Oncology, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

The contribution of genetic predisposing factors to the development of pediatric 
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), the most frequently diagnosed cancer in 
childhood, has not been fully elucidated. Children presenting with multiple de 
novo leukemias are more likely to suffer from genetic predisposition. Here, we 
selected five of these patients and analyzed the mutational spectrum of normal 
and malignant tissues. In two patients, we identified germline mutations in 
TYK2, a member of the JAK tyrosine kinase family. These mutations were located 
in two adjacent codons of the pseudokinase domain (p.Pro760Leu and p.Gly761Val). 
In silico modeling revealed that both mutations affect the conformation of this 
autoregulatory domain. Consistent with this notion, both germline mutations 
promote TYK2 autophosphorylation and activate downstream STAT family members, 
which could be blocked with the JAK kinase inhibitor I. These data indicate that 
germline activating TYK2 mutations predispose to the development of ALL.

DOI: 10.1038/leu.2016.277
PMID: 27733777 [Indexed for MEDLINE]