1. Clin Dysmorphol. 2017 Jan;26(1):18-25. doi: 10.1097/MCD.0000000000000152.

Combined ultrasound and exome sequencing approach recognizes Opitz G/BBB 
syndrome in two malformed fetuses.

Pinto AM(1), Imperatore V, Bianciardi L, Baldassarri M, Galluzzi P, Furini S, 
Centini G, Renieri A, Mari F.

Author information:
(1)aMedical Genetics, Department of Medical Biotechnologies bBioengineering 
Unit, Department of Medical Biotechnologies, University of Siena cMedical 
Genetics Unit, Department of Medical Biotechnologies dDepartment of Neurology 
NINT (Neuroimmagini e Neurointerventistica), Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria 
Senese eDepartment of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Azienda, Siena, Italy.

Orofacial clefts are the most common congenital craniofacial anomalies and can 
occur as an isolated defect or be associated with other anomalies such as 
posterior fossa anomalies as a part of several genetic syndromes. We report two 
consecutive voluntary pregnancy interruptions in a nonconsanguineous couple 
following the fetal ultrasound finding of cleft lip and palate and posterior 
fossa anomalies confirmed by means of post-termination examination on the second 
fetus. The quantitative fluorescent PCR, the karyotype, and the comparative 
genomic hybridization-array analysis after amniocentesis were normal. Exome 
sequencing on abortive material from both fetuses detected a missense mutation 
in MID1, resulting in a clinical diagnosis of Opitz G/BBB syndrome. The same 
mutation was found in the mother and in her brother, who both revealed 
cerebellar anomalies at an MRI examination. Our study supports the efficacy of 
exome sequencing in the presence of both a family history suggestive of an 
inherited disorder and well-documented ultrasound findings. It reveals the 
importance of a synergistic effort between gynecologists and geneticists aimed 
at the integration of the most sophisticated ultrasound techniques with the 
next-generation sequencing tools to provide a definite diagnosis essential to 
orient the final decision and to estimate a proper recurrence risk.

DOI: 10.1097/MCD.0000000000000152
PMID: 27749392 [Indexed for MEDLINE]