1. Appl Clin Genet. 2016 Oct 17;9:157-167. doi: 10.2147/TACG.S86760. eCollection 
2016.

Novel treatment options for lysosomal acid lipase deficiency: critical appraisal 
of sebelipase alfa.

Su K(1), Donaldson E(1), Sharma R(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology/Hepatology.
(2)The Mark Holland Metabolic Unit, Salford Royal Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, 
Salford, UK.

Lysosomal acid lipase deficiency (LAL-D) is a rare disorder of cholesterol 
metabolism with an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance. The absence or 
deficiency of the LAL enzyme gives rise to pathological accumulation of 
cholesterol esters in various tissues. A severe LAL-D phenotype manifesting in 
infancy is associated with adrenal calcification and liver and gastrointestinal 
involvement with characteristic early mortality. LAL-D presenting in childhood 
and adulthood is associated with hepatomegaly, liver fibrosis, cirrhosis, and 
premature atherosclerosis. There are currently no curative pharmacological 
treatments for this life-threatening condition. Supportive management with 
lipid-modifying agents does not ameliorate disease progression. Hematopoietic 
stem cell transplantation as a curative measure in infantile disease has mixed 
success and is associated with inherent risks and complications. Sebelipase alfa 
(Kanuma) is a recombinant human LAL protein and the first enzyme replacement 
therapy for the treatment of LAL-D. Clinical trials have been undertaken in 
infants with rapidly progressive LAL-D and in children and adults with 
later-onset LAL-D. Initial data have shown significant survival benefits in the 
infant group and improvements in biochemical parameters in the latter. 
Sebelipase alfa has received marketing authorization in the United States and 
Europe as long-term therapy for all affected individuals. The availability of 
enzyme replacement therapy for this rare and progressive disorder warrants 
greater recognition and awareness by physicians.

DOI: 10.2147/TACG.S86760
PMCID: PMC5074735
PMID: 27799810

Conflict of interest statement: Dr Reena Sharma is principle investigator for 
sebelipase alfa CL04 trial and has received travel grants and bursaries from 
Synageva and Alexion. The other authors report no conflicts of interest in this 
work.