1. Acc Chem Res. 2016 Nov 15;49(11):2560-2568. doi: 10.1021/acs.accounts.6b00446.
 Epub 2016 Oct 24.

Spin-Dependent Transport through Chiral Molecules Studied by Spin-Dependent 
Electrochemistry.

Mondal PC(1), Fontanesi C(1)(2), Waldeck DH(3), Naaman R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical Physics, Weizmann Institute of Science , Rehovot 
76100, Israel.
(2)Department of Engineering, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia , Via 
Vivarelli 10, 41125 Modena, Italy.
(3)Department of Chemistry, University of Pittsburgh , Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 
15260, United States.

Molecular spintronics (spin + electronics), which aims to exploit both the spin 
degree of freedom and the electron charge in molecular devices, has recently 
received massive attention. Our recent experiments on molecular spintronics 
employ chiral molecules which have the unexpected property of acting as spin 
filters, by way of an effect we call "chiral-induced spin selectivity" (CISS). 
In this Account, we discuss new types of spin-dependent electrochemistry 
measurements and their use to probe the spin-dependent charge transport 
properties of nonmagnetic chiral conductive polymers and biomolecules, such as 
oligopeptides, L/D cysteine, cytochrome c, bacteriorhodopsin (bR), and 
oligopeptide-CdSe nanoparticles (NPs) hybrid structures. Spin-dependent 
electrochemical measurements were carried out by employing ferromagnetic 
electrodes modified with chiral molecules used as the working electrode. Redox 
probes were used either in solution or when directly attached to the 
ferromagnetic electrodes. During the electrochemical measurements, the 
ferromagnetic electrode was magnetized either with its magnetic moment pointing 
"UP" or "DOWN" using a permanent magnet (H = 0.5 T), placed underneath the 
chemically modified ferromagnetic electrodes. The spin polarization of the 
current was found to be in the range of 5-30%, even in the case of small chiral 
molecules. Chiral films of the l- and d-cysteine tethered with a redox-active 
dye, toludin blue O, show spin polarizarion that depends on the chirality. 
Because the nickel electrodes are susceptible to corrosion, we explored the 
effect of coating them with a thin gold overlayer. The effect of the gold layer 
on the spin polarization of the electrons ejected from the electrode was 
investigated. In addition, the role of the structure of the protein on the spin 
selective transport was also studied as a function of bias voltage and the 
effect of protein denaturation was revealed. In addition to "dark" measurements, 
we also describe photoelectrochemical measurements in which light is used to 
affect the spin selective electron transport through the chiral molecules. We 
describe how the excitation of a chromophore (such as CdSe nanoparticles), which 
is attached to a chiral working electrode, can flip the preferred spin 
orientation of the photocurrent, when measured under the identical conditions. 
Thus, chirality-induced spin polarization, when combined with light and magnetic 
field effects, opens new avenues for the study of the spin transport properties 
of chiral molecules and biomolecules and for creating new types of spintronic 
devices in which light and molecular chirality provide new functions and 
properties.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.accounts.6b00446
PMCID: PMC5112609
PMID: 27797176 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.