1. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2017 Mar 1;20(3):213-218. doi:
10.1093/ijnp/pyw096.

Serum Brain-Derived Neurotrophic Factors in Taiwanese Patients with Drug-Naïve 
First-Episode Major Depressive Disorder: Effects of Antidepressants.

Chiou YJ(1), Huang TL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang 
Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Brain-derived neurotrophic factors are known to be related to the 
psychopathology of major depressive disorder. However, studies focusing on 
drug-naïve first-episode patients are still rare.
METHODS: Over a 6-year period, we examined the serum brain-derived neurotrophic 
factors levels in patients with ﬁrst-episode drug-naïve major depressive 
disorder and compared them with sex-matched healthy controls. We also 
investigated the relationships between serum brain-derived neurotrophic factors 
levels, suicidal behavior, and Hamilton Depression Rating Scale scores before 
and after a 4-week antidepressant treatment.
RESULTS: The baseline serum brain-derived neurotrophic factors levels of 71 
patients were significantly lower than those of the controls (P=.017), and the 
Hamilton Depression Rating Scale scores in 71 patients did not correlate with 
brain-derived neurotrophic factor levels. Brain-derived neurotrophic factor 
levels were significantly lower in 13 suicidal major depressive disorder 
patients than in 58 nonsuicidal major depressive disorder patients (P=.038). 
Among 41 followed-up patients, there was no alteration in serum brain-derived 
neurotrophic factors levels after treatment with antidepressants (P=.126). In 
receiver operating characteristic curve analysis of using pretreatment 
brain-derived neurotrophic factors to estimate the response to treatment, the 
area under the curve was 0.684. The most suitable cut-off point was 6.1 ng/mL 
(sensitivity=78.6%, specificity = 53.8%).
CONCLUSIONS: Our data support the serum brain-derived neurotrophic factor levels 
in patients with drug-naïve first-episode major depressive disorder were lower 
than those in the healthy controls, and patients with pretreatment brain-derived 
neurotrophic factors >6.1 ng/mL were more likely to be responders. Although the 
relationship of our results to the mechanism of drug action and pathophysiology 
of depression remains unclear, the measure may have potential use as a predictor 
of response to treatment. In the future, it needs a large sample to prove these 
results.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of CINP.

DOI: 10.1093/ijnp/pyw096
PMCID: PMC5408974
PMID: 27811136 [Indexed for MEDLINE]