1. PeerJ. 2016 Oct 26;4:e2602. doi: 10.7717/peerj.2602. eCollection 2016.

In silico study on anti-Chikungunya virus activity of hesperetin.

Oo A(1), Hassandarvish P(1), Chin SP(2), Lee VS(2), Abu Bakar S(1), Zandi K(1).

Author information:
(1)Tropical Infectious Disease Research and Education Centre, Department of 
Medical Microbiology Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya , Kuala Lumpur , 
Malaysia.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Malaya , Kuala Lumpur , Malaysia.

BACKGROUND: The re-emerging, Aedes spp. transmitted Chikungunya virus (CHIKV) 
has recently caused large outbreaks in a wide geographical distribution of the 
world including countries in Europe and America. Though fatalities associated 
with this self-remitting disease were rarely reported, quality of patients' 
lives have been severely diminished by polyarthralgia recurrence. Neither 
effective antiviral treatment nor vaccines are available for CHIKV. Our previous 
in vitro screening showed that hesperetin, a bioflavonoid exhibits inhibitory 
effect on the virus intracellular replication. Here, we present a study using 
the computational approach to identify possible target proteins for future 
mechanistic studies of hesperetin.
METHODS: 3D structures of CHIKV nsP2 (3TRK) and nsP3 (3GPG) were retrieved from 
Protein Data Bank (PDB), whereas nsP1, nsP4 and cellular factor SPK2 were 
modeled using Iterative Threading Assembly Refinement (I-TASSER) server based on 
respective amino acids sequence. We performed molecular docking on hesperetin 
against all four CHIKV non-structural proteins and SPK2. Proteins preparation 
and subsequent molecular docking were performed using Discovery Studio 2.5 and 
AutoDock Vina 1.5.6. The Lipinski's values of the ligand were computed and 
compared with the available data from PubChem. Two non-structural proteins with 
crystal structures 3GPG and 3TRK in complexed with hesperetin, demonstrated 
favorable free energy of binding from the docking study, were further explored 
using molecular dynamics (MD) simulations.
RESULTS: We observed that hesperetin interacts with different types of proteins 
involving hydrogen bonds, pi-pi effects, pi-cation bonding and pi-sigma 
interactions with varying binding energies. Among all five tested proteins, our 
compound has the highest binding affinity with 3GPG at -8.5 kcal/mol. The ligand 
used in this study also matches the Lipinski's rule of five in addition to 
exhibiting closely similar properties with that of in PubChem. The docking 
simulation was performed to obtain a first guess of the binding structure of 
hesperetin complex and subsequently analysed by MD simulations to assess the 
reliability of the docking results. Root mean square deviation (RMSD) of the 
simulated systems from MD simulations indicated that the hesperetin complex 
remains stable within the simulation timescale.
DISCUSSION: The ligand's tendencies of binding to the important proteins for 
CHIKV replication were consistent with our previous in vitro screening which 
showed its efficacy in blocking the virus intracellular replication. NsP3 serves 
as the highest potential target protein for the compound's inhibitory effect, 
while it is interesting to highlight the possibility of interrupting CHIKV 
replication via interaction with host cellular factor. By complying the 
Lipinski's rule of five, hesperetin exhibits drug-like properties which projects 
its potential as a therapeutic option for CHIKV infection.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.2602
PMCID: PMC5088613
PMID: 27812412

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.