1. Oncotarget. 2016 Dec 27;7(52):86388-86405. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.13199.

No role of IFITM3 in brain tumor formation in vivo.

Stankovic ND(1)(2)(3), Hoppmann N(4), Teodorczyk M(1), Kim EL(5), Bros M(6), 
Giese A(5), Zipp F(4), Schmidt MHH(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Signal Transduction Laboratories, Institute for Microscopic Anatomy 
and Neurobiology, Focus Program Translational Neuroscience (FTN), Rhine Main 
Neuroscience Network (rmn2), Johannes Gutenberg University, School of Medicine, 
Mainz, Germany.
(2)German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)Department of Neurology, Focus Program Translational Neuroscience (FTN) and 
Research Center for Immunotherapy (FZI), Rhine Main Neuroscience Network (rmn2), 
Johannes Gutenberg University, School of Medicine, Mainz, Germany.
(5)Translational Oncology Research Group, Department of Neurosurgery, Johannes 
Gutenberg University, School of Medicine, Mainz, Germany.
(6)Department of Dermatology, Johannes Gutenberg University, School of Medicine, 
Mainz, Germany.

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is one of the most lethal solid tumors in adults. 
Despite aggressive treatment approaches for patients, GBM recurrence is 
inevitable, in part due to the existence of stem-like brain tumor-propagating 
cells (BTPCs), which produce factors rendering them resistant to radio- and 
chemotherapy. Comparative transcriptome analysis of irradiated, patient-derived 
BTPCs revealed a significant upregulation of the interferon-inducible 
transmembrane protein 3 (IFITM3), suggesting the protein as a factor mediating 
radio resistance. Previously, IFITM3 has been described to affect glioma cells; 
therefore, the role of IFITM3 in the formation and progression of brain tumors 
has been investigated in vivo. Intracranial implantation studies using 
radio-selected BTPCs alongside non-irradiated parental BTPCs in immunodeficient 
mice displayed no influence of irradiation on animal survival. Furthermore, gain 
and loss of function studies using BTPCs ectopically expressing IFITM3 or having 
IFITM3 down-modulated by a shRNA approach, did affect neither tumor growth nor 
animal survival. Additionally, a syngeneic model based on the mouse glioma cell 
line GL261 was applied in order to consider the possibility that IFITM3 relies 
on an intact immune system to unfold its tumorigenic potential. GL261 cells 
ectopically expressing IFITM3 were implanted into the striatum of 
immunocompetent mice without influencing the survival of glioma-bearing animals. 
Lastly, the vasculature and the extent of microglia/macrophage invasion into the 
tumor were studied in BTPC and GL261 tumors but neither parameter was altered by 
IFITM3. This report presents for the first time that IFITM3 is upregulated in 
patient-derived BTPCs upon irradiation but does not affect brain tumor formation 
or progression in vivo.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.13199
PMCID: PMC5349921
PMID: 27835870 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors declare no 
competing financial interest.