1. PLoS One. 2016 Nov 16;11(11):e0166450. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0166450. 
eCollection 2016.

Alpha B-Crystallin Protects Rat Articular Chondrocytes against Casein Kinase II 
Inhibition-Induced Apoptosis.

Lee SW(1), Rho JH(2), Lee SY(1), Yoo SH(2), Kim HY(2), Chung WT(1), Yoo YH(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Dong-A University College of Medicine, Busan, 
Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology and Mitochondria Hub Regulation 
Center, Dong-A University College of Medicine, Busan, Republic of Korea.

Although alpha (α)B-crystallin is expressed in articular chondrocytes, little is 
known about its role in these cells. Protein kinase casein kinase 2 (CK2) 
inhibition induces articular chondrocyte death. The present study examines 
whether αB-crystallin exerts anti-apoptotic activity in articular chondrocytes. 
Primary rat articular chondrocytes were isolated from knee joint slices. Cells 
were treated with CK2 inhibitors with or without αB-crystallin siRNA. To examine 
whether the silencing of αB-crystallin sensitizes rat articular chondrocytes to 
CK2 inhibition-induced apoptosis, we assessed apoptosis by performing viability 
assays, mitochondrial membrane potential measurements, flow cytometry, nuclear 
morphology observations, and western blot analysis. To investigate the mechanism 
by which αB-crystallin modulates the extent of CK2 inhibition-mediated 
chondrocyte death, we utilized confocal microscopy to observe the subcellular 
location of αB-crystallin and its phosphorylated forms and performed a 
co-immunoprecipitation assay to observe the interaction between αB-crystallin 
and CK2. Immunochemistry was employed to examine αB-crystallin expression in 
cartilage obtained from rats with experimentally induced osteoarthritis (OA). 
Our results demonstrated that silencing of αB-crystallin sensitized rat 
articular chondrocytes to CK2 inhibitor-induced apoptosis. Furthermore, CK2 
inhibition modulated the expression and subcellular localization of 
αB-crystallin and its phosphorylated forms and dissociated αB-crystallin from 
CK2. The population of rat articular chondrocytes expressing αB-crystallin and 
its phosphorylated forms was reduced in an experimentally induced rat model of 
OA. In summary, αB-crystallin protects rat articular chondrocytes against CK2 
inhibition-induced apoptosis. αB-crystallin may represent a suitable target for 
pharmacological interventions to prevent OA.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0166450
PMCID: PMC5112790
PMID: 27851782 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.