1. Semin Cancer Biol. 2017 Dec;47:147-153. doi: 10.1016/j.semcancer.2016.11.009. 
Epub 2016 Nov 17.

Mitochondrial dysfunction in cancer chemoprevention by phytochemicals from 
dietary and medicinal plants.

Sehrawat A(1), Roy R(1), Pore SK(1), Hahm ER(1), Samanta SK(1), Singh KB(1), Kim 
SH(1), Singh K(2), Singh SV(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology & Chemical Biology, University of Pittsburgh 
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(2)University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute, University of Pittsburgh School of 
Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(3)Department of Pharmacology & Chemical Biology, University of Pittsburgh 
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA; University of Pittsburgh Cancer 
Institute, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. 
Electronic address: singhs@upmc.edu.

Cancer chemoprevention, a scientific term coined by Dr. Sporn in the late 
seventies, implies use of natural or synthetic chemicals to block, delay or 
reverse carcinogenesis. Phytochemicals derived from edible and medicinal plants 
have been studied rather extensively for cancer chemoprevention using 
preclinical models in the past few decades. Nevertheless, some of these agents 
(e.g., isothiocyanates from cruciferous vegetables like broccoli and watercress) 
have already entered into clinical investigations. Examples of widely studied 
and highly promising phytochemicals from edible and medicinal plants include 
cruciferous vegetable constituents (phenethyl isothiocyanate, benzyl 
isothiocyanate, and sulforaphane), withaferin A (WA) derived from a medicinal 
plant (Withania somnifera) used heavily in Asia, and an oriental medicine plant 
component honokiol (HNK). An interesting feature of these structurally-diverse 
phytochemicals is that they target mitochondria to provoke cancer cell-selective 
death program. Mechanisms underlying cell death induction by commonly studied 
phytochemicals have been discussed rather extensively and thus are not covered 
in this review article. Instead, the primary focus of this perspective is to 
discuss experimental evidence pointing to mitochondrial dysfunction in cancer 
chemoprevention by promising phytochemicals.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semcancer.2016.11.009
PMCID: PMC5435556
PMID: 27867044 [Indexed for MEDLINE]