1. BMC Genomics. 2016 Nov 21;17(1):944. doi: 10.1186/s12864-016-3230-0.

Insights into the human mesenchymal stromal/stem cell identity through 
integrative transcriptomic profiling.

Roson-Burgo B(1)(2)(3), Sanchez-Guijo F(2)(3), Del Cañizo C(2)(3), De Las Rivas 
J(4).

Author information:
(1)Bioinformatics and Functional Genomics Group, Cancer Research Center (IBMCC, 
CSIC/USAL) and IBSAL, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientificas (CSIC), 
Salamanca, Spain.
(2)Hematology Department, IBSAL-Hospital Universitario de Salamanca, Salamanca, 
Spain.
(3)Centro en Red de Medicina Regenerativa y Terapia Celular de Castilla y León, 
Salamanca, Spain.
(4)Bioinformatics and Functional Genomics Group, Cancer Research Center (IBMCC, 
CSIC/USAL) and IBSAL, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientificas (CSIC), 
Salamanca, Spain. jrivas@usal.es.

BACKGROUND: Mesenchymal Stromal/Stem Cells (MSCs), isolated under the criteria 
established by the ISCT, still have a poorly characterized phenotype that is 
difficult to distinguish from similar cell populations. Although the field of 
transcriptomics and functional genomics has quickly grown in the last decade, a 
deep comparative analysis of human MSCs expression profiles in a meaningful 
cellular context has not been yet performed. There is also a need to find a 
well-defined MSCs gene-signature because many recent biomedical studies show 
that key cellular interaction processes (i.e. inmuno-modulation, cellular 
cross-talk, cellular maintenance, differentiation, epithelial-mesenchymal 
transition) are dependent on the mesenchymal stem cells within the stromal 
niche.
RESULTS: In this work we define a core mesenchymal lineage signature of 489 
genes based on a deep comparative analysis of multiple transcriptomic expression 
data series that comprise: (i) MSCs of different tissue origins; (ii) MSCs in 
different states of commitment; (iii) other related non-mesenchymal human cell 
types. The work integrates several public datasets, as well as de-novo produced 
microarray and RNA-Seq datasets. The results present tissue-specific signatures 
for adipose tissue, chorionic placenta, and bone marrow MSCs, as well as for 
dermal fibroblasts; providing a better definition of the relationship between 
fibroblasts and MSCs. Finally, novel CD marker patterns and cytokine-receptor 
profiles are unravelled, especially for BM-MSCs; with MCAM (CD146) revealed as a 
prevalent marker in this subtype of MSCs.
CONCLUSIONS: The improved biomolecular characterization and the released 
genome-wide expression signatures of human MSCs provide a comprehensive new 
resource that can drive further functional studies and redesigned cell therapy 
applications.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-016-3230-0
PMCID: PMC5117530
PMID: 27871224 [Indexed for MEDLINE]