1. Sci Rep. 2016 Dec 1;6:37938. doi: 10.1038/srep37938.

Direct identification of antibiotic resistance genes on single plasmid molecules 
using CRISPR/Cas9 in combination with optical DNA mapping.

Müller V(1), Rajer F(2), Frykholm K(1), Nyberg LK(1), Quaderi S(1)(3), Fritzsche 
J(4), Kristiansson E(5)(6), Ambjörnsson T(3), Sandegren L(2), Westerlund F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology and Biological Engineering, Chalmers University of 
Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(2)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University, 
Uppsala, Sweden.
(3)Department of Astronomy and Theoretical Physics, Lund University, Lund, 
Sweden.
(4)Department of Applied Physics, Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, 
Sweden.
(5)Department of Mathematical Sciences, Chalmers University of 
Technology/University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(6)Centre for Antibiotic Resistance Research (CARe), University of Gothenburg, 
Gothenburg, Sweden.

Bacterial plasmids are extensively involved in the rapid global spread of 
antibiotic resistance. We here present an assay, based on optical DNA mapping of 
single plasmids in nanofluidic channels, which provides detailed information 
about the plasmids present in a bacterial isolate. In a single experiment, we 
obtain the number of different plasmids in the sample, the size of each plasmid, 
an optical barcode that can be used to identify and trace the plasmid of 
interest and information about which plasmid that carries a specific resistance 
gene. Gene identification is done using CRISPR/Cas9 loaded with a guide-RNA 
(gRNA) complementary to the gene of interest that linearizes the circular 
plasmids at a specific location that is identified using the optical DNA maps. 
We demonstrate the principle on clinically relevant extended spectrum 
beta-lactamase (ESBL) producing isolates. We discuss how the gRNA sequence can 
be varied to obtain the desired information. The gRNA can either be very 
specific to identify a homogeneous group of genes or general to detect several 
groups of genes at the same time. Finally, we demonstrate an example where we 
use a combination of two gRNA sequences to identify carbapenemase-encoding genes 
in two previously not characterized clinical bacterial samples.

DOI: 10.1038/srep37938
PMCID: PMC5131345
PMID: 27905467 [Indexed for MEDLINE]