1. JMIR Med Inform. 2016 Nov 30;4(4):e40. doi: 10.2196/medinform.6373.

Finding Important Terms for Patients in Their Electronic Health Records: A 
Learning-to-Rank Approach Using Expert Annotations.

Chen J(1), Zheng J(2), Yu H(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Quantitative Health Sciences, University of Massachusetts 
Medical School, Worcester, MA, United States.
(2)School of Computer Science, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA, United 
States.
(3)Bedford Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Center for Healthcare Organization 
and Implementation Research, Bedford, MA, United States.

BACKGROUND: Many health organizations allow patients to access their own 
electronic health record (EHR) notes through online patient portals as a way to 
enhance patient-centered care. However, EHR notes are typically long and contain 
abundant medical jargon that can be difficult for patients to understand. In 
addition, many medical terms in patients' notes are not directly related to 
their health care needs. One way to help patients better comprehend their own 
notes is to reduce information overload and help them focus on medical terms 
that matter most to them. Interventions can then be developed by giving them 
targeted education to improve their EHR comprehension and the quality of care.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to develop a supervised natural language processing (NLP) 
system called Finding impOrtant medical Concepts most Useful to patientS (FOCUS) 
that automatically identifies and ranks medical terms in EHR notes based on 
their importance to the patients.
METHODS: First, we built an expert-annotated corpus. For each EHR note, 2 
physicians independently identified medical terms important to the patient. 
Using the physicians' agreement as the gold standard, we developed and evaluated 
FOCUS. FOCUS first identifies candidate terms from each EHR note using MetaMap 
and then ranks the terms using a support vector machine-based learn-to-rank 
algorithm. We explored rich learning features, including distributed word 
representation, Unified Medical Language System semantic type, topic features, 
and features derived from consumer health vocabulary. We compared FOCUS with 2 
strong baseline NLP systems.
RESULTS: Physicians annotated 90 EHR notes and identified a mean of 9 (SD 5) 
important terms per note. The Cohen's kappa annotation agreement was .51. The 
10-fold cross-validation results show that FOCUS achieved an area under the 
receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC-ROC) of 0.940 for ranking candidate 
terms from EHR notes to identify important terms. When including term 
identification, the performance of FOCUS for identifying important terms from 
EHR notes was 0.866 AUC-ROC. Both performance scores significantly exceeded the 
corresponding baseline system scores (P<.001). Rich learning features 
contributed to FOCUS's performance substantially.
CONCLUSIONS: FOCUS can automatically rank terms from EHR notes based on their 
importance to patients. It may help develop future interventions that improve 
quality of care.

©Jinying Chen, Jiaping Zheng, Hong Yu. Originally published in JMIR Medical 
Informatics (http://medinform.jmir.org), 30.11.2016.

DOI: 10.2196/medinform.6373
PMCID: PMC5156821
PMID: 27903489

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.