1. Avicenna J Med Biotechnol. 2016 Oct-Dec;8(4):175-181.

Cloning and Expression of Soluble Recombinant HIV-1 CRF35 Protease-HP 
Thioredoxin Fusion Protein.

Azarnezhad A(1), Sharifi Z(2), Seyedabadi R(3), Hosseini A(4), Johari B(4), 
Sobhani Fard M(5).

Author information:
(1)Cellular and Molecular Research Center, Kurdistan University of Medical 
Sciences, Sanandaj, Iran; Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, 
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Blood Transfusion Research Center, Institute for Research and Education in 
Transfusion Medicine, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Department of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Hamedan 
University of Medical Sciences, Hamedan, Iran.
(4)Department of Medical Biotechnology, Faculty of Allied Medicine, Iran 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(5)Department of Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Hamedan University of Medical 
Sciences, Hamedan, Iran; Student Research Center, Hamedan University of Medical 
Sciences, Hamedan, Iran.

BACKGROUND: As a drug target and an antigenic agent, HIV-1 protease (HIV-1 PR) 
is at the center of attention for designing anti-AIDS inhibitors and diagnostic 
tests. In previous studies, the production of the recombinant protease has been 
faced with several difficulties; therefore, the aims of this study were the easy 
production, purification of the soluble form of protease in E. coli and 
investigation of its immunoreactivity.
METHODS: Protease coding region was isolated from the serum of an infected 
individual, amplified by RT-PCR and cloned into PTZ57R using TA-cloning. 
Protease coding frame was isolated by PCR and cloned in pET102/D. TOPO 
expression vector and cloned protease was expressed in Escherichia coli (E. 
coli) BL21. Produced recombinant protein was purified by affinity Ni-NTA column 
and protein concentration was checked by BCA protein assay kit. Subsequently, 
immunoreactivity of recombinant protease (rPR) was assayed by Western blotting 
and ELISA.
RESULTS: Cloning of the HIV protease by TOPO cloning system in pET102/D.TOPO was 
confirmed with PCR and sequencing. The concentration range of purified 
recombinant protein was 85 to 100 μg/ml. Immunogenicity of rPR was confirmed by 
Western blotting and ELISA.
CONCLUSION: Soluble production of recombinant HIV-1 protease (HIV-1 rPR) was 
performed successfully. This recombinant protein disclosed 86% specificity and 
90% sensitivity in immunoassay tests.

PMCID: PMC5124254
PMID: 27920885