1. Clin Transl Med. 2016 Dec;5(1):45. doi: 10.1186/s40169-016-0128-z. Epub 2016
Dec  5.

Choices have consequences: the nexus between DNA repair pathways and genomic 
instability in cancer.

Bhattacharjee S(1), Nandi S(2).

Author information:
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY, USA. 
bhattacharjee@cshl.edu.
(2)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY, USA. snandi@cshl.edu.

BACKGROUND: The genome is under constant assault from a multitude of sources 
that can lead to the formation of DNA double-stand breaks (DSBs). DSBs are 
cytotoxic lesions, which if left unrepaired could lead to genomic instability, 
cancer and even cell death. However, erroneous repair of DSBs can lead to 
chromosomal rearrangements and loss of heterozygosity, which in turn can also 
cause cancer and cell death. Hence, although the repair of DSBs is crucial for 
the maintenance of genome integrity the process of repair need to be well 
regulated and closely monitored.
MAIN BODY: The two most commonly used pathways to repair DSBs in higher 
eukaryotes include non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) and homologous 
recombination (HR). NHEJ is considered to be error-prone, intrinsically 
mutagenic quick fix remedy to seal together the broken DNA ends and restart 
replication. In contrast, HR is a high-fidelity process that has been very well 
conserved from phage to humans. Here we review HR and its sub-pathways. We 
discuss what factors determine the sub pathway choice including etiology of the 
DSB, chromatin structure at the break site, processing of the DSBs and the 
mechanisms regulating the sub-pathway choice. We also elaborate on the potential 
of targeting HR genes for cancer therapy and anticancer strategies.
CONCLUSION: The DNA repair field is a vibrant one, and the stage is ripe for 
scrutinizing the potential treatment efficacy and future clinical applications 
of the pharmacological inhibitors of HR enzymes as mono- or combinatorial 
therapy regimes.

DOI: 10.1186/s40169-016-0128-z
PMCID: PMC5136664
PMID: 27921283