1. Front Physiol. 2016 Nov 24;7:574. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2016.00574. eCollection 
2016.

Gene Expression Dynamics in Major Endocrine Regulatory Pathways along the 
Transition from Solitary to Social Life in a Bumblebee, Bombus terrestris.

Jedlička P(1), Ernst UR(1), Votavová A(2), Hanus R(1), Valterová I(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry of Social Insects, The Institute of Organic Chemistry 
and Biochemistry, Czech Academy of Sciences Prague, Czechia.
(2)Agricultural Research Ltd. Troubsko, Czechia.
(3)Research Group of Infochemicals, The Institute of Organic Chemistry and 
Biochemistry, Czech Academy of Sciences Prague, Czechia.

Understanding the social evolution leading to insect eusociality requires, among 
other, a detailed insight into endocrine regulatory mechanisms that have been 
co-opted from solitary ancestors to play new roles in the complex life histories 
of eusocial species. Bumblebees represent well-suited models of a relatively 
primitive social organization standing on the mid-way to highly advanced 
eusociality and their queens undergo both, a solitary and a social phase, 
separated by winter diapause. In the present paper, we characterize the gene 
expression levels of major endocrine regulatory pathways across tissues, sexes, 
and life-stages of the buff-tailed bumblebee, Bombus terrestris, with special 
emphasis on critical stages of the queen's transition from solitary to social 
life. We focused on fundamental genes of three pathways: (1) Forkhead box 
protein O and insulin/insulin-like signaling, (2) Juvenile hormone (JH) 
signaling, and (3) Adipokinetic hormone signaling. Virgin queens were 
distinguished by higher expression of forkhead box protein O and downregulated 
insulin-like peptides and JH signaling, indicated by low expression of methyl 
farnesoate epoxidase (MFE) and transcription factor Krüppel homolog 1 (Kr-h1). 
Diapausing queens showed the expected downregulation of JH signaling in terms of 
low MFE and vitellogenin (Vg) expressions, but an unexpectedly high expression 
of Kr-h1. By contrast, reproducing queens revealed an upregulation of MFE and Vg 
together with insulin signaling. Surprisingly, the insulin growth factor 1 
(IGF-1) turned out to be a queen-specific hormone. Workers exhibited an 
expression pattern of MFE and Vg similar to that of reproducing queens. Males 
were characterized by high Kr-h1 expression and low Vg level. The tissue 
comparison unveiled an unexpected resemblance between the fat body and 
hypopharyngeal glands across all investigated genes, sexes, and life stages.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2016.00574
PMCID: PMC5121236
PMID: 27932998