1. J Biol Chem. 1989 Oct 15;264(29):17476-85.

Identification of cysteine 530 as the covalent attachment site of an 
affinity-labeling estrogen (ketononestrol aziridine) and antiestrogen (tamoxifen 
aziridine) in the human estrogen receptor.

Harlow KW(1), Smith DN, Katzenellenbogen JA, Greene GL, Katzenellenbogen BS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Illinois, Urbana 
61801.

Radiosequence analysis of peptide fragments of the estrogen receptor (ER) from 
MCF-7 human breast cancer cells has been used to identify cysteine 530 as the 
site of covalent attachment of an estrogenic affinity label, ketononestrol 
aziridine (KNA), and an antiestrogenic affinity label, tamoxifen aziridine 
(TAZ). ER from MCF-7 cells was covalently labeled with [3H]TAZ or [3H]KNA and 
purified to greater than 95% homogeneity by immunoadsorbent chromatography. 
Limit digest peptide fragments, generated by prolonged exposure of the labeled 
receptor to trypsin, cyanogen bromide, or Staphylococcus aureus V8 protease, 
were purified to homogeneity by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), 
and the position of the labeled residue was determined by sequential Edman 
degradation. With both aziridines, the labeled residue was at position 1 in the 
tryptic peptide, position 2 in the cyanogen bromide peptide, and position 7 in 
the V8 protease peptide. This localizes the site of labeling to a single 
cysteine at position 530 in the receptor sequence. The identity of cysteine as 
the site of labeling was confirmed by HPLC comparison of the TAZ-labeled amino 
acid (as the phenylthiohydantoin and phenylthiocarbamyl derivatives) and the 
KNA-labeled amino acid (as the phenylthiocarbamyl derivative) with authentic 
standards prepared by total synthesis. Cysteine 530 is located in the hormone 
binding domain of the receptor, near its carboxyl terminus. This location is 
consistent with earlier studies using sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel 
electrophoresis to analyze the size of the proteolytic fragments containing the 
covalent labeling sites for TAZ and KNA and the antigen recognition sites for 
monoclonal antibodies. The fact that both the estrogenic and antiestrogenic 
affinity labeling agents react covalently with the same cysteine indicates that 
differences in receptor-agonist and receptor-antagonist complexes do not result 
in differential covalent labeling of amino acid residues in the hormone binding 
domain.

PMID: 2793867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]