1. Front Immunol. 2016 Nov 28;7:542. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2016.00542. eCollection 
2016.

Complement Regulator FHR-3 Is Elevated either Locally or Systemically in a 
Selection of Autoimmune Diseases.

Schäfer N(1), Grosche A(2), Reinders J(3), Hauck SM(4), Pouw RB(5), Kuijpers 
TW(6), Wouters D(5), Ehrenstein B(7), Enzmann V(8), Zipfel PF(9), Skerka C(10), 
Pauly D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University Hospital Regensburg , Regensburg , 
Germany.
(2)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Regensburg , Regensburg , Germany.
(3)Institute of Functional Genomics, University of Regensburg , Regensburg , 
Germany.
(4)Research Unit Protein Science, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research 
Center for Environmental Health (GmbH) , Neuherberg , Germany.
(5)Department of Immunopathology, Sanquin Research and Landsteiner Laboratory of 
the Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam , Amsterdam , Netherlands.
(6)Department of Pediatric Hematology, Immunology and Infectious Diseases, 
Academic Medical Center, Emma Children's Hospital, Amsterdam, Netherlands; 
Department of Blood Cell Research, Sanquin Research and Landsteiner Laboratory 
of the Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(7)Klinik und Poliklinik für Rheumatologie und Klinische Immunologie, Asklepios 
Klinikum Bad Abbach , Bad Abbach , Germany.
(8)Department of Ophthalmology, Inselspital, University of Bern , Bern , 
Switzerland.
(9)Department of Infection Biology, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product 
Research and Infection Biology, Jena, Germany; Friedrich Schiller University, 
Jena, Germany.
(10)Department of Infection Biology, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product 
Research and Infection Biology , Jena , Germany.

The human complement factor H-related protein-3 (FHR-3) is a soluble regulator 
of the complement system. Homozygous cfhr3/1 deletion is a genetic risk factor 
for the autoimmune form of atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome (aHUS), while also 
found to be protective in age-related macular degeneration (AMD). The precise 
function of FHR-3 remains to be fully characterized. We generated four mouse 
monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) for FHR-3 (RETC) without cross-reactivity to the 
complement factor H (FH)-family. These antibodies detected FHR-3 from human 
serum with a mean concentration of 1 μg/mL. FHR-3 levels in patients were 
significantly increased in sera from systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid 
arthritis, and polymyalgia rheumatica but remained almost unchanged in samples 
from AMD or aHUS patients. Moreover, by immunostaining of an aged human donor 
retina, we discovered a local FHR-3 production by microglia/macrophages. The mAb 
RETC-2 modulated FHR-3 binding to C3b but not the binding of FHR-3 to heparin. 
Interestingly, FHR-3 competed with FH for binding C3b and the mAb RETC-2 reduced 
the interaction of FHR-3 and C3b, resulting in increased FH binding. Our results 
unveil a previously unknown systemic involvement of FHR-3 in rheumatoid diseases 
and a putative local role of FHR-3 mediated by microglia/macrophages in the 
damaged retina. We conclude that the local FHR-3/FH equilibrium in AMD is a 
potential therapeutic target, which can be modulated by our specific mAb RETC-2.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2016.00542
PMCID: PMC5124756
PMID: 27965669