1. Clin Transl Immunology. 2016 Nov 2;5(11):e112. doi: 10.1038/cti.2016.58. 
eCollection 2016 Nov.

Coeliac disease: a unique model for investigating broken tolerance in 
autoimmunity.

Hardy MY(1), Tye-Din JA(2).

Author information:
(1)Immunology Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, 
Parkville, Victoria, Australia; Department of Medical Biology, The University of 
Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.
(2)Immunology Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, 
Parkville, Victoria, Australia; Department of Medical Biology, The University of 
Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia; Centre of Food and Allergy Research, 
Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Parkville, Victoria, Australia; 
Department of Gastroenterology, The Royal Melbourne Hospital, Parkville, 
Victoria, Australia.

Coeliac disease, a prevalent immune-mediated enteropathy driven by dietary 
gluten, provides an exceptional human model to dissect the genetic, 
environmental and immunologic factors operating in autoimmunity. Despite the 
causative antigen being an exogenous food protein, coeliac disease has many 
features in common with autoimmune disease including a strong HLA class II 
association and the presence of pathogenic CD4+ T cells and autoantibodies. CD8+ 
intraepithelial lymphocytes specifically target and destroy intestinal 
epithelium in response to stress signals and not a specific antigen. A unique 
feature of coeliac disease is the ability to remove gluten to induce disease 
remission and reintroduce it to trigger a memory response. This provides an 
unparalleled opportunity to study disease-relevant CD4+ T cells that have been 
expanded in vivo. As a result, the causative peptides have been characterised at 
a level unprecedented for any autoimmune disease. Despite the complexity of the 
gluten proteome, resistance to gastrointestinal proteolysis and susceptibility 
to post-translational modification by transglutaminase help shape a restricted 
repertoire of immunogenic gluten peptides that have high affinity for 
disease-associated HLA. The critical steps in coeliac disease pathogenesis have 
been broadly elucidated and provide the basis for experimental therapies in 
pre-clinical or clinical development. However, little is known about how and why 
tolerance to gluten sometimes breaks or fails to develop. Understanding the 
interactions between genes, the environment, gluten immunity and the microbiome 
may provide novel approaches for the prevention and treatment of disease.

DOI: 10.1038/cti.2016.58
PMCID: PMC5133362
PMID: 27990287

Conflict of interest statement: MYH and JAT-D are co-inventors of patents 
pertaining to the use gluten peptides in therapeutics, diagnostics and non-toxic 
gluten in coeliac disease. JAT-D is a shareholder of Nexpep Pty. Ltd and a 
consultant to ImmusanT Inc. Nexpep Pty. Ltd and ImmusanT Inc. were formed to 
develop novel diagnostics and treatments for coeliac disease.