1. Sleep Med. 2017 Mar;31:61-70. doi: 10.1016/j.sleep.2016.07.028. Epub 2016 Nov 
10.

Iron and restless legs syndrome: treatment, genetics and pathophysiology.

Connor JR(1), Patton SM(2), Oexle K(3), Allen RP(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Penn State Hershey Medical Center, Hershey, PA, 
USA. Electronic address: jconnor@psu.edu.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Penn State Hershey Medical Center, Hershey, PA, 
USA.
(3)Institut für Humangenetik, Technische Universität, Munich, Germany.
(4)The Johns Hopkins University, Dep of neuroloy, Baltimore, MD USA.

In this article, we review the original findings from MRI and autopsy studies 
that demonstrated brain iron status is insufficient in individuals with restless 
legs syndrome (RLS). The concept of deficient brain iron status is supported by 
proteomic studies from cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and from the clinical findings 
where intervention with iron, either dietary or intravenous, can improve RLS 
symptoms. Therefore, we include a section on peripheral iron status and how 
peripheral status may influence both the RLS symptoms and treatment strategy. 
Given the impact of iron in RLS, we have evaluated genetic data to determine if 
genes are directly involved in iron regulatory pathways. The result was 
negative. In fact, even the HFE mutation C282Y could not be shown to have a 
protective effect. Lastly, a consistent finding in conditions of low iron is 
increased expression of proteins in the hypoxia pathway. Although there is lack 
of clinical data that RLS patients are hypoxic, there are intriguing 
observations that environmental hypoxic conditions worsen RLS symptoms; in this 
chapter we review very compelling data for activation of hypoxic pathways in the 
brain in RLS patients. In general, the data in RLS point to a pathophysiology 
that involves decreased acquisition of iron by cells in the brain. Whether the 
decreased ability is genetically driven, activation of pathways (eg, hypoxia) 
that are designed to limit cellular uptake is unknown at this time; however, the 
data strongly support a functional rather than structural defect in RLS, 
suggesting that an effective treatment is possible.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.sleep.2016.07.028
PMCID: PMC5334282
PMID: 28057495 [Indexed for MEDLINE]