1. Chin Clin Oncol. 2016 Dec;5(6):78. doi: 10.21037/cco.2016.12.03.

An efficient method for native protein purification in the selected range from 
prostate cancer tissue digests.

Ahmad R(1), Nicora CD(2), Shukla AK(2), Smith RD(2), Qian WJ(2), Liu AY(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA; 
Institute for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA 98195, USA. rumana_ahmad@yahoo.co.in.
(2)Biological Science Division and Environmental Molecular Sciences Laboratory, 
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, WA 99352, USA.
(3)Department of Urology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA; 
Institute for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

BACKGROUND: Prostate cancer (CP) cells differ from their normal counterpart in 
gene expression. Genes encoding secreted or extracellular proteins with 
increased expression in CP may serve as potential biomarkers. For their 
detection and quantification, assays based on monoclonal antibodies are best 
suited for development in the clinical setting. One approach to obtain 
antibodies is to use recombinant proteins as immunogen. However, the synthesis 
of recombinant protein for each identified candidate is time-consuming and 
expensive. It is also not practical to generate high quality antibodies to all 
identified candidates individually. Furthermore, non-native forms (e.g., 
recombinant) of proteins may not always lead to useful antibodies. Our approach 
was to purify a subset of proteins from CP tissue specimens for use as 
immunogen.
METHODS: In the present investigation, ten cancer specimens obtained from cases 
scored Gleason 3+3, 3+4 and 4+3 were digested by collagenase to single cells in 
serum-free tissue culture media. Cells were pelleted after collagenase 
digestion, and the cell-free supernatant from each specimen were pooled and used 
for isolation of proteins in the 10-30 kDa molecular weight range using a 
combination of sonication, dialysis and Amicon ultrafiltration. Western blotting 
and mass spectrometry (MS) proteomics were performed to identify the proteins in 
the selected size fraction.
RESULTS: The presence of cancer-specific anterior gradient 2 (AGR2) and absence 
of prostate-specific antigen (PSA)/KLK3 were confirmed by Western blotting. 
Proteomics also detected AGR2 among many other proteins, some outside the 
selected molecular weight range, as well.
CONCLUSIONS: Using this approach, the potentially harmful (to the mouse host) 
exogenously added collagenase was removed as well as other abundant prostatic 
proteins like ACPP/PAP and AZGP1 to preclude the generation of antibodies 
against these species. The paper presents an optimized scheme for convenient and 
rapid isolation of native proteins in any desired size range with minor 
modifications.

DOI: 10.21037/cco.2016.12.03
PMCID: PMC5627993
PMID: 28061542 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: The authors have no 
conflicts of interest to declare.