1. Front Microbiol. 2016 Dec 19;7:2018. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.02018.
eCollection  2016.

Genome-Wide Identification of Antimicrobial Intrinsic Resistance Determinants in 
Staphylococcus aureus.

Vestergaard M(1), Leng B(1), Haaber J(1), Bojer MS(1), Vegge CS(1), Ingmer H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Disease Biology, Faculty of Health and Medical 
Sciences, University of Copenhagen Frederiksberg, Denmark.

The emergence of antimicrobial resistance severely threatens our ability to 
treat bacterial infections. While acquired resistance has received considerable 
attention, relatively little is known of intrinsic resistance that allows 
bacteria to naturally withstand antimicrobials. Gene products that confer 
intrinsic resistance to antimicrobial agents may be explored for alternative 
antimicrobial therapies, by potentiating the efficacy of existing 
antimicrobials. In this study, we identified the intrinsic resistome to a broad 
spectrum of antimicrobials in the human pathogen, Staphylococcus aureus. We 
screened the Nebraska Transposon Mutant Library of 1920 single-gene 
inactivations in S. aureus strain JE2, for increased susceptibility to the 
anti-staphylococcal antimicrobials (ciprofloxacin, oxacillin, linezolid, 
fosfomycin, daptomycin, mupirocin, vancomycin, and gentamicin). Sixty-eight 
mutants were confirmed by E-test to display at least twofold increased 
susceptibility to one or more antimicrobial agents. The majority of the 
identified genes have not previously been associated with antimicrobial 
susceptibility in S. aureus. For example, inactivation of genes encoding for 
subunits of the ATP synthase, atpA, atpB, atpG and atpH, reduced the minimum 
inhibitory concentration (MIC) of gentamicin 16-fold. To elucidate the potential 
of the screen, we examined treatment efficacy in the Galleria mellonella 
infection model. Gentamicin efficacy was significantly improved, when treating 
larvae infected with the atpA mutant compared to wild type cells with gentamicin 
at a clinically relevant concentration. Our results demonstrate that many gene 
products contribute to the intrinsic antimicrobial resistance of S. aureus. 
Knowledge of these intrinsic resistance determinants provides alternative 
targets for compounds that may potentiate the efficacy of existing antimicrobial 
agents against this important pathogen.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.02018
PMCID: PMC5165250
PMID: 28066345