1. Nature. 2017 Jan 19;541(7637):407-411. doi: 10.1038/nature20828. Epub 2017 Jan
 11.

Structural basis for nutrient acquisition by dominant members of the human gut 
microbiota.

Glenwright AJ(#)(1), Pothula KR(#)(2), Bhamidimarri SP(3), Chorev DS(4), Baslé 
A(1), Firbank SJ(1), Zheng H(1), Robinson CV(4), Winterhalter M(3), 
Kleinekathöfer U(2), Bolam DN(1), van den Berg B(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Cell and Molecular Biosciences, The Medical School, Newcastle 
University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH, UK.
(2)Jacobs University Bremen, Department of Physics & Earth Sciences, 28759 
Bremen, Germany.
(3)Jacobs University Bremen, Department of Life Sciences & Chemistry, 28759 
Bremen, Germany.
(4)Physical and Theoretical Chemistry Laboratory, University of Oxford, South 
Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3QZ, UK.
(#)Contributed equally

The human large intestine is populated by a high density of microorganisms, 
collectively termed the colonic microbiota, which has an important role in human 
health and nutrition. The survival of microbiota members from the dominant 
Gram-negative phylum Bacteroidetes depends on their ability to degrade dietary 
glycans that cannot be metabolized by the host. The genes encoding proteins 
involved in the degradation of specific glycans are organized into co-regulated 
polysaccharide utilization loci, with the archetypal locus sus (for starch 
utilisation system) encoding seven proteins, SusA-SusG. Glycan degradation 
mainly occurs intracellularly and depends on the import of oligosaccharides by 
an outer membrane protein complex composed of an extracellular SusD-like 
lipoprotein and an integral membrane SusC-like TonB-dependent transporter. The 
presence of the partner SusD-like lipoprotein is the major feature that 
distinguishes SusC-like proteins from previously characterized TonB-dependent 
transporters. Many sequenced gut Bacteroides spp. encode over 100 SusCD pairs, 
of which the majority have unknown functions and substrate specificities. The 
mechanism by which extracellular substrate binding by SusD proteins is coupled 
to outer membrane passage through their cognate SusC transporter is unknown. 
Here we present X-ray crystal structures of two functionally distinct SusCD 
complexes purified from Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron and derive a general model 
for substrate translocation. The SusC transporters form homodimers, with each 
β-barrel protomer tightly capped by SusD. Ligands are bound at the SusC-SusD 
interface in a large solvent-excluded cavity. Molecular dynamics simulations and 
single-channel electrophysiology reveal a 'pedal bin' mechanism, in which SusD 
moves away from SusC in a hinge-like fashion in the absence of ligand to expose 
the substrate-binding site to the extracellular milieu. These data provide 
mechanistic insights into outer membrane nutrient import by members of the 
microbiota, an area of major importance for understanding human-microbiota 
symbiosis.

DOI: 10.1038/nature20828
PMCID: PMC5497811
PMID: 28077872 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Author information The authors declare no 
financial interests.