1. PLoS One. 2017 Jan 12;12(1):e0168046. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0168046. 
eCollection 2017.

BnLATE, a Cys2/His2-Type Zinc-Finger Protein, Enhances Silique Shattering 
Resistance by Negatively Regulating Lignin Accumulation in the Silique Walls of 
Brassica napus.

Tao Z(1), Huang Y(1), Zhang L(2), Wang X(1), Liu G(1), Wang H(1).

Author information:
(1)Oil Crops Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences; Key 
Laboratory of Oil Crop Biology and Genetic Improvement, Ministry of Agriculture; 
Wuhan, Hubei, China.
(2)Plant Biotechnology Research Center, School of Agriculture and Biology, 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.

Silique shattering resistance is one of the most important agricultural traits 
in oil crop breeding. Seed shedding from siliques prior to and during harvest 
causes devastating losses in oilseed yield. Lignin biosynthesis in the silique 
walls is thought to affect silique-shattering resistance in oil crops. Here, we 
identified and characterized B. napus LATE FLOWERING (BnLATE), which encodes a 
Cys2/His2-type zinc-finger protein. Heterologous expression of BnLATE under the 
double enhanced CaMV 35S promoter (D35S) in wild-type Arabidopsis plants 
resulted in a marked decrease in lignification in the replum, valve layer 
(carpel) and dehiscence zone. pBnLATE::GUS activity was strong in the yellowing 
silique walls of transgenic lines. Furthermore, the expression pattern of BnLATE 
and the lignin content gradient in the silique walls at 48 days after 
pollination (DAP) of 73290, a B. napus silique shattering-resistant line, are 
similar to those in transgenic Arabidopsis lines expressing BnLATE. 
Transcriptome sequencing of the silique walls revealed that genes encoding 
peroxidases, which polymerize monolignols and lignin in the phenylpropanoid 
pathway, were down-regulated at least two-fold change in the D35S::BnLATE 
transgenic lines. pBnLATE::BnLATE transgenic lines were further used to identify 
the function of BnLATE, and the results showed that lignification in the carpel 
and dehiscence zone of yellowing silique also remarkably decreased compared with 
the wild-type control, the silique shattering-resistance and expression pattern 
of peroxidase genes are very similar to results with D35S::BnLATE. These results 
suggest that BnLATE is a negative regulator of lignin biosynthesis in the 
yellowing silique walls, and promotes silique-shattering resistance in B. napus 
through restraining the polymerization of monolignols and lignin.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0168046
PMCID: PMC5231383
PMID: 28081140 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.