1. J Clin Microbiol. 2017 Apr;55(4):1066-1073. doi: 10.1128/JCM.01662-16. Epub
2017  Jan 18.

FIND Tuberculosis Strain Bank: a Resource for Researchers and Developers Working 
on Tests To Detect Mycobacterium tuberculosis and Related Drug Resistance.

Tessema B(1)(2), Nabeta P(1), Valli E(1), Albertini A(1), Collantes J(3), Lan 
NH(4), Romancenco E(5), Tukavdze N(6), Denkinger CM(1), Dolinger DL(7).

Author information:
(1)Foundation for Innovative New Diagnostics, Geneva, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology, University of Gondar, Gondar, Ethiopia.
(3)Universidad Peruana Cayetano Heredia, Lima, Peru.
(4)Pham Ngoc Thach Hospital, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam.
(5)National Reference TB Laboratory, Institute of Phthisiopneumology, Chisinau, 
Moldova.
(6)National Center for Tuberculosis and Lung Disease, Tbilisi, Georgia.
(7)Foundation for Innovative New Diagnostics, Geneva, Switzerland 
david.dolinger@finddx.org.

The spread of multidrug-resistant (MDR) tuberculosis (TB) and extensively 
drug-resistant (XDR) TB hampers global efforts in the fight against 
tuberculosis. To enhance the development and evaluation of diagnostic tests 
quickly and efficiently, well-characterized strains and samples from 
drug-resistant tuberculosis patients are necessary. In this project, the 
Foundation for Innovative New Diagnostics (FIND) has focused on the collection, 
characterization, and storage of such well-characterized reference materials and 
making them available to researchers and developers. The collection is being 
conducted at multiple centers in Southeast Asia, South America, Eastern Europe, 
and soon the sub-Saharan Africa regions. Strains are characterized for their 
phenotypic resistances and MICs to first-line drugs (FLDs) and second-line drugs 
(SLDs) using the automated MGIT 960 system following validated procedures and 
WHO criteria. Analysis of resistance-associated mutations is done by 
whole-genome sequencing (WGS) using the Illumina NextSeq system. Mycobacterial 
interspersed repetitive-unit-variable-number tandem-repeat analysis and WGS are 
used to determine strain lineages. All strains are maintained frozen at -80°C ± 
10°C as distinct mother and daughter lots. All strains are extensively quality 
assured. The data presented here represent an analysis of the initial part of 
the collection. Currently, the bank contains 118 unique strains with extracted 
genomic DNA and matched sputum, serum, and plasma samples and will be expanded 
to a minimum of 1,000 unique strains over the next 3 years. Analysis of the 
current strains by phenotypic resistance testing shows 102 (86.4%), 10 (8.5%), 
and 6 (5.1%) MDR, XDR, and mono/poly resistant strains, respectively. Two of the 
strains are resistant to all 11 drugs that were phenotypically tested. WGS 
mutation analysis revealed FLD resistance-associated mutations in the rpoB, 
katG, inhA, embB, embA, and pncA genes; SLD resistance in the gyrA, gyrB, rrs, 
eis, and tlyA genes; and ethionamide resistance in the ethA genes. Most 
important lineages are represented in the bank, and further collections have 
been initiated to increase geographic and lineage diversity. The bank provides 
highly characterized and high-quality strains as a resource for researchers and 
developers in support of the development and evaluation of new diagnostics and 
drug resistance detection tools.

Copyright © 2017 Tessema et al.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.01662-16
PMCID: PMC5377833
PMID: 28100602 [Indexed for MEDLINE]