1. Toxins (Basel). 2017 Jan 29;9(2):52. doi: 10.3390/toxins9020052.

p-Cresyl Sulfate.

Gryp T(1)(2), Vanholder R(3), Vaneechoutte M(4), Glorieux G(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Nephrology Division, Ghent University 
Hospital, 9000 Ghent, Belgium. tessa.gryp@ugent.be.
(2)Laboratory for Bacteriology Research, Department of Clinical Chemistry, 
Microbiology & Immunology, Ghent University, 9000 Ghent, Belgium. 
tessa.gryp@ugent.be.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Nephrology Division, Ghent University 
Hospital, 9000 Ghent, Belgium. raymond.vanholder@ugent.be.
(4)Laboratory for Bacteriology Research, Department of Clinical Chemistry, 
Microbiology & Immunology, Ghent University, 9000 Ghent, Belgium. 
mario.vaneechoutte@ugent.be.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Nephrology Division, Ghent University 
Hospital, 9000 Ghent, Belgium. griet.glorieux@ugent.be.

If chronic kidney disease (CKD) is associated with an impairment of kidney 
function, several uremic solutes are retained. Some of these exert toxic 
effects, which are called uremic toxins. p-Cresyl sulfate (pCS) is a prototype 
protein-bound uremic toxin to which many biological and biochemical (toxic) 
effects have been attributed. In addition, increased levels of pCS have been 
associated with worsening outcomes in CKD patients. pCS finds its origin in the 
intestine where gut bacteria metabolize aromatic amino acids, such as tyrosine 
and phenylalanine, leading to phenolic end products, of which pCS is one of the 
components. In this review we summarize the biological effects of pCS and its 
metabolic origin in the intestine. It appears that, according to in vitro 
studies, the intestinal bacteria generating phenolic compounds mainly belong to 
the families Bacteroidaceae, Bifidobacteriaceae, Clostridiaceae, 
Enterobacteriaceae, Enterococcaceae, Eubacteriaceae, Fusobacteriaceae, 
Lachnospiraceae, Lactobacillaceae, Porphyromonadaceae, Staphylococcaceae, 
Ruminococcaceae, and Veillonellaceae. Since pCS remains difficult to remove by 
dialysis, the gut microbiota could be a future target to decrease pCS levels and 
its toxicity, even at earlier stages of CKD, aiming at slowing down the 
progression of the disease and decreasing the cardiovascular burden.

DOI: 10.3390/toxins9020052
PMCID: PMC5331431
PMID: 28146081 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.