1. Molecules. 2017 Feb 5;22(2):235. doi: 10.3390/molecules22020235.

Towards Precision Engineering of Canonical Polyketide Synthase Domains: Recent 
Advances and Future Prospects.

Bayly CL(1)(2), Yadav VG(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genome Sciences & Technology, The University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, BC V5Z 4S6, Canada. c.bayly@alumni.ubc.ca.
(2)Department of Chemical & Biological Engineering, The University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z3, Canada. c.bayly@alumni.ubc.ca.
(3)Department of Chemical & Biological Engineering, The University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z3, Canada. vikramaditya.yadav@ubc.ca.

Modular polyketide synthases (mPKSs) build functionalized polymeric chains, some 
of which have become blockbuster therapeutics. Organized into repeating clusters 
(modules) of independently-folding domains, these assembly-line-like 
megasynthases can be engineered by introducing non-native components. However, 
poor introduction points and incompatible domain combinations can cause both 
unintended products and dramatically reduced activity. This limits the 
engineering and combinatorial potential of mPKSs, precluding access to further 
potential therapeutics. Different regions on a given mPKS domain determine how 
it interacts both with its substrate and with other domains. Within the assembly 
line, these interactions are crucial to the proper ordering of reactions and 
efficient polyketide construction. Achieving control over these domain 
functions, through precision engineering at key regions, would greatly expand 
our catalogue of accessible polyketide products. Canonical mPKS domains, given 
that they are among the most well-characterized, are excellent candidates for 
such fine-tuning. The current minireview summarizes recent advances in the 
mechanistic understanding and subsequent precision engineering of canonical mPKS 
domains, focusing largely on developments in the past year.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules22020235
PMCID: PMC6155766
PMID: 28165430 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.