1. N Engl J Med. 2017 Feb 9;376(6):536-547. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1611604.

Prognostic Mutations in Myelodysplastic Syndrome after Stem-Cell 
Transplantation.

Lindsley RC(1), Saber W(1), Mar BG(1), Redd R(1), Wang T(1), Haagenson MD(1), 
Grauman PV(1), Hu ZH(1), Spellman SR(1), Lee SJ(1), Verneris MR(1), Hsu K(1), 
Fleischhauer K(1), Cutler C(1), Antin JH(1), Neuberg D(1), Ebert BL(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Medical Oncology, Division of Hematological 
Malignancies (R.C.L., C.C., J.H.A.), and the Departments of Pediatric Oncology 
(B.G.M.) and Biostatistics and Computational Biology (R.R., D.N.), Dana-Farber 
Cancer Institute, and the Division of Hematology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School (P.V.G., B.L.E.) - all in Boston; the Center for 
International Blood and Marrow Transplant Research, Medical College of 
Wisconsin, Milwaukee (W.S., T.W., Z.-H.H., S.J.L.); the Center for International 
Blood and Marrow Transplant Research, National Marrow Donor Program-Be the Match 
(M.D.H., S.R.S.), and the Pediatric Blood and Marrow Transplantation Center, 
University of Minnesota (M.R.V.) - both in Minneapolis; the Clinical Research 
Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle (S.J.L.); Memorial 
Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York (K.H.); and the Institute for 
Experimental Cellular Therapy, University Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany (K.F.).

BACKGROUND: Genetic mutations drive the pathogenesis of the myelodysplastic 
syndrome (MDS) and are closely associated with clinical phenotype. Therefore, 
genetic mutations may predict clinical outcomes after allogeneic hematopoietic 
stem-cell transplantation.
METHODS: We performed targeted mutational analysis on samples obtained before 
transplantation from 1514 patients with MDS who were enrolled in the Center for 
International Blood and Marrow Transplant Research Repository between 2005 and 
2014. We evaluated the association of mutations with transplantation outcomes, 
including overall survival, relapse, and death without relapse.
RESULTS: TP53 mutations were present in 19% of the patients and were associated 
with shorter survival and a shorter time to relapse than was the absence of TP53 
mutations, after adjustment for significant clinical variables (P<0.001 for both 
comparisons). Among patients 40 years of age or older who did not have TP53 
mutations, the presence of RAS pathway mutations was associated with shorter 
survival than was the absence of RAS pathway mutations (P=0.004), owing to a 
high risk of relapse, and the presence of JAK2 mutations was associated with 
shorter survival than was the absence of JAK2 mutations (P=0.001), owing to a 
high risk of death without relapse. The adverse prognostic effect of TP53 
mutations was similar in patients who received reduced-intensity conditioning 
regimens and those who received myeloablative conditioning regimens. By 
contrast, the adverse effect of RAS pathway mutations on the risk of relapse, as 
compared with the absence of RAS pathway mutations, was evident only with 
reduced-intensity conditioning (P<0.001). In young adults, 4% of the patients 
had compound heterozygous mutations in the Shwachman-Diamond syndrome-associated 
SBDS gene with concurrent TP53 mutations and a poor prognosis. Mutations in the 
p53 regulator PPM1D were more common among patients with therapy-related MDS 
than those with primary MDS (15% vs. 3%, P<0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Genetic profiling revealed that molecular subgroups of patients 
undergoing allogeneic hematopoietic stem-cell transplantation for MDS may inform 
prognostic stratification and the selection of conditioning regimen. (Funded by 
the Edward P. Evans Foundation and others.).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1611604
PMCID: PMC5438571
PMID: 28177873 [Indexed for MEDLINE]