1. PLoS One. 2017 Feb 9;12(2):e0170984. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0170984. 
eCollection 2017.

Ilexsaponin A attenuates ischemia-reperfusion-induced myocardial injury through 
anti-apoptotic pathway.

Zhang SW(1), Liu Y(2), Wang F(2), Qiang J(2), Liu P(2), Zhang J(2), Xu JW(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)The second affiliated hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Changgang 
east road, Guangzhou, China.
(2)School of Chinese Pharmaceutical Science, Guangzhou University of Chinese 
Medicine, University Town, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Basic Medical College, Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine, University 
Town, Guangzhou, China.

The protective effects of ilexsaponin A on ischemia-reperfusion-induced 
myocardial injury were investigated. Myocardial ischemia/reperfusion model was 
established in male Sprague-Dawley rats. Myocardial injury was evaluated by TTC 
staining and myocardial marker enzyme leakage. The in vitro protective potential 
of Ilexsaponin A was assessed on hypoxia/reoxygenation cellular model in 
neonatal rat cardiomyocytes. Cellular viability and apoptosis were evaluated by 
MTT and TUNEL assay. Caspase-3, cleaved caspase-3, bax, bcl-2, p-Akt and Akt 
protein expression levels were detected by western-blot. Ilexsaponin A treatment 
was able to attenuate the myocardial injury in ischemia/reperfusion model by 
reducing myocardial infarct size and lower the serum levels of LDH, AST and 
CK-MB. The in vitro study also showed that ilexsaponin A treatment could 
increase cellular viability and inhibit apoptosis in hypoxia/reoxygenation 
cardiomyocytes. Proapoptotic proteins including caspase-3, cleaved caspase-3 and 
bax were significantly reduced and anti-apoptotic protein bcl-2 was 
significantly increased by ilexsaponin A treatment in hypoxia/reoxygenation 
cardiomyocytes. Moreover, Ilexsaponin A treatment was able to increase the 
expression levels of p-Akt in hypoxia/reoxygenation cellular model and 
myocardial ischemia/reperfusion animal model. Coupled results from both in vivo 
and in vitro experiments indicate that Ilexsaponin A attenuates 
ischemia-reperfusion-induced myocardial injury through anti-apoptotic pathway.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0170984
PMCID: PMC5300190
PMID: 28182689 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.