1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2017 Feb 17;45(3):1105-1113. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkw969.

Misincorporation by RNA polymerase is a major source of transcription pausing in 
vivo.

James K(1), Gamba P(1), Cockell SJ(2), Zenkin N(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Bacterial Cell Biology, Institute for Cell and Molecular 
Bioscience, Newcastle University, Baddiley-Clark Building, Richardson Road, 
Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK.
(2)Bioinformatics Support Unit, Newcastle University, William Leech Building, 
Framlington Place, Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK.

The transcription error rate estimated from mistakes in end product RNAs is 
10−3–10−5. We analyzed the fidelity of nascent RNAs from all actively 
transcribing elongation complexes (ECs) in Escherichia coli and Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae and found that 1–3% of all ECs in wild-type cells, and 5–7% of all 
ECs in cells lacking proofreading factors are, in fact, misincorporated 
complexes. With the exception of a number of sequence-dependent hotspots, most 
misincorporations are distributed relatively randomly. Misincorporation at 
hotspots does not appear to be stimulated by pausing. Since misincorporation 
leads to a strong pause of transcription due to backtracking, our findings 
indicate that misincorporation could be a major source of transcriptional 
pausing and lead to conflicts with other RNA polymerases and replication in 
bacteria and eukaryotes. This observation implies that physical resolution of 
misincorporated complexes may be the main function of the proofreading factors 
Gre and TFIIS. Although misincorporation mechanisms between bacteria and 
eukaryotes appear to be conserved, the results suggest the existence of a 
bacteria-specific mechanism(s) for reducing misincorporation in protein-coding 
regions. The links between transcription fidelity, human disease, and phenotypic 
variability in genetically-identical cells can be explained by the accumulation 
of misincorporated complexes, rather than mistakes in mature RNA.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkw969
PMCID: PMC5388426
PMID: 28180286 [Indexed for MEDLINE]