1. PLoS One. 2017 Feb 16;12(2):e0172000. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0172000. 
eCollection 2017.

Altered hepatic lipid metabolism in mice lacking both the melanocortin type 4 
receptor and low density lipoprotein receptor.

Lede V(1), Meusel A(2), Garten A(3), Popkova Y(2), Penke M(3), Franke C(4), 
Ricken A(5), Schulz A(1), Kiess W(3), Huster D(2), Schöneberg T(1), Schiller 
J(2).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Biochemistry, Rudolf-Schönheimer-Institute of Biochemistry, 
University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.
(2)Institute of Medical Physics and Biophysics, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, 
Germany.
(3)Hospital for Children & Adolescents, Department of Women and Child Health, 
Center for Pediatric Research Leipzig, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.
(4)Heart and Vascular Center, Bad Bevensen, Germany.
(5)Institute of Anatomy, Medical Faculty, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, 
Germany.

Obesity is often associated with dyslipidemia and hepatosteatosis. A number of 
animal models of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) are established but 
they significantly differ in the molecular and biochemical changes depending on 
the genetic modification and diet used. Mice deficient for melanocortin type 4 
receptor (Mc4rmut) develop hyperphagia, obesity, and subsequently NAFLD already 
under regular chow and resemble more closely the energy supply-driven obesity 
found in humans. This animal model was used to assess the molecular and 
biochemical consequences of hyperphagia-induced obesity on hepatic lipid 
metabolism. We analyzed transcriptome changes in Mc4rmut mice by RNA sequencing 
and used high resolution 1H magic angle spinning NMR spectroscopy and MALDI-TOF 
mass spectrometry to assess changes in the lipid composition. On the 
transcriptomic level we found significant changes in components of the 
triacylglycerol metabolism, unsaturated fatty acids biosynthesis, peroxisome 
proliferator-activated receptor signaling pathways, and lipid transport and 
storage compared to the wild-type. These findings were supported by increases in 
triacylglycerol, monounsaturated fatty acid, and arachidonic acid levels. The 
transcriptome signatures significantly differ from those of other NAFLD mouse 
models supporting the concept of hepatic subphenotypes depending on the genetic 
background and diet. Comparative analyses of our data with previous studies 
allowed for the identification of common changes and genotype-specific 
components and pathways involved in obesity-associated NAFLD.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0172000
PMCID: PMC5313158
PMID: 28207798 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.