1. J Pediatr Adolesc Gynecol. 2017 Aug;30(4):495-498. doi: 
10.1016/j.jpag.2017.02.001. Epub 2017 Feb 16.

Mucinous Cystadenoma in Children and Adolescents.

Cowan RA(1), Haber EN(2), Faucz FR(3), Stratakis CA(3), Gomez-Lobo V(4).

Author information:
(1)Children's National Medical Center, MedStar Washington Hospital Center, 
Washington, DC. Electronic address: cowanr@mskcc.org.
(2)MedStar Georgetown University Hospital, Washington, DC.
(3)Section on Endocrinology and Genetics, Program on Developmental Endocrinology 
and Genetics & Pediatric Endocrinology Inter-Institute Training Program, Eunice 
Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland.
(4)Children's National Medical Center, MedStar Washington Hospital Center, 
Washington, DC.

STUDY OBJECTIVE: Mucinous cystadenomas (MCAs) are benign epithelial ovarian 
tumors that occur rarely in children and adolescents. Because children and 
adolescents typically have their childbearing years ahead of them, conservative 
therapy is indicated. However, there is concern that ovarian cystectomy might be 
associated with significant recurrence risk in patients with MCA. Furthermore, 
guanine nucleotide binding protein, alpha stimulating (GNAS) gene mutations are 
associated with McCune-Albright syndrome, which is associated with cystic 
ovaries. We sought to evaluate the outcomes of children and adolescents with MCA 
treated conservatively. A subset of patients underwent GNAS gene testing.
DESIGN, SETTING, PARTICIPANTS, AND INTERVENTIONS: After institutional board 
review approval, the pathology database of a large urban children's hospital was 
queried to identify adolescents with MCA between the years 2008 and 2014. 
Fourteen patients, aged 8-18 years (median, 14), were identified. A buccal swab 
for genetic testing was obtained from a subset of consenting patients.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: MCA recurrence; ovarian return to normal size; GNAS gene 
variants.
RESULTS: Two patients underwent oophorectomies, and the remaining 12 underwent 
cystectomies. Follow-up ultrasound examination revealed slow return of ovary to 
normal size. Of the 10 patients with available follow-up data, there were no 
recurrences at a median of 225 days from surgery. Four patients consented to a 
buccal swab for genetic testing, and the GNAS gene was noted to have rare 
variants in 2 patients.
CONCLUSION: This series supports the use of ovary-sparing surgery in the 
treatment of MCA. Further research exploring possible genetic variants such as 
the GNAS gene in children and adolescents diagnosed with MCA is warranted.

Copyright © 2017 North American Society for Pediatric and Adolescent Gynecology. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpag.2017.02.001
PMCID: PMC6379898
PMID: 28216128 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest to disclose.