1. Am J Med Genet A. 2017 Mar;173(3):780-783. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38073.

Intrathecal enzyme replacement therapy reverses cognitive decline in 
mucopolysaccharidosis type I.

Nestrasil I(1), Shapiro E(1), Svatkova A(1)(2), Dickson P(3), Chen A(3), 
Wakumoto A(1), Ahmed A(1), Stehel E(4), McNeil S(4), Gravance C(5), Maher E(4).

Author information:
(1)University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota.
(2)Multimodal and Functional Neuroimaging Research Group, CEITEC-Central 
European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic.
(3)Los Angeles Biomedical Institute at Harbor-UCLA, Torrance, California.
(4)University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas.
(5)Ryan Foundation, Carrollton, Texas.

Mucopolysaccharidosis type I (MPS I) is an inherited lysosomal storage disease 
that seriously affects the brain. Severity of neurocognitive symptoms in 
attenuated MPS subtype (MPS IA) broadly varies partially, due to restricted 
permeability of blood-brain barrier (BBB) which limits treatment effects of 
intravenously applied α-L-iduronidase (rhIDU) enzyme. Intrathecal (IT) rhIDU 
application as a possible solution to circumvent BBB improved brain outcomes in 
canine models; therefore, our study quantifies effects of IT rhIDU on brain 
structure and function in an MPS IA patient with previous progressive cognitive 
decline. Neuropsychological testing and MRIs were performed twice prior 
(baseline, at 1 year) and twice after initiating IT rhIDU (at 2nd and 3rd 
years). The difference between pre- and post-treatment means was evaluated as a 
percentage of the change. Neurocognitive performance improved particularly in 
memory tests and resulted in improved school performance after IT rhIDU 
treatment. White matter (WM) integrity improved together with an increase of WM 
and corpus callosum volumes. Hippocampal and gray matter volume decreased which 
may either parallel reduction of glycosaminoglycan storage or reflect typical 
longitudinal brain changes in early adulthood. In conclusion, our outcomes 
suggest neurological benefits of IT rhIDU compared to the intravenous 
administration on brain structure and function in a single MPS IA patient.© 2017 
Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38073
PMCID: PMC5367919
PMID: 28211988 [Indexed for MEDLINE]