1. J Transl Med. 2017 Mar 3;15(1):54. doi: 10.1186/s12967-017-1156-1.

Endothelial and smooth muscle cells derived from human cardiac explants 
demonstrate angiogenic potential and suitable for design of cell-containing 
vascular grafts.

Zakharova IS(1)(2)(3), Zhiven' MK(4)(5)(6), Saaya SB(6), Shevchenko 
AI(4)(5)(6)(7), Smirnova AM(4)(6)(7), Strunov A(4), Karpenko AA(6), Pokushalov 
EA(6), Ivanova LN(4)(7), Makarevich PI(8)(9), Parfyonova YV(8)(10), Aboian 
E(11), Zakian SM(4)(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)The Federal Research Center Institute of Cytology And Genetics, The Siberian 
Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation. 
zakharova@bionet.nsc.ru.
(2)Institute of Chemical Biology and Fundamental Medicine, The Siberian Branch 
of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation. 
zakharova@bionet.nsc.ru.
(3)Siberian Federal Biomedical Research Center, Ministry of Health Care of 
Russian Federation, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation. zakharova@bionet.nsc.ru.
(4)The Federal Research Center Institute of Cytology And Genetics, The Siberian 
Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation.
(5)Institute of Chemical Biology and Fundamental Medicine, The Siberian Branch 
of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation.
(6)Siberian Federal Biomedical Research Center, Ministry of Health Care of 
Russian Federation, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation.
(7)Novosibirsk State University, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation.
(8)Laboratory of Angiogenesis, Russian Cardiology Research and Production 
Complex, Moscow, Russian Federation.
(9)Laboratory of gene and cell therapy, Institute of regenerative medicine, 
Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow, Russian Federation.
(10)Faculty of Medicine, Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow, Russian 
Federation.
(11)Division of Vascular Surgery, Palo Alto Medical Foundation, Burlingame, USA.

BACKGROUND: Endothelial and smooth muscle cells are considered promising 
resources for regenerative medicine and cell replacement therapy. It has been 
shown that both types of cells are heterogeneous depending on the type of 
vessels and organs in which they are located. Therefore, isolation of 
endothelial and smooth muscle cells from tissues relevant to the area of 
research is necessary for the adequate study of specific pathologies. However, 
sources of specialized human endothelial and smooth muscle cells are limited, 
and the search for new sources is still relevant. The main goal of our study is 
to demonstrate that functional endothelial and smooth muscle cells can be 
obtained from an available source-post-surgically discarded cardiac tissue from 
the right atrial appendage and right ventricular myocardium.
METHODS: Heterogeneous primary cell cultures were enzymatically isolated from 
cardiac explants and then grown in specific endothelial and smooth muscle growth 
media on collagen IV-coated surfaces. The population of endothelial cells was 
further enriched by immunomagnetic sorting for CD31, and the culture thus 
obtained was characterized by immunocytochemistry, ultrastructural analysis and 
in vitro functional tests. The angiogenic potency of the cells was examined by 
injecting them, along with Matrigel, into immunodeficient mice. Cells were also 
seeded on characterized polycaprolactone/chitosan membranes with subsequent 
analysis of cell proliferation and function.
RESULTS: Endothelial cells isolated from cardiac explants expressed CD31, 
VE-cadherin and VEGFR2 and showed typical properties, namely, cytoplasmic 
Weibel-Palade bodies, metabolism of acetylated low-density lipoproteins, 
formation of capillary-like structures in Matrigel, and production of 
extracellular matrix and angiogenic cytokines. Isolated smooth muscle cells 
expressed extracellular matrix components as well as α-actin and myosin heavy 
chain. Vascular cells derived from cardiac explants demonstrated the ability to 
stimulate angiogenesis in vivo. Endothelial cells proliferated most effectively 
on membranes made of polycaprolactone and chitosan blended in a 25:75 ratio, 
neutralized by a mixture of alkaline and ethanol. Endothelial and smooth muscle 
cells retained their functional properties when seeded on the blended membranes.
CONCLUSIONS: We established endothelial and smooth muscle cell cultures from 
human right atrial appendage and right ventricle post-operative explants. The 
isolated cells revealed angiogenic potential and may be a promising source of 
patient-specific cells for regenerative medicine.

DOI: 10.1186/s12967-017-1156-1
PMCID: PMC5336693
PMID: 28257636 [Indexed for MEDLINE]