1. PLoS One. 2017 Mar 2;12(3):e0172959. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0172959. 
eCollection 2017.

A flexible method to model HIV serodiscordance among couples in Mozambique.

Juga AJ(1)(2), Hens N(2)(3)(4), Osman N(5)(6), Aerts M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mathematics and Informatics, Faculty of Sciences, Eduardo 
Mondlane University, Maputo, Mozambique.
(2)I-BioStat, Hasselt University, Diepenbeek, Belgium.
(3)Centre for Health Economic Research and Modelling Infectious Diseases, 
Vaccine and Infectious Disease Institute (VAXINFECTIO), University of Antwerp, 
Antwerp, Belgium.
(4)Epidemiology and Social Medicine (ESOC), Faculty of Medicine and Health 
Sciences, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Maputo Central Hospital, Maputo, 
Mozambique.
(6)Faculty of Medicine, Eduardo Mondlane University, Maputo, Mozambique.

Whereas the number of people newly infected by HIV is continuing to decline 
globally, the epidemic continues to expand in many parts of the world. As the 
HIV/AIDS epidemic has matured in many countries, it is believed that the 
proportion of new infections occurring within couples has risen. Across 
countries, including Mozambique, a sizeable proportion of couples with HIV 
infection are discordant. A serodiscordant couple is a couple in which one 
partner has tested positive for HIV and the other has not. To describe the HIV 
serodiscordance among couples, a variety of association measures can be used. In 
this paper, we propose the serodiscordance measure (SDM) as a new alternative 
measure. Focus is on the specification of flexible marginal and random effects 
models for multivariate correlated binary data together with a full-likelihood 
estimation method, to adequately and directly describe the measure of interest. 
Fitting joint models allows examining the effects of different risk factors and 
other covariates on the probability to be HIV positive for each member within a 
couple, and estimating common effects for both probabilities more efficiently, 
while accounting for the association between their infection status. Moreover, 
the interpretation of the proposed association parameter SDM is more direct and 
relevant and effects of covariates can be studied as well. Results show that the 
HIV prevalence for the province where a couple was located as well as the union 
number for the woman within a couple are factors associated with HIV 
serodiscordance. These findings are important for the Mozambican public health 
policy makers to design national prevention plans, which include policies to 
stimulate regular HIV testing for couples as well as adolescents and young 
adults, prior to getting married or living together as a couple.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0172959
PMCID: PMC5416904
PMID: 28253283 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.