1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2017 Feb 22;7:44. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2017.00044. 
eCollection 2017.

Mutational Pressure in Zika Virus: Local ADAR-Editing Areas Associated with 
Pauses in Translation and Replication.

Khrustalev VV(1), Khrustaleva TA(2), Sharma N(3), Giri R(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Chemistry, Belarusian State Medical University Minsk, 
Belarus.
(2)Laboratory of Cellular Technologies, Institute of Physiology of the National 
Academy of Sciences of Belarus Minsk, Belarus.
(3)School of Basic Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology Mandi Mandi, India.

Zika virus (ZIKV) spread led to the recent medical health emergency of 
international concern. Understanding the variations in virus system is of utmost 
need. Using available complete sequences of ZIKV we estimated directions of 
mutational pressure along the length of consensus sequences of three lineages of 
the virus. Results showed that guanine usage is growing in ZIKV RNA plus strand 
due to adenine to guanine transitions, while adenine usage is growing due to 
cytosine to adenine transversions. Especially high levels of guanine have been 
found in two-fold degenerated sites of certain areas of RNA plus strand with 
high amount of secondary structure. The usage of cytosine in two-fold 
degenerated sites shows direct dependence on the amount of secondary structure 
in 52% (consensus sequence of East African ZIKV lineage)-32% (consensus sequence 
of epidemic strains) of the length of RNA minus strand. These facts are the 
evidences of ADAR-editing of both strands of ZIKV genome during pauses in 
replication. RNA plus strand can also be edited by ADAR during pauses in 
translation caused by the appearance of groups of rare codons. According to our 
results, RNA minus strand of epidemic ZIKV strain has lower number of points in 
which polymerase can be stalled (allowing ADAR-editing) compared to other 
strains. The data on preferable directions of mutational pressure in epidemic 
ZIKV strain is useful for future vaccine development and understanding the 
evolution of new strains.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2017.00044
PMCID: PMC5319961
PMID: 28275585 [Indexed for MEDLINE]