1. Alzheimers Dement (Amst). 2017 Feb 9;7:69-87. doi: 10.1016/j.dadm.2017.01.005.
 eCollection 2017.

Pathophysiologic relationship between Alzheimer's disease, cerebrovascular 
disease, and cardiovascular risk: A review and synthesis.

Santos CY(1), Snyder PJ(2), Wu WC(3), Zhang M(4), Echeverria A(5), Alber J(6).

Author information:
(1)Lifespan Clinical Research Center, Rhode Island Hospital, Providence, RI, 
USA; Interdisciplinary Neuroscience Program, University of Rhode Island, 
Kingston, RI, USA.
(2)Lifespan Clinical Research Center, Rhode Island Hospital, Providence, RI, 
USA; Interdisciplinary Neuroscience Program, University of Rhode Island, 
Kingston, RI, USA; Department of Neurology, Warren Alpert Medical School of 
Brown University, Providence, RI, USA.
(3)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Warren Alpert Medical School 
of Brown University, Providence, RI, USA.
(4)Griffith University School of Medicine, Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia.
(5)University of Puerto Rico School of Medicine, San Juan, Puerto Rico.
(6)Lifespan Clinical Research Center, Rhode Island Hospital, Providence, RI, 
USA; Department of Neurology, Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown University, 
Providence, RI, USA; Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, Warren Alpert 
Medical School of Brown University, Providence, RI, USA.

As the population ages due to demographic trends and gains in life expectancy, 
the incidence and prevalence of dementia increases, and the need to understand 
the etiology and pathogenesis of dementia becomes ever more urgent. Alzheimer's 
disease (AD), the most common form of dementia, is a complex disease, the 
mechanisms of which are poorly understood. The more we learn about AD, the more 
questions are raised about our current conceptual models of disease. In the 
absence of a cure or the means by which to slow disease progress, it may be 
prudent to apply our current knowledge of the intersection between AD, 
cardiovascular disease, and cerebrovascular disease to foster efforts to delay 
or slow the onset of AD. This review discusses our current understanding of the 
epidemiology, genetics, and pathophysiology of AD, the intersection between AD 
and vascular causes of dementia, and proposes future directions for research and 
prevention.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dadm.2017.01.005
PMCID: PMC5328683
PMID: 28275702