1. Clin Epigenetics. 2017 Feb 14;9:21. doi: 10.1186/s13148-016-0302-6.
eCollection  2017.

Cerebral white matter hyperintensities on MRI and acceleration of epigenetic 
aging: the atherosclerosis risk in communities study.

Raina A(#)(1), Zhao X(#)(1), Grove ML(2), Bressler J(2), Gottesman RF(3), Guan 
W(4), Pankow JS(5), Boerwinkle E(2), Mosley TH(6), Fornage M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine, McGovern Medical School, University of Texas 
Health Science Center at Houston, 1825 Pressler Street, 77030 Houston, TX USA.
(2)Division of Epidemiology, Human Genetics, and Environmental Sciences, School 
of Public Health, University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, 
TX USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD USA.
(4)Division of Biostatistics, School of Public Health, University of Minnesota, 
Minneapolis, MN USA.
(5)Division of Epidemiology & Community Health, School of Public Health, 
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN USA.
(6)Division of Geriatrics, School of Medicine, University of Mississippi Medical 
Center, Jackson, MS USA.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Cerebral white matter hyperintensities (WMH) on magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) are part of the spectrum of brain vascular injury accompanying 
aging and are associated with a substantial risk of stroke and dementia. We 
investigated the association of cerebral WMH burden on MRI with a DNA 
methylation-based biomarker of aging, termed DNA methylation age acceleration, 
which represents the deviation of the DNA methylation-predicted age from the 
chronologic age.
RESULTS: In this cross-sectional observational study of 713 African-American 
participants of the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities study, aged 51-73 years, 
estimates of predicted age were obtained based on two algorithms (Hannum et al. 
and Horvath) from DNA methylation measured using the Illumina HM450 array on 
genomic DNA extracted from blood. Age acceleration, calculated as the residual 
values from the regression of each of the predicted age measures onto the 
chronologic age, was significantly associated with WMH burden after accounting 
for chronologic age and sex, body mass index, systolic blood pressure, 
hypertension, diabetes, current smoking, and blood cell composition, and results 
were similar for either Hannum et al.- or Horvath-derived estimates (P = 0.016 
and 0.026). An age acceleration increase by 1 year was associated with an 
increase of WMH burden by ~1 grade. To shed light on possible biological 
mechanisms underlying this association, we conducted a genome-wide association 
study of age acceleration and identified four loci harboring genes implicated in 
hemostasis, cell proliferation, protein degradation, and histone methylation. 
However, none of these loci were associated with WMH burden.
CONCLUSIONS: In this population-based study of middle-aged to older 
African-American adults, we report an association between accelerated epigenetic 
aging and increased WMH burden, independent of known risk factors, including 
chronologic age. Additional studies are needed to clarify whether DNA 
methylation age reflects biological mechanisms implicated in the aging of the 
cerebral white matter.

DOI: 10.1186/s13148-016-0302-6
PMCID: PMC5310061
PMID: 28289478 [Indexed for MEDLINE]