1. Brain Behav. 2017 Feb 22;7(3):e00624. doi: 10.1002/brb3.624. eCollection 2017 
Mar.

CADASIL: Ultrastructural insights into the morphology of granular osmiophilic 
material.

Lorenzi T(1), Ragno M(2), Paolinelli F(1), Castellucci C(3), Scarpelli M(4), 
Morroni M(5).

Author information:
(1)Section of Neuroscience and Cell Biology Department of Experimental and 
Clinical Medicine School of Medicine Università Politecnica delle Marche Ancona 
Italy.
(2)Division of Neurology Madonna del Soccorso Hospital San Benedetto del Tronto 
Italy.
(3)Division of Pathology Department of Clinical and Molecular Sciences School of 
Medicine Università Politecnica delle Marche Ancona Italy.
(4)Section of Pathological Anatomy Department of Biomedical Sciences and Public 
Health School of Medicine Università Politecnica delle Marche United Hospitals 
Ancona Italy.
(5)Section of Neuroscience and Cell Biology Department of Experimental and 
Clinical Medicine School of Medicine Università Politecnica delle Marche Ancona 
Italy; Electron Microscopy Unit United Hospitals Ancona Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts 
and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL) is a hereditary systemic vascular disorder. 
Granular osmiophilic material (GOM) is its ultrastructural marker. We reviewed 
tissue biopsies from CADASIL patients to establish whether ultrastructural 
observations help clarify the pathogenic mechanism of CADASIL. Given the 
resemblance of the GOM deposits to the immunoglobulin deposits seen in 
glomerulonephritis and focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS), their 
morphologies were investigated and compared.
METHODS: Skin, skeletal muscle, kidney, and pericardium tissue biopsies from 13 
patients with a clinical and molecular diagnosis of CADASIL, and kidney biopsies 
from five patients with IgA nephropathy and five patients with primary FSGS were 
subjected to ultrastructural examination.
RESULTS: In CADASIL patients, several GOM deposits from all sites were partially 
or totally surrounded by an electron-lucent halo. The deposits frequently had a 
more electron-dense portion with a regular outline on the inner side and a less 
osmiophilic, looser outer side displaying a less regular profile. The uniformly 
dense deposits tended to be more osmiophilic if located close to the cell 
membrane and less osmiophilic if laid farther away from it. The immunoglobulin 
deposits from the glomerulonephritis and FSGS patients lacked both the granular 
pattern and the halo.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that GOM deposits may have a nonuniform 
morphology and describes in detail an electron-lucent halo surrounding several 
of them. It is conceivable that the halo is the morphological evidence and 
possibly the cause of an aberrant NOTCH3 processing, already suspected to be 
involved in CADASIL.

DOI: 10.1002/brb3.624
PMCID: PMC5346513
PMID: 28293466 [Indexed for MEDLINE]