1. Genome Biol Evol. 2017 Apr 1;9(4):855-868. doi: 10.1093/gbe/evx052.

RNA Editing During Sexual Development Occurs in Distantly Related Filamentous 
Ascomycetes.

Teichert I(1), Dahlmann TA(1), Kück U(1), Nowrousian M(1).

Author information:
(1)Lehrstuhl für Allgemeine und Molekulare Botanik, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, 
Germany.

RNA editing is a post-transcriptional process that modifies RNA molecules 
leading to transcript sequences that differ from their template DNA. A-to-I 
editing was found to be widely distributed in nuclear transcripts of metazoa, 
but was detected in fungi only recently in a study of the filamentous ascomycete 
Fusarium graminearum that revealed extensive A-to-I editing of mRNAs in sexual 
structures (fruiting bodies). Here, we searched for putative RNA editing events 
in RNA-seq data from Sordaria macrospora and Pyronema confluens, two distantly 
related filamentous ascomycetes, and in data from the Taphrinomycete 
Schizosaccharomyces pombe. Like F. graminearum, S. macrospora is a member of the 
Sordariomycetes, whereas P. confluens belongs to the early-diverging group of 
Pezizomycetes. We found extensive A-to-I editing in RNA-seq data from sexual 
mycelium from both filamentous ascomycetes, but not in vegetative structures. 
A-to-I editing was not detected in different stages of meiosis of S. pombe. A 
comparison of A-to-I editing in S. macrospora with F. graminearum and P. 
confluens, respectively, revealed little conservation of individual editing 
sites. An analysis of RNA-seq data from two sterile developmental mutants of S. 
macrospora showed that A-to-I editing is strongly reduced in these strains. 
Sequencing of cDNA fragments containing more than one editing site from P. 
confluens showed that at the beginning of sexual development, transcripts were 
incompletely edited or unedited, whereas in later stages transcripts were more 
extensively edited. Taken together, these data suggest that A-to-I RNA editing 
is an evolutionary conserved feature during fruiting body development in 
filamentous ascomycetes.

© The Author(s) 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/gbe/evx052
PMCID: PMC5381528
PMID: 28338982 [Indexed for MEDLINE]