1. Mol Vis. 2017 Mar 18;23:131-139. eCollection 2017.

Novel splice-site mutation in TTLL5 causes cone dystrophy in a consanguineous 
family.

Dias MS(1), Hamel CP(2), Meunier I(2), Varin J(1), Blanchard S(3), Boyard F(1), 
Sahel JA(4), Zeitz C(1).

Author information:
(1)Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, INSERM U968, CNRS UMR 7210, 
Institut de la Vision, 17 rue Moreau, Paris, France.
(2)INSERM U 1051, Institut des Neurosciences de Montpellier, Hôpital Saint-Eloi, 
Montpellier, France; Affections Sensorielles Génétiques, CHU de Montpellier, 191 
Avenue du Doyen Gaston Giraud, Montpellier, France; Université Montpellier, 163 
Avenue Auguste Broussonnet, Montpellier, France.
(3)IntegraGen SA, Genopole CAMPUS 1 bât, G8, EVRY, Paris, France.
(4)Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, INSERM U968, CNRS UMR 7210, 
Institut de la Vision, 17 rue Moreau, Paris, France; CHNO des Quinze-Vingts, DHU 
Sight Restore, INSERM-DHOS CIC1423, 28 rue de Charenton, Paris, France; 
Institute of Ophthalmology, University College of London, London EC1V 9EL, UK; 
Fondation Ophtalmologique Adolphe de Rothschild, Paris, France; Academie des 
Sciences, Institut de France, Paris, France; Department of Ophthalmology, The 
University of Pittsburghschool of Medicine, Pittsburg, PA.

PURPOSE: To report the clinical and genetic findings of one family with 
autosomal recessive cone dystrophy (CD) and to identify the causative mutation.
METHODS: An institutional study of three family members from two generations. 
The clinical examination included best-corrected Snellen visual acuity 
measurement, fundoscopy, the Farnsworth D-15 color vision test, a full-field 
electroretinogram (ERG) that incorporated the International Society for Clinical 
Electrophysiology of Vision standards and methodology, fundus autofluorescence 
(FAF) and infrared (IR), and spectral-domain optical coherence tomography 
(SD-OCT). Genetic findings were achieved with DNA analysis using whole exome 
sequencing (WES) and Sanger sequencing.
RESULTS: The proband, a 9-year-old boy, presented with a condition that appeared 
to be congenital and stationary. The clinical presentation initially reflected 
incomplete congenital stationary night blindness (icCSNB) because of myopia, a 
decrease in visual acuity, abnormal oscillatory potentials, and reduced 
amplitudes on the 30 Hz flicker ERG but was atypical because there were no clear 
electronegative responses. However, no disease-causing mutations in the genes 
underlying icCSNB were identified. Following WES analysis of family members, a 
homozygous splice-site mutation in intron 3 of TTLL5 (c.182-3_182-1delinsAA) was 
found cosegregating within the phenotype in the family.
CONCLUSIONS: The distinction between icCSNB and CD phenotypes is not always 
straightforward in young patients. The patient was quite young, which most 
likely explains why the progression of the CD was not obvious. WES analysis 
provided prompt diagnosis for this family; thus, the use of this technique to 
refine the diagnosis is highlighted in this study.

PMCID: PMC5360453
PMID: 28356705 [Indexed for MEDLINE]