1. Mol Biol Evol. 2017 Jul 1;34(7):1654-1668. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msx107.

The Influence of HIV on the Evolution of Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

Koch AS(1), Brites D(2)(3), Stucki D(2)(3), Evans JC(4), Seldon R(4), Heekes 
A(5), Mulder N(5), Nicol M(6), Oni T(7)(8), Mizrahi V(4), Warner DF(4), Parkhill 
J(8), Gagneux S(2)(3), Martin DP(9), Wilkinson RJ(1)(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Wellcome Centre for Infectious Disease Research in Africa, Institute of 
Infectious Disease and Molecular Medicine, and Department of Medicine, 
University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.
(2)Department of Medical Parasitology and Infection Biology, Swiss Tropical and 
Public Health Institute, Basel, Switzerland.
(3)University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(4)Molecular Mycobacteriology Research Unit, Institute of Infectious Disease and 
Molecular Medicine and Department of Pathology, Faculty of Health Sciences, 
University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.
(5)Department of Integrative Biomedical Sciences, Institute of Infectious 
Diseases and Molecular Medicine, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South 
Africa.
(6)University of Cape Town, and National Health Laboratory Service, Cape Town, 
South Africa.
(7)Division of Public Health Medicine, School of Public Health and Family 
Medicine, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.
(8)The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(9)Division of Computational Biology, Department of Integrated Biology Sciences 
and Institute of Infectious Disease and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Health 
Sciences, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.
(10)Department of Medicine, Imperial College, London, United Kingdom.
(11)Francis Crick Institute, London, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    10.1093/molbev/msx132.

HIV significantly affects the immunological environment during tuberculosis 
coinfection, and therefore may influence the selective landscape upon which M. 
tuberculosis evolves. To test this hypothesis whole genome sequences were 
determined for 169 South African M. tuberculosis strains from HIV-1 coinfected 
and uninfected individuals and analyzed using two Bayesian codon-model based 
selection analysis approaches: FUBAR which was used to detect persistent 
positive and negative selection (selection respectively favoring and disfavoring 
nonsynonymous substitutions); and MEDS which was used to detect episodic 
directional selection specifically favoring nonsynonymous substitutions within 
HIV-1 infected individuals. Among the 25,251 polymorphic codon sites analyzed, 
FUBAR revealed that 189-fold more were detectably evolving under persistent 
negative selection than were evolving under persistent positive selection. Three 
specific codon sites within the genes celA2b, katG, and cyp138 were identified 
by MEDS as displaying significant evidence of evolving under directional 
selection influenced by HIV-1 coinfection. All three genes encode proteins that 
may indirectly interact with human proteins that, in turn, interact functionally 
with HIV proteins. Unexpectedly, epitope encoding regions were enriched for 
sites displaying weak evidence of directional selection influenced by HIV-1. 
Although the low degree of genetic diversity observed in our M. tuberculosis 
data set means that these results should be interpreted carefully, the effects 
of HIV-1 on epitope evolution in M. tuberculosis may have implications for the 
design of M. tuberculosis vaccines that are intended for use in populations with 
high HIV-1 infection rates.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msx107
PMCID: PMC5455964
PMID: 28369607 [Indexed for MEDLINE]