1. Contemp Oncol (Pozn). 2016;20(5):365-373. doi: 10.5114/wo.2016.64594. Epub
2016  Dec 20.

Comparison of clinical pharmacology of voriconazole and posaconazole.

Sienkiewicz BM(1), Łapiński Ł(1), Wiela-Hojeńska A(1).

Author information:
(1)Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland.

Despite greater knowledge and possibilities in pharmacotherapy, fungal 
infections remain a challenge for clinicians. As the population of 
immunocompromised patients and those treated for their hematologic ailments 
increases, the number of fungal infections grows too. This is why there is still 
a quest for new antifungal drugs as well as for optimization of pharmacotherapy 
with already registered pharmaceutics. Voriconazole and posaconazole are 
broad-spectrum, new generation, triazole antifungal agents. The drugs are used 
in the pharmacotherapy of invasive aspergillosis, Candida and Fusarium 
infections. Voriconazole is also used in infections caused by Scedosporium. 
Posaconazole is used in the treatment of coccidioidomycosis and 
chromoblastomycosis. Besides some similarities, the two mentioned drugs also 
show differences in therapeutic indications, pharmacokinetics (mainly absorption 
and metabolism), frequency and severity of adverse drug reactions, drug-drug 
interactions and dosage. As both of the drugs are used in the treatment of 
invasive fungal infections in adults and children, detailed knowledge of the 
clinical pharmacology of antifungal agents is the main factor in pharmacotherapy 
optimization in treatment of fungal infections. The goal of the article is to 
present and compare the clinical pharmacology of voriconazole and posaconazole 
as well as to point out the indications and contraindications of using the 
drugs, determine factors influencing their pharmacotherapy, and provide 
information that might be helpful in the treatment of fungal infections.

DOI: 10.5114/wo.2016.64594
PMCID: PMC5371702
PMID: 28373817

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.