1. Sci Rep. 2017 Apr 10;7:46266. doi: 10.1038/srep46266.

Toward a scientific understanding of the effectiveness, material basis and 
prescription compatibility of a Chinese herbal formula Dan-hong injection.

Li P(1), Su W(1), Yun S(1), Liao Y(1), Liao Y(1), Liu H(1), Li P(1), Wang Y(1), 
Peng W(1), Yao H(1).

Author information:
(1)Guangdong Engineering and Technology Research Center for Quality and Efficacy 
Re-evaluation of Post-marketed TCM, Guangdong Key Laboratory of Plant Resources, 
School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510275, P R. China.

Since traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) is a complex mixture of multiple 
components, the application of methodologies for evaluating single-components 
Western medicine in TCM studies may have certain limitations. Appropriate 
strategies that recognize the integrality of TCM and connect to TCM theories 
remain to be developed. Here we use multiple unique approaches to study the 
scientific connotation of a TCM formula Dan-hong injection (DHI) without 
undermining its prescription integrity. The blood circulation improving and 
healing promoting effects of DHI were assessed by a qi stagnation blood stasis 
rat model and a mouse model of laser irradiation induced cerebral microvascular 
thrombosis. By UFLC-PDA-Triple Q-TOF-MS/MS and relevance analysis between 
chemical characters and biological effects, 82 chemical constituents and nine 
core components, whose blood circulation promoting effects were found comparable 
to that of whole DHI, were successfully identified. What's more, the rationality 
of DHI prescription compatibility could be reflected not only in the maximum 
efficacy of the original ratio, but also in the interactions of compounds from 
different ingredient herbs, such as complementary activities and facilitating 
tissues distribution. This study provides scientific evidences in explanation of 
the clinical benefits of DHI, and also gives a good demonstration for the 
comprehensive evaluation of other TCM.

DOI: 10.1038/srep46266
PMCID: PMC5385876
PMID: 28393856 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.