1. PLoS Genet. 2017 Apr 10;13(4):e1006674. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1006674. 
eCollection 2017 Apr.

Evidence for the evolutionary steps leading to mecA-mediated β-lactam resistance 
in staphylococci.

Rolo J(1)(2), Worning P(3), Boye Nielsen J(3), Sobral R(4), Bowden R(5), 
Bouchami O(1)(2), Damborg P(6), Guardabassi L(6)(7), Perreten V(8), Westh 
H(3)(9), Tomasz A(10), de Lencastre H(1)(10), Miragaia M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Instituto de Tecnologia Química e Biológica 
António Xavier, Universidade Nova de Lisboa (ITQB-NOVA), Oeiras, Portugal.
(2)Laboratory of Bacterial Evolution and Molecular Epidemiology, Instituto de 
Tecnologia Química e Biológica António Xavier, Universidade Nova de Lisboa 
(ITQB-NOVA), Oeiras, Portugal.
(3)MRSA Knowledge Center, Department of Clinical Microbiology, Hvidovre 
Hospital, Hvidovre, Denmark.
(4)UCIBIO-REQUIMTE, Departamento de Ciências da Vida, Faculdade de Ciências e 
Tecnologia, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Caparica, Portugal.
(5)Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(6)Department of Veterinary Disease Biology, Faculty of Health and Medical 
Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(7)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Ross University School of Veterinary 
Medicine, Basseterre, St Kitts, West Indies.
(8)Department of Molecular Epidemiology and Infectious Diseases, Institute of 
Veterinary Bacteriology, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Bern, Bern, 
Switzerland.
(9)Department of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, 
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(10)Laboratory of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, The Rockefeller 
University, New York, United States of America.

The epidemiologically most important mechanism of antibiotic resistance in 
Staphylococcus aureus is associated with mecA-an acquired gene encoding an extra 
penicillin-binding protein (PBP2a) with low affinity to virtually all β-lactams. 
The introduction of mecA into the S. aureus chromosome has led to the emergence 
of methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) pandemics, responsible for high rates 
of mortality worldwide. Nonetheless, little is known regarding the origin and 
evolution of mecA. Different mecA homologues have been identified in species 
belonging to the Staphylococcus sciuri group representing the most primitive 
staphylococci. In this study we aimed to identify evolutionary steps linking 
these mecA precursors to the β-lactam resistance gene mecA and the resistance 
phenotype. We sequenced genomes of 106 S. sciuri, S. vitulinus and S. fleurettii 
strains and determined their oxacillin susceptibility profiles. 
Single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) analysis of the core genome was performed 
to assess the genetic relatedness of the isolates. Phylogenetic analysis of the 
mecA gene homologues and promoters was achieved through nucleotide/amino acid 
sequence alignments and mutation rates were estimated using a Bayesian analysis. 
Furthermore, the predicted structure of mecA homologue-encoded PBPs of 
oxacillin-susceptible and -resistant strains were compared. We showed for the 
first time that oxacillin resistance in the S. sciuri group has emerged multiple 
times and by a variety of different mechanisms. Development of resistance 
occurred through several steps including structural diversification of the 
non-binding domain of native PBPs; changes in the promoters of mecA homologues; 
acquisition of SCCmec and adaptation of the bacterial genetic background. 
Moreover, our results suggest that it was exposure to β-lactams in human-created 
environments that has driven evolution of native PBPs towards a resistance 
determinant. The evolution of β-lactam resistance in staphylococci highlights 
the numerous resources available to bacteria to adapt to the selective pressure 
of antibiotics.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1006674
PMCID: PMC5402963
PMID: 28394942 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.