1. Transl Psychiatry. 2017 Apr 11;7(4):e1089. doi: 10.1038/tp.2017.61.

Large-scale interaction effects reveal missing heritability in schizophrenia, 
bipolar disorder and posttraumatic stress disorder.

Woo HJ(1), Yu C(1), Kumar K(1), Reifman J(1).

Author information:
(1)Biotechnology High Performance Computing Software Applications Institute, 
Telemedicine and Advanced Technology Research Center, U.S. Army Medical Research 
and Materiel Command, Fort Detrick, MD, USA.

Genetic susceptibility factors behind psychiatric disorders typically contribute 
small effects individually. A possible explanation for the missing heritability 
is that the effects of common variants are not only polygenic but also 
non-additive, appearing only when interactions within large groups are taken 
into account. Here, we tested this hypothesis for schizophrenia (SZ) and bipolar 
disorder (BP) disease risks, and identified genetic factors shared with 
posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). When considered independently, few 
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) reached genome-wide significance. In 
contrast, when SNPs were selected in groups (containing up to thousands each) 
and the collective effects of all interactions were estimated, the association 
strength for SZ/BP rose dramatically with a combined sample size of 7187 cases 
and 8309 controls. We identified a large number of genes and pathways whose 
association was significant only when interaction effects were included. The 
gene with highest association was CSMD1, which encodes a negative regulator of 
complement activation. Pathways for glycosaminoglycan (GAG) synthesis exhibited 
strong association in multiple contexts. Taken together, highly associated 
pathways suggested a pathogenesis mechanism where maternal immune activation 
causes disruption of neurogenesis (compounded by impaired cell cycle, DNA repair 
and neuronal migration) and deficits in cortical interneurons, leading to 
symptoms triggered by synaptic pruning. Increased risks arise from GAG 
deficiencies causing complement activation and excessive microglial action. 
Analysis of PTSD data sets suggested an etiology common to SZ/BP: interneuron 
deficiency can also lead to impaired control of fear responses triggered by 
trauma. We additionally found PTSD risk factors affecting synaptic plasticity 
and fatty acid signaling, consistent with the fear extinction model. Our results 
suggest that much of the missing heritability of psychiatric disorders resides 
in non-additive interaction effects.

DOI: 10.1038/tp.2017.61
PMCID: PMC5416702
PMID: 28398343 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.