1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2017 Mar 28;7:80. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2017.00080. 
eCollection 2017.

SCM, the M Protein of Streptococcus canis Binds Immunoglobulin G.

Bergmann S(1), Eichhorn I(2), Kohler TP(3), Hammerschmidt S(3), Goldmann O(4), 
Rohde M(5), Fulde M(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Helmholtz Center for Infection Research 
Braunschweig, Germany.
(2)Institute of Microbiology and Epizootics, Centre for Infection Medicine, 
Freie Universität Berlin Berlin, Germany.
(3)Department Genetics of Microorganisms, Interfaculty Institute for Genetics 
and Functional Genomics, Ernst-Moritz-Arndt Universität Greifswald Greifswald, 
Germany.
(4)Department of Infection Immunology, Helmholtz Center for Infection Research 
Braunschweig, Germany.
(5)Central Facility for Microscopy, Helmholtz Center for Infection Research 
Braunschweig, Germany.
(6)Department of Medical Microbiology, Helmholtz Center for Infection 
ResearchBraunschweig, Germany; Institute of Microbiology and Epizootics, Centre 
for Infection Medicine, Freie Universität BerlinBerlin, Germany.

The M protein of Streptococcus canis (SCM) is a virulence factor and serves as a 
surface-associated receptor with a particular affinity for mini-plasminogen, a 
cleavage product of the broad-spectrum serine protease plasmin. Here, we report 
that SCM has an additional high-affinity immunoglobulin G (IgG) binding 
activity. The ability of a particular S. canis isolate to bind to IgG 
significantly correlates with a scm-positive phenotype, suggesting a dominant 
role of SCM as an IgG receptor. Subsequent heterologous expression of SCM in 
non-IgG binding S. gordonii and Western Blot analysis with purified recombinant 
SCM proteins confirmed its IgG receptor function. As expected for a zoonotic 
agent, the SCM-IgG interaction is species-unspecific, with a particular affinity 
of SCM for IgGs derived from human, cats, dogs, horses, mice, and rabbits, but 
not from cows and goats. Similar to other streptococcal IgG-binding proteins, 
the interaction between SCM and IgG occurs via the conserved Fc domain and is, 
therefore, non-opsonic. Interestingly, the interaction between SCM and IgG-Fc on 
the bacterial surface specifically prevents opsonization by C1q, which might 
constitute another anti-phagocytic mechanism of SCM. Extensive binding analyses 
with a variety of different truncated SCM fragments defined a region of 52 amino 
acids located in the central part of the mature SCM protein which is important 
for IgG binding. This binding region is highly conserved among SCM proteins 
derived from different S. canis isolates but differs significantly from IgG-Fc 
receptors of S. pyogenes and S. dysgalactiae sub. equisimilis, respectively. In 
summary, we present an additional role of SCM in the pathogen-host interaction 
of S. canis. The detailed analysis of the SCM-IgG interaction should contribute 
to a better understanding of the complex roles of M proteins in streptococcal 
pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2017.00080
PMCID: PMC5368172
PMID: 28401063 [Indexed for MEDLINE]