1. Genet Med. 2017 Sep;19(9):967-974. doi: 10.1038/gim.2017.7. Epub 2017 Apr 13.

Consensus recommendation for a diagnostic guideline for acid sphingomyelinase 
deficiency.

McGovern MM(1), Dionisi-Vici C(2), Giugliani R(3), Hwu P(4), Lidove O(5), Lukacs 
Z(6), Eugen Mengel K(7), Mistry PK(8), Schuchman EH(9), Wasserstein MP(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Stony Brook University School of Medicine, Stony 
Brook, New York, USA.
(2)Division of Metabolism, Bambino Gesù Childrens Hospital, Rome, Italy.
(3)Medical Genetics Service, Hospital de Clinicas de Porto Alegre, Porto Alegre, 
Brazil.
(4)Department of Medical Genetics and Pediatrics National Taiwan University 
Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine - Rheumatology, Groupe Hospitalier 
Diaconesses-Croix St Simon, Paris, France.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, 
Hamburg, Germany.
(7)Center for Child and Adolescent Medicine, University Medical Center of the 
Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut, USA.
(9)Department Of Genetics and Genomic Sciences Icahn School of Medicine at Mount 
Sinai, New York, New York, USA.
(10)Department of Pediatrics Children's Hospital at Montefiore, Albert Einstein 
College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA.

Disclaimer:This diagnostic guideline is intended as an educational resource and 
represents the opinions of the authors, and is not representative of 
recommendations or policy of the American College of Medical Genetics and 
Genomics (ACMG). The information should be considered a consensus based on 
expert opinion, as more comprehensive levels of evidence were not available in 
the literature in all cases.
BACKGROUND: Acid sphingomyelinase deficiency (ASMD) is a rare, progressive, and 
often fatal lysosomal storage disease. The underlying metabolic defect is 
deficiency of the enzyme acid sphingomyelinase that results in progressive 
accumulation of sphingomyelin in target tissues. ASMD manifests as a spectrum of 
severity ranging from rapidly progressive severe neurovisceral disease that is 
uniformly fatal to more slowly progressive chronic neurovisceral and chronic 
visceral forms. Disease management is aimed at symptom control and regular 
assessments for multisystem involvement.
PURPOSE AND METHODS: An international panel of experts in the clinical and 
laboratory evaluation, diagnosis, treatment/management, and genetic aspects of 
ASMD convened to review the evidence base and share personal experience in order 
to develop a guideline for diagnosis of the various ASMD phenotypes.
CONCLUSIONS: Although care of ASMD patients is typically provided by metabolic 
disease specialists, the guideline is directed at a wide range of providers 
because it is important for primary care providers (e.g., pediatricians and 
internists) and specialists (e.g., pulmonologists, hepatologists, and 
hematologists) to be able to identify ASMD.Genet Med advance online publication 
13 April 2017.

DOI: 10.1038/gim.2017.7
PMCID: PMC5589980
PMID: 28406489 [Indexed for MEDLINE]