1. PLoS One. 2017 Apr 14;12(4):e0175976. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0175976. 
eCollection 2017.

Altered glucose metabolism and hypoxic response in alloxan-induced diabetic 
atherosclerosis in rabbits.

Matsuura Y(1)(2), Yamashita A(1), Zhao Y(3), Iwakiri T(1)(2), Yamasaki K(3), 
Sugita C(1)(4), Koshimoto C(5), Kitamura K(2), Kawai K(6)(7), Tamaki N(8), Zhao 
S(3), Kuge Y(9)(10), Asada Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Miyazaki, 
Miyazaki, Japan.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Miyazaki, 
Miyazaki, Japan.
(3)Department of Tracer Kinetics and Bioanalysis, Graduate School of Medicine, 
Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Faculty of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, Kyusyu University of Health and Welfare, Nobeoka, Japan.
(5)Frontier Science Research Center, University of Miyazaki, Miyazaki, Japan.
(6)Faculty of Health Sciences, Institute of Medical, Pharmaceutical and Health 
Sciences, Kanazawa University, Kanazawa, Japan.
(7)Biomedical Imaging Research Center, University of Fukui, Fukui, Japan.
(8)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Hokkaido 
University, Sapporo, Japan.
(9)Department of Integrated Molecular Imaging, Graduate School of Medicine, 
Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.
(10)Central Institute of Isotope Science, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.

Diabetes mellitus accelerates atherosclerosis that causes most cardiovascular 
events. Several metabolic pathways are considered to contribute to the 
development of atherosclerosis, but comprehensive metabolic alterations to 
atherosclerotic arterial cells remain unknown. The present study investigated 
metabolic changes and their relationship to vascular histopathological changes 
in the atherosclerotic arteries of rabbits with alloxan-induced diabetes. 
Diabetic atherosclerosis was induced in rabbit ilio-femoral arteries by 
injecting alloxan (100 mg/kg), injuring the arteries using a balloon, and 
feeding with a 0.5% cholesterol diet. We histologically assessed the 
atherosclerotic lesion development, cellular content, pimonidazole 
positive-hypoxic area, the nuclear localization of hypoxia-inducible factor-1α, 
and apoptosis. We evaluated comprehensive arterial metabolism by performing 
metabolomic analyses using capillary electrophoresis-time of flight mass 
spectrometry. We evaluated glucose uptake and its relationship to vascular 
hypoxia using 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose and pimonidazole. Plaque burden, macrophage 
content, and hypoxic areas were more prevalent in arteries with diabetic, than 
non-diabetic atherosclerosis. Metabolomic analyses highlighted 12 metabolites 
that were significantly altered between diabetic and non-diabetic 
atherosclerosis. A half of them were associated with glycolysis metabolites, and 
their levels were decreased in diabetic atherosclerosis. The uptake of glucose 
evaluated as 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose in atherosclerotic lesions increased 
according to increased macrophage content or hypoxic areas in non-diabetic, but 
not diabetic rabbits. Despite profound hypoxic areas, the nuclear localization 
of hypoxia-inducible factor-1α decreased and the number of apoptotic cells 
increased in diabetic atherosclerotic lesions. Altered glycolysis metabolism and 
an impaired response to hypoxia in atherosclerotic lesions under conditions of 
insulin-dependent diabetes might be involved in the development of diabetic 
atherosclerosis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0175976
PMCID: PMC5391952
PMID: 28410399 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.