1. Front Neuroanat. 2017 Apr 6;11:31. doi: 10.3389/fnana.2017.00031. eCollection 
2017.

Expression of D-Amino Acid Oxidase (DAO/DAAO) and D-Amino Acid Oxidase Activator 
(DAOA/G72) during Development and Aging in the Human Post-mortem Brain.

Jagannath V(1), Marinova Z(1), Monoranu CM(2), Walitza S(1)(3)(4), Grünblatt 
E(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Molecular and Neurobiochemistry Laboratory, Centre for Child and Adolescent 
Psychiatry Research, Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and 
Psychotherapy, University Hospital of Psychiatry Zurich, University of 
ZurichZurich, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Neuropathology, Institute of Pathology, University of 
WürzburgWürzburg, Germany.
(3)Neuroscience Center Zurich, University of Zurich and ETH ZurichZurich, 
Switzerland.
(4)Zurich Center for Integrative Human Physiology, University of ZurichZurich, 
Switzerland.

In the brain, D-amino acid oxidase (DAO/DAAO) mainly oxidizes D-serine, a 
co-agonist of the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors. Thus, DAO can regulate 
the function of NMDA receptors via D-serine breakdown. Furthermore, DAO 
activator (DAOA)/G72 has been reported as both DAOA and repressor. The 
co-expression of DAO and DAOA genes and proteins in the human brain is not yet 
elucidated. The aim of this study was to understand the regional and age span 
distribution of DAO and DAOA (mRNA and protein) in a concomitant manner. We 
determined DAO and DAOA mRNA and protein expression across six brain regions in 
normal human post-mortem brain samples (16 weeks of gestation to 91 years) using 
quantitative real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction and 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. We found higher expression of DAO mRNA in the 
cerebellum, whereas lower expression of DAO protein in the cerebellum compared 
to the other brain regions studied, which suggests post-transcriptional 
regulation. We detected DAOA protein but not DAOA mRNA in all brain regions 
studied, suggesting a tightly regulated expression. To understand this 
regulation at the transcriptional level, we analyzed DNA methylation levels at 
DAO and DAOA CpG sites in the cerebellum and frontal cortex of control human 
post-mortem brain obtained from Gene Expression Omnibus datasets. Indeed, DAO 
and DAOA CpG sites in the cerebellum were significantly more methylated than 
those in the frontal cortex. While investigating lifespan effects, we found that 
DAO mRNA levels were positively correlated with age <2 years in the cerebellum 
and amygdala. We also detected a significant positive correlation (controlled 
for age) between DAO and DAOA protein in all of the brain regions studied except 
for the frontal cortex. In summary, DAO and DAOA expression in the human brain 
are both age and brain region dependent.

DOI: 10.3389/fnana.2017.00031
PMCID: PMC5382383
PMID: 28428746