1. PLoS One. 2017 Apr 20;12(4):e0175642. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0175642. 
eCollection 2017.

Mini-G proteins: Novel tools for studying GPCRs in their active conformation.

Nehmé R(1), Carpenter B(1), Singhal A(1), Strege A(1), Edwards PC(1), White 
CF(2), Du H(2), Grisshammer R(2), Tate CG(1).

Author information:
(1)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(2)Membrane Protein Structure Function Unit, National Institute of Neurological 
Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Department of Health and 
Human Services, Rockville, United States of America.

Mini-G proteins are the engineered GTPase domains of Gα subunits. They couple to 
GPCRs and recapitulate the increase in agonist affinity observed upon coupling 
of a native heterotrimeric G protein. Given the small size and stability of 
mini-G proteins, and their ease of expression and purification, they are ideal 
for biophysical studies of GPCRs in their fully active state. The first mini-G 
protein developed was mini-Gs. Here we extend the family of mini-G proteins to 
include mini-Golf, mini-Gi1, mini-Go1 and the chimeras mini-Gs/q and mini-Gs/i. 
The mini-G proteins were shown to couple to relevant GPCRs and to form stable 
complexes with purified receptors that could be purified by size exclusion 
chromatography. Agonist-bound GPCRs coupled to a mini-G protein showed higher 
thermal stability compared to the agonist-bound receptor alone. Fusion of GFP at 
the N-terminus of mini-G proteins allowed receptor coupling to be monitored by 
fluorescence-detection size exclusion chromatography (FSEC) and, in a separate 
assay, the affinity of mini-G protein binding to detergent-solubilised receptors 
was determined. This work provides the foundation for the development of any 
mini-G protein and, ultimately, for the structure determination of GPCRs in a 
fully active state.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0175642
PMCID: PMC5398546
PMID: 28426733 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: CGT is a consultant, 
shareholder and member of the Scientific Advisory Board of Heptares 
Therapeutics. This does not alter our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing 
data and materials. BC was also funded by a grant from Heptares Therapeutics.