1. Epilepsia. 2017 Jun;58(6):1102-1111. doi: 10.1111/epi.13750. Epub 2017 Apr 27.

Plasma cytokines associated with febrile status epilepticus in children: A 
potential biomarker for acute hippocampal injury.

Gallentine WB(1), Shinnar S(2), Hesdorffer DC(3), Epstein L(4), Nordli DR Jr(5), 
Lewis DV(1), Frank LM(6), Seinfeld S(7), Shinnar RC(2), Cornett K(1), Liu B(3), 
Moshé SL(2), Sun S(8); FEBSTAT Investigator Team.

Collaborators: Bello J, Gomes W, Hannigan J, Katz S, Mancini A, Masur D, Weiss 
E, Chan S, Bonner M, MacFall J, Provenzale J, Song A, Voyvodic J, Xu Y, Andy J, 
Conklin T, Grasso S, Powers CS, Kushner D, Landers S, Van de Water V, Bush BJ, 
Davis LL, Deng X, Rogers C, Sabo CS, Curran J, Kim A, Rinaldi J, Bagiella E, 
Brazemore T, Culbert J, O'Hara K, Snow J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics (Neurology), Duke Children's Hospital, Durham, North 
Carolina, U.S.A.
(2)Departments of Neurology and Pediatrics, Montefiore Medical Center, Albert 
Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, U.S.A.
(3)Department of Epidemiology and GH Sergievsky Center, Columbia University, New 
York, New York, U.S.A.
(4)Department of Neurology, Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of 
Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, U.S.A.
(5)Department of Pediatrics (Neurology), Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Los 
Angeles, California, U.S.A.
(6)Department of Neurology, Children's Hospital of The King's Daughters and 
Eastern Virginia Medical School, Norfolk, Virginia, U.S.A.
(7)Department of Neurology, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, 
Virginia, U.S.A.
(8)Department of Biostatistics and International Epilepsy Consortium, Virginia 
Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia, U.S.A.

OBJECTIVE: Our aim was to explore the association between plasma cytokines and 
febrile status epilepticus (FSE) in children, as well as their potential as 
biomarkers of acute hippocampal injury.
METHODS: Analysis was performed on residual samples of children with FSE 
(n = 33) as part of the Consequences of Prolonged Febrile Seizures in Childhood 
study (FEBSTAT) and compared to children with fever (n = 17). Magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) was obtained as part of FEBSTAT within 72 h of FSE. Cytokine 
levels and ratios of antiinflammatory versus proinflammatory cytokines in 
children with and without hippocampal T2 hyperintensity were assessed as 
biomarkers of acute hippocampal injury after FSE.
RESULTS: Levels of interleukin (IL)-8 and epidermal growth factor (EGF) were 
significantly elevated after FSE in comparison to controls. IL-1β levels trended 
higher and IL-1RA trended lower following FSE, but did not reach statistical 
significance. Children with FSE were found to have significantly lower ratios of 
IL-1RA/IL-1β and IL-1RA/IL-8. Specific levels of any one individual cytokine 
were not associated with FSE. However, lower ratios of IL-1RA/IL-1β, 
IL-1RA/1L-6, and IL-1RA/ IL-8 were all associated with FSE. IL-6 and IL-8 levels 
were significantly higher and ratios of IL-1RA/IL-6 and IL-1RA/IL-8 were 
significantly lower in children with T2 hippocampal hyperintensity on MRI after 
FSE in comparison to those without hippocampal signal abnormalities. Neither 
individual cytokine levels nor ratios of IL-1RA/IL-1β or IL-1RA/IL-8 were 
predictive of MRI changes. However, a lower ratio of IL-1RA/IL-6 was strongly 
predictive (odds ratio [OR] 21.5, 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.17-393) of 
hippocampal T2 hyperintensity after FSE.
SIGNIFICANCE: Our data support involvement of the IL-1 cytokine system, IL-6, 
and IL-8 in FSE in children. The identification of the IL-1RA/IL-6 ratio as a 
potential biomarker of acute hippocampal injury following FSE is the most 
significant finding. If replicated in another study, the IL-1RA/IL-6 ratio could 
represent a serologic biomarker that offers rapid identification of patients at 
risk for ultimately developing mesial temporal lobe epilepsy (MTLE).

Wiley Periodicals, Inc. © 2017 International League Against Epilepsy.

DOI: 10.1111/epi.13750
PMCID: PMC5482499
PMID: 28448686 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: The authors report no relevant 
conflict of interest. The authors confirm that they have read the journal’s 
position on issues involved in ethical publication and affirm that this report 
is consistent with those guidelines. None of the authors have any conflict of 
interest to disclose.