1. Elife. 2017 May 2;6:e21374. doi: 10.7554/eLife.21374.

PDE2A2 regulates mitochondria morphology and apoptotic cell death via local 
modulation of cAMP/PKA signalling.

Monterisi S(1)(2), Lobo MJ(1)(2), Livie C(3), Castle JC(1)(2), Weinberger 
M(1)(2), Baillie G(4), Surdo NC(1)(2), Musheshe N(5), Stangherlin A(3), Gottlieb 
E(6), Maizels R(1)(2), Bortolozzi M(7)(8), Micaroni M(9), Zaccolo M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
United Kingdom.
(2)BHF Centre of Research Excellence, University of Oxford, Oxford, United 
Kingdom.
(3)Institute of Neuroscioence and Psychology, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, 
United Kingdom.
(4)Institute of Cardiovascular and Medical Science, University of Glasgow, 
Glasgow, United Kingdom.
(5)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, University of Groningen, Groningen, The 
Netherlands.
(6)Beatson Institute, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom.
(7)Department of Physics and Astronomy "G. Galilei", University of Padova, 
Padova, Italy.
(8)Venetian Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Padova, Padova, 
Italy.
(9)Swedish National Centre for Cellular Imaging, Sahlgrenska Academy, University 
of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.

cAMP/PKA signalling is compartmentalised with tight spatial and temporal control 
of signal propagation underpinning specificity of response. The cAMP-degrading 
enzymes, phosphodiesterases (PDEs), localise to specific subcellular domains 
within which they control local cAMP levels and are key regulators of signal 
compartmentalisation. Several components of the cAMP/PKA cascade are located to 
different mitochondrial sub-compartments, suggesting the presence of multiple 
cAMP/PKA signalling domains within the organelle. The function and regulation of 
these domains remain largely unknown. Here, we describe a novel cAMP/PKA 
signalling domain localised at mitochondrial membranes and regulated by PDE2A2. 
Using pharmacological and genetic approaches combined with real-time FRET 
imaging and high resolution microscopy, we demonstrate that in rat cardiac 
myocytes and other cell types mitochondrial PDE2A2 regulates local cAMP levels 
and PKA-dependent phosphorylation of Drp1. We further demonstrate that 
inhibition of PDE2A, by enhancing the hormone-dependent cAMP response locally, 
affects mitochondria dynamics and protects from apoptotic cell death.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.21374
PMCID: PMC5423767
PMID: 28463107 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that no competing interests 
exist.