1. Front Mol Neurosci. 2017 Apr 19;10:110. doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2017.00110. 
eCollection 2017.

Integrative Analysis of Brain Region-specific Shank3 Interactomes for 
Understanding the Heterogeneity of Neuronal Pathophysiology Related to SHANK3 
Mutations.

Lee Y(1)(2), Kang H(3), Lee B(1), Zhang Y(1)(2), Kim Y(1), Kim S(1)(2), Kim 
WK(1)(2), Han K(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, College of Medicine, Korea UniversitySeoul, South 
Korea.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine, Korea 
UniversitySeoul, South Korea.
(3)HPC-enabled Convergence Technology Research Division, Korea Institute of 
Science and Technology InformationDaejeon, South Korea.

Recent molecular genetic studies have identified 100s of risk genes for various 
neurodevelopmental and neuropsychiatric disorders. As the number of risk genes 
increases, it is becoming clear that different mutations of a single gene could 
cause different types of disorders. One of the best examples of such a gene is 
SHANK3, which encodes a core scaffold protein of the neuronal excitatory 
post-synapse. Deletions, duplications, and point mutations of SHANK3 are 
associated with autism spectrum disorders, intellectual disability, 
schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. 
Nevertheless, how the different mutations of SHANK3 can lead to such phenotypic 
diversity remains largely unknown. In this study, we investigated whether Shank3 
could form protein complexes in a brain region-specific manner, which might 
contribute to the heterogeneity of neuronal pathophysiology caused by SHANK3 
mutations. To test this, we generated a medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) Shank3 
in vivo interactome consisting of 211 proteins, and compared this protein list 
with a Shank3 interactome previously generated from mixed hippocampal and 
striatal (HP+STR) tissues. Unexpectedly, we found that only 47 proteins (about 
20%) were common between the two interactomes, while 164 and 208 proteins were 
specifically identified in the mPFC and HP+STR interactomes, respectively. Each 
of the mPFC- and HP+STR-specific Shank3 interactomes represents a highly 
interconnected network. Upon comparing the brain region-enriched proteomes, we 
found that the large difference between the mPFC and HP+STR Shank3 interactomes 
could not be explained by differential protein expression profiles among the 
brain regions. Importantly, bioinformatic pathway analysis revealed that the 
representative biological functions of the mPFC- and HP+STR-specific Shank3 
interactomes were different, suggesting that these interactors could mediate the 
brain region-specific functions of Shank3. Meanwhile, the same analysis on the 
common Shank3 interactors, including Homer and GKAP/SAPAP proteins, suggested 
that they could mainly function as scaffolding proteins at the post-synaptic 
density. Lastly, we found that the mPFC- and HP+STR-specific Shank3 interactomes 
contained a significant number of proteins associated with neurodevelopmental 
and neuropsychiatric disorders. These results suggest that Shank3 can form 
protein complexes in a brain region-specific manner, which might contribute to 
the pathophysiological and phenotypic diversity of disorders related to SHANK3 
mutations.

DOI: 10.3389/fnmol.2017.00110
PMCID: PMC5395616
PMID: 28469556