1. PLoS One. 2017 May 11;12(5):e0174345. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0174345. 
eCollection 2017.

Identification of the potentiating mutations and synergistic epistasis that 
enabled the evolution of inter-species cooperation.

Douglas SM(1)(2), Chubiz LM(2)(3), Harcombe WR(2)(4), Marx CJ(2)(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, United States of America.
(2)Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(3)Department of Biology, University of Missouri-St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri, 
United States of America.
(4)Department of Ecology, Evolution, and Behavior, University of Minnesota, St. 
Paul, Minnesota, United States of America.
(5)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Idaho, Moscow, Idaho, United 
States of America.
(6)Institute for Bioinformatics and Evolutionary Studies, University of Idaho, 
Moscow, Idaho, United States of America.
(7)Center for Modeling Complex Interactions, University of Idaho, Moscow, Idaho, 
United States of America.

Microbes often engage in cooperation through releasing biosynthetic compounds 
required by other species to grow. Given that production of costly biosynthetic 
metabolites is generally subjected to multiple layers of negative feedback, 
single mutations may frequently be insufficient to generate cooperative 
phenotypes. Synergistic epistatic interactions between multiple coordinated 
changes may thus often underlie the evolution of cooperation through 
overproduction of metabolites. To test the importance of synergistic mutations 
in cooperation we used an engineered bacterial consortium of an Escherichia coli 
methionine auxotroph and Salmonella enterica. S. enterica relies on carbon 
by-products from E. coli if lactose is the only carbon source. Directly 
selecting wild-type S. enterica in an environment that favored cooperation 
through secretion of methionine only once led to a methionine producer, and this 
producer both took a long time to emerge and was not very effective at 
cooperating. On the other hand, when an initial selection for resistance of S. 
enterica to a toxic methionine analog, ethionine, was used, subsequent selection 
for cooperation with E. coli was rapid, and the resulting double mutants were 
much more effective at cooperation. We found that potentiating mutations in metJ 
increase expression of metA, which encodes the first step of methionine 
biosynthesis. This increase in expression is required for the previously 
identified actualizing mutations in metA to generate cooperation. This work 
highlights that where biosynthesis of metabolites involves multiple layers of 
regulation, significant secretion of those metabolites may require multiple 
mutations, thereby constraining the evolution of cooperation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0174345
PMCID: PMC5426591
PMID: 28493869 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.