1. J Nephropathol. 2017 Mar;6(2):90-96. doi: 10.15171/jnp.2017.15. Epub 2016 Oct 
22.

Autophagy in kidney transplants of sirolimus treated recipients.

Bhayana S(1), Baisantry A(1)(2), Kraemer TD(1), Wrede C(3)(4), Hegermann 
J(3)(4), Bräsen JH(5), Bockmeyer C(5), Ulrich Becker J(5), Ochs M(3)(4), Gwinner 
W(1), Haller H(1), Melk A(2), Schmitt R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology and Hypertension, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, 
Germany.
(2)Department of Paediatric Nephrology and Gastroenterology, Hannover Medical 
School, Hannover, Germany.
(3)Institute of Functional and Applied Anatomy, Hannover Medical School, 
Hannover, Germany.
(4)REBIRTH Cluster of Excellence, Hannover, Germany.
(5)Institute of Pathology, Medical School Hannover, Hannover, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitors are increasingly 
used as immunosuppressive agents in kidney transplantation. In the experimental 
setting it has been shown that mTOR inhibitors promote autophagy, but the 
concept that this might also occur in transplant patients has not been 
addressed.
OBJECTIVES: This study was designed to investigate the association between mTOR 
inhibition and autophagy in renal transplants under routine clinical conditions.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Protocol transplant biopsies of patients receiving 
sirolimus were compared to biopsies of patients treated without mTOR inhibitor. 
Electron microscopy was used for quantitative stereological analysis of 
autophagosomal volume fractions. Ultrastructural analysis was focused on 
podocytes to avoid cell type bias. Autophagy-related gene products were profiled 
by QPCR from laser assisted microdissected glomeruli and by immunohistochemistry 
for semiquantitative evaluation.
RESULTS: By electron microscopy, we observed a significant > 50% increase in 
podocytic autophagosomal volume fractions in patients treated with sirolimus. 
Evaluation of biopsy material from the same patients using transcriptional 
profiling of laser capture microdissected glomeruli revealed no differences in 
autophagy-related gene expressions. Immunohistochemical evaluation of autophagic 
degradation product p62 was also unaltered whereas a significant increase was 
observed in podocytic LC3 positivity in biopsies of sirolimus treated patients.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate an association of sirolimus treatment and 
autophagosome formation in transplant patients. However, they might reflect 
autophagosomal buildup rather than increased autophagic flux. Further research 
is needed to investigate the potential functional consequences in short- and 
long-term outcome of patients treated with mTOR inhibitors.

DOI: 10.15171/jnp.2017.15
PMCID: PMC5418076
PMID: 28491859