1. Depress Anxiety. 2017 Jul;34(7):632-640. doi: 10.1002/da.22633. Epub 2017 May 
11.

Posttraumatic stress disorder symptom severity is associated with reduced 
default mode network connectivity in individuals with elevated genetic risk for 
psychopathology.

Miller DR(1)(2), Logue MW(1)(3)(4), Wolf EJ(1)(2), Maniates H(1), Robinson 
ME(5)(6)(7), Hayes JP(1)(2)(5), Stone A(8), Schichman S(8), McGlinchey 
RE(9)(7)(10), Milberg WP(9)(7)(10), Miller MW(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)National Center for PTSD, VA Boston Healthcare System, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, 
USA.
(3)Biomedical Genetics, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Department of Biostatistics, Boston University School of Public Health, 
Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Neuroimaging Research for Veterans Center, VA Boston Healthcare System, 
Boston, MA, USA.
(6)Department of Neurology, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, 
USA.
(7)Translational Research Center for TBI and Stress Disorders, VA Boston 
Healthcare System, Boston, MA, USA, USA.
(8)Pharmacogenomics Analysis Laboratory, Research Service, Central Arkansas 
Veterans Healthcare System, Little Rock, AR, USA.
(9)Geriatric Research, Educational, and Clinical Center, VA Boston Healthcare 
System, Boston, MA, USA, USA.
(10)Department of Psychiatry, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Accumulating evidence suggests that posttraumatic stress disorder 
(PTSD) is associated with disrupted default mode network (DMN) connectivity, but 
findings across studies have not been uniform. Individual differences in 
relevant genes may account for some of the reported variability in the 
relationship between DMN connectivity and PTSD. In this study, we investigated 
this possibility using genome-wide association study (GWAS) derived polygenic 
risk scores (PRSs) for relevant psychiatric traits. We hypothesized that the 
association between PTSD and DMN connectivity would be moderated by genetic risk 
for one or more psychiatric traits such that individuals with elevated polygenic 
risk for psychopathology and severe PTSD would exhibit disrupted DMN 
connectivity.
METHODS: Participants were 156 white, non-Hispanic veterans of the wars in Iraq 
and Afghanistan who were genotyped and underwent resting state functional 
magnetic resonance imaging and clinical assessment. PRSs for neuroticism, 
anxiety, major depressive disorder, and cross-disorder risk (based on five 
psychiatric disorders) were calculated using summary statistics from published 
large-scale consortia-based GWASs.
RESULTS: Cross-disorder polygenic risk influenced the relationship between DMN 
connectivity and PTSD symptom severity such that individuals at greater genetic 
risk showed a significant negative association between PTSD symptom severity and 
connectivity between the posterior cingulate cortex and right middle temporal 
gyrus. Polygenic risk for neuroticism, anxiety, and major depressive disorder 
did not influence DMN connectivity directly or through an interaction with PTSD.
CONCLUSIONS: Findings illustrate the potential power of genome-wide PRSs to 
advance understanding of the relationship between PTSD and DMN connectivity, a 
putative neural endophenotype of the disorder.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/da.22633
PMCID: PMC5523965
PMID: 28494120 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest or financial disclosures.