1. PLoS One. 2017 May 16;12(5):e0177649. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0177649. 
eCollection 2017.

ALS skeletal muscle shows enhanced TGF-β signaling, fibrosis and induction of 
fibro/adipogenic progenitor markers.

Gonzalez D(1), Contreras O(1), Rebolledo DL(1), Espinoza JP(1), van Zundert 
B(2), Brandan E(1).

Author information:
(1)Centro de Envejecimiento y Regeneración, CARE Chile UC y Departamento de 
Biología Celular y Molecular, Facultad de Ciencias Biológicas, Pontificia 
Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile.
(2)Centro de Investigaciones Biomédicas, Facultad de Ciencias Biológicas y 
Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Andres Bello, Santiago, Chile.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurodegenerative disease in 
which upper and lower motoneurons degenerate leading to muscle wasting, 
paralysis and eventually death from respiratory failure. Several studies 
indicate that skeletal muscle contributes to disease progression; however the 
molecular mechanisms remain elusive. Fibrosis is a common feature in skeletal 
muscle under chronic damage conditions such as those caused by muscular 
dystrophies or denervation. However, the exact mechanisms of fibrosis induction 
and the cellular bases of this pathological response are unknown. We show that 
extracellular matrix (ECM) components are augmented in skeletal muscles of 
symptomatic hSOD1G93A mice, a widely used murine model of ALS. These mice also 
show increased TGF-β1 mRNA levels, total Smad3 protein levels and p-Smad3 
positive nuclei. Furthermore, platelet-derived growth factor receptor-α 
(PDGFRα), Tcf4 and α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA) levels are augmented in the 
skeletal muscle of symptomatic hSOD1G93A mice. Additionally, the 
fibro/adipogenic progenitors (FAPs), which are the main producers of ECM 
constituents, are also increased in these pathogenic conditions. Therefore, FAPs 
and ECM components are more abundant in symptomatic stages of the disease than 
in pre-symptomatic stages. We present evidence that fibrosis observed in 
skeletal muscle of symptomatic hSOD1G93A mice is accompanied with an induction 
of TGF-β signaling, and also that FAPs might be involved in triggering a 
fibrotic response. Co-localization of p-Smad3 positive cells together with 
PDGFRα was observed in the interstitial cells of skeletal muscles from 
symptomatic hSOD1G93A mice. Finally, the targeting of pro-fibrotic factors such 
as TGF-β, CTGF/CCN2 and platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) signaling pathway 
might be a suitable therapeutic approach to improve muscle function in several 
degenerative diseases.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0177649
PMCID: PMC5433732
PMID: 28520806 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.