1. Neurobiol Aging. 2017 Aug;56:150-158. doi:
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2017.04.018.  Epub 2017 May 3.

Candidate gene analysis for Alzheimer's disease in adults with Down syndrome.

Lee JH(1), Lee AJ(2), Dang LH(3), Pang D(4), Kisselev S(5), Krinsky-McHale 
SJ(4), Zigman WB(4), Luchsinger JA(6), Silverman W(7), Tycko B(5), Clark LN(8), 
Schupf N(9).

Author information:
(1)Sergievsky Center, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, 
New York, NY, USA; Taub Institute, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia 
University, New York, NY, USA; Department of Epidemiology, School of Public 
Health, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA. Electronic address: 
JHL2@columbia.edu.
(2)Sergievsky Center, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, 
New York, NY, USA.
(3)Sergievsky Center, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, 
New York, NY, USA; Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, Columbia 
University, New York, NY, USA.
(4)Department of Psychology, NYS Institute for Basic Research in Developmental 
Disabilities, Staten Island, NY, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology & Cell Biology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, 
Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.
(6)Department of Medicine, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia 
University, New York, NY, USA.
(7)Kennedy Krieger Institute and Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(8)Taub Institute, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New 
York, NY, USA; Department of Pathology & Cell Biology, College of Physicians and 
Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.
(9)Sergievsky Center, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, 
New York, NY, USA; Taub Institute, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia 
University, New York, NY, USA; Department of Epidemiology, School of Public 
Health, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.

Individuals with Down syndrome (DS) overexpress many genes on chromosome 21 due 
to trisomy and have high risk of dementia due to the Alzheimer's disease (AD) 
neuropathology. However, there is a wide range of phenotypic differences (e.g., 
age at onset of AD, amyloid β levels) among adults with DS, suggesting the 
importance of factors that modify risk within this particularly vulnerable 
population, including genotypic variability. Previous genetic studies in the 
general population have identified multiple genes that are associated with AD. 
This study examined the contribution of polymorphisms in these genes to the risk 
of AD in adults with DS ranging from 30 to 78 years of age at study entry (N = 
320). We used multiple logistic regressions to estimate the likelihood of AD 
using single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in candidate genes, adjusting for 
age, sex, race/ethnicity, level of intellectual disability and APOE genotype. 
This study identified multiple SNPs in APP and CST3 that were associated with AD 
at a gene-wise level empirical p-value of 0.05, with odds ratios in the range of 
1.5-2. SNPs in MARK4 were marginally associated with AD. CST3 and MARK4 may 
contribute to our understanding of potential mechanisms where CST3 may 
contribute to the amyloid pathway by inhibiting plaque formation, and MARK4 may 
contribute to the regulation of the transition between stable and dynamic 
microtubules.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2017.04.018
PMCID: PMC5603247
PMID: 28554490 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure statement The authors have no actual 
or potential conflicts of interest.