1. PLoS One. 2017 May 31;12(5):e0178199. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0178199. 
eCollection 2017.

Identification of diagnostic peptide regions that distinguish Zika virus from 
related mosquito-borne Flaviviruses.

Lee AJ(1), Bhattacharya R(1)(2), Scheuermann RH(1)(3)(4), Pickett BE(1).

Author information:
(1)J. Craig Venter Institute, La Jolla, California, United States of America.
(2)Biological and Medical Informatics, San Diego State University, San Diego, 
California, United States of America.
(3)Department of Pathology, University of California, San Diego, California, 
United States of America.
(4)La Jolla Institute for Allergy and Immunology, La Jolla, California, United 
States of America.

Zika virus (ZIKV) is a member of the Flavivirus genus of positive-sense 
single-stranded RNA viruses, which includes Dengue, West Nile, Yellow Fever, and 
other mosquito-borne arboviruses. Infection by ZIKV can be difficult to 
distinguish from infection by other mosquito-borne Flaviviruses due to high 
sequence similarity, serum antibody cross-reactivity, and virus co-circulation 
in endemic areas. Indeed, existing serological methods are not able to 
consistently differentiate ZIKV from other Flaviviruses, which makes it 
extremely difficult to accurately calculate the incidence rate of 
Zika-associated Guillain-Barre in adults, microcephaly in newborns, or 
asymptomatic infections within a geographical area. In order to identify 
Zika-specific peptide regions that could be used as serology reagents, we have 
applied comparative genomics and protein structure analyses to identify amino 
acid residues that distinguish each of 10 Flavivirus species and subtypes from 
each other by calculating the specificity, sensitivity, and surface exposure of 
each residue in relevant target proteins. For ZIKV we identified 104 and 116 
15-mer peptides in the E glycoprotein and NS1 non-structural protein, 
respectively, that contain multiple diagnostic sites and are located in 
surface-exposed regions in the tertiary protein structure. These sensitive, 
specific, and surface-exposed peptide regions should serve as useful reagents 
for seroprevalence studies to better distinguish between prior infections with 
any of these mosquito-borne Flaviviruses. The development of better detection 
methods and diagnostic tools will enable clinicians and public health workers to 
more accurately estimate the true incidence rate of asymptomatic infections, 
neurological syndromes, and birth defects associated with ZIKV infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0178199
PMCID: PMC5451039
PMID: 28562637 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.