1. World J Gastrointest Pathophysiol. 2017 May 15;8(2):77-86. doi: 
10.4291/wjgp.v8.i2.77.

Endoscopic therapy for biliary strictures complicating living donor liver 
transplantation: Factors predicting better outcome.

Rao HB(1), Ahamed H(1), Panicker S(1), Sudhindran S(1), Venu RP(1).

Author information:
(1)Harshavardhan B Rao, Hasim Ahamed, Suprabha Panicker, Rama P Venu, Department 
of Gastroenterology, Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences, Kochi, Kerala 682041, 
India.

AIM: To identify factors predicting outcome of endoscopic therapy in bile duct 
strictures (BDS) post living donor liver transplantation (LDLT).
METHODS: Patients referred with BDS post LDLT, were retrospectively studied. 
Patient demographics, symptoms (Pruritus, Jaundice, cholangitis), intra-op 
variables (cold ischemia time, blood transfusions, number of ducts used, etc.), 
peri-op complications [hepatic artery thrombosis (HAT), bile leak, infections], 
stricture morphology (length, donor and recipient duct diameters) and relevant 
laboratory data both pre- and post-endotherapy were studied. Favourable response 
to endotherapy was defined as symptomatic relief with > 80% reduction in total 
bilirubin/serum gamma glutamyl transferase. Statistical analysis was performed 
using SPSS 20.0.
RESULTS: Forty-one patients were included (age: 8-63 years). All had right lobe 
LDLT with duct-to-duct anastomosis. Twenty patients (48.7%) had favourable 
response to endotherapy. Patients with single duct anastomosis, aggressive stent 
therapy (multiple endoscopic retrograde cholagiography, upsizing of stents, 
dilatation and longer duration of stents) and an initial favourable response to 
endotherapy were independent predictors of good outcome (P < 0.05). Older donor 
age, HAT, multiple ductal anastomosis and persistent bile leak (> 4 wk post LT) 
were found to be significant predictors of poor response on multivariate 
analysis (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Endoscopic therapy with aggressive stent therapy especially in 
patients with single duct-to-duct anastomosis was associated with a better 
outcome. Multiple ductal anastomosis, older donor age, shorter duration of stent 
therapy, early bile leak and HAT were predictors of poor outcome with 
endotherapy in these patients.

DOI: 10.4291/wjgp.v8.i2.77
PMCID: PMC5437505
PMID: 28573070

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: There are no 
conflicts of interest to report.