1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2017 May 18;7:186. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2017.00186.
 eCollection 2017.

RegA Plays a Key Role in Oxygen-Dependent Establishment of Persistence and in 
Isocitrate Lyase Activity, a Critical Determinant of In vivo Brucella suis 
Pathogenicity.

Abdou E(1), Jiménez de Bagüés MP(2), Martínez-Abadía I(1), Ouahrani-Bettache 
S(1), Pantesco V(3), Occhialini A(1), Al Dahouk S(4), Köhler S(1), Jubier-Maurin 
V(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut de Recherche en Infectiologie de Montpellier UMR9004, Centre 
National de la Recherche Scientifique, Université de MontpellierMontpellier, 
France.
(2)Unidad de Tecnología en Producción y Sanidad Animal, Centro de Investigación 
y Tecnología Agroalimentaria, Instituto Agroalimentario de Aragón 
(CITA-Universidad de Zaragoza)Zaragoza, Spain.
(3)Institut de Médecine Régénératrice et Biothérapie-U1183 Institut National de 
la Santé et de la Recherche MédicaleMontpellier, France.
(4)Department of Biological Safety, German Federal Institute for Risk 
AssessmentBerlin, Germany.

For aerobic human pathogens, adaptation to hypoxia is a critical factor for the 
establishment of persistent infections, as oxygen availability is low inside the 
host. The two-component system RegB/A of Brucella suis plays a central role in 
the control of respiratory systems adapted to oxygen deficiency, and in 
persistence in vivo. Using an original "in vitro model of persistence" 
consisting in gradual oxygen depletion, we compared transcriptomes and proteomes 
of wild-type and ΔregA strains to identify the RegA-regulon potentially involved 
in the set-up of persistence. Consecutive to oxygen consumption resulting in 
growth arrest, 12% of the genes in B. suis were potentially controlled directly 
or indirectly by RegA, among which numerous transcriptional regulators were 
up-regulated. In contrast, genes or proteins involved in envelope biogenesis and 
in cellular division were repressed, suggesting a possible role for RegA in the 
set-up of a non-proliferative persistence state. Importantly, the greatest 
number of the RegA-repressed genes and proteins, including aceA encoding the 
functional IsoCitrate Lyase (ICL), were involved in energy production. A 
potential consequence of this RegA impact may be the slowing-down of the central 
metabolism as B. suis progressively enters into persistence. Moreover, ICL is an 
essential determinant of pathogenesis and long-term interactions with the host, 
as demonstrated by the strict dependence of B. suis on ICL activity for 
multiplication and persistence during in vivo infection. RegA regulates gene or 
protein expression of all functional groups, which is why RegA is a key 
regulator of B. suis in adaptation to oxygen depletion. This function may 
contribute to the constraint of bacterial growth, typical of chronic infection. 
Oxygen-dependent activation of two-component systems that control persistence 
regulons, shared by several aerobic human pathogens, has not been studied in 
Brucella sp. before. This work therefore contributes significantly to the 
unraveling of persistence mechanisms in this important zoonotic pathogen.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2017.00186
PMCID: PMC5435760
PMID: 28573107 [Indexed for MEDLINE]