1. Onderstepoort J Vet Res. 2017 May 29;84(1):e1-e6. doi:
10.4102/ojvr.v84i1.1411.

Detection and prevalence of antimicrobial resistance genes in Campylobacter spp. 
isolated from chickens and humans.

Reddy S, Zishiri OT(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, University of KwaZulu-Natal. Zishiri@ukzn.ac.za.

Campylobacter spp. are common pathogenic bacteria in both veterinary and human 
medicine. Infections caused by Campylobacter spp. are usually treated using 
antibiotics. However, the injudicious use of antibiotics has been proven to 
spearhead the emergence of antibiotic resistance. The purpose of this study was 
to detect the prevalence of antibiotic resistance genes in Campylobacter spp. 
isolated from chickens and human clinical cases in South Africa. One hundred and 
sixty one isolates of Campylobacter jejuni and Campylobacter coli were collected 
from chickens and human clinical cases and then screened for the presence of 
antimicrobial resistance genes. We observed a wide distribution of the tetO 
gene, which confers resistance to tetracycline. The gyrA genes that are 
responsible quinolone resistance were also detected. Finally, our study also 
detected the presence of the blaOXA-61, which is associated with ampicillin 
resistance. There was a higher (p < 0.05) prevalence of the studied 
antimicrobial resistance genes in chicken faeces compared with human clinical 
isolates. The tetO gene was the most prevalent gene detected, which was isolated 
at 64% and 68% from human and chicken isolates, respectively. The presence of 
gyrA genes was significantly (p < 0.05) associated with quinolone resistance. In 
conclusion, this study demonstrated the presence of gyrA (235 bp), gyrA (270 
bp), blaOXA-61 and tetO antimicrobial resistance genes in C. jejuni and C. coli 
isolated from chickens and human clinical cases. This indicates that 
Campylobacter spp. have the potential of resistance to a number of antibiotic 
classes.

DOI: 10.4102/ojvr.v84i1.1411
PMCID: PMC6238756
PMID: 28582978 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no financial 
or personal relationships that may have inappropriately influenced them in 
writing this article.