1. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2017 Jun 8;3:17032. doi: 10.1038/nrdp.2017.32.

Severe congenital neutropenias.

Skokowa J(1), Dale DC(2), Touw IP(3), Zeidler C(4), Welte K(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, Oncology, Clinical Immunology, University of 
Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(3)Department of Hematology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(4)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Medical School Hannover, Hannover, 
Germany.
(5)University Children's Hospital, Department of General Pediatrics and 
Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Hoppe-Seyler-Str. 1, Tübingen 72076, Germany.

Severe congenital neutropenias are a heterogeneous group of rare haematological 
diseases characterized by impaired maturation of neutrophil granulocytes. 
Patients with severe congenital neutropenia are prone to recurrent, often 
life-threatening infections beginning in their first months of life. The most 
frequent pathogenic defects are autosomal dominant mutations in ELANE, which 
encodes neutrophil elastase, and autosomal recessive mutations in HAX1, whose 
product contributes to the activation of the granulocyte colony-stimulating 
factor (G-CSF) signalling pathway. The pathophysiological mechanisms of these 
conditions are the object of extensive research and are not fully understood. 
Furthermore, severe congenital neutropenias may predispose to myelodysplastic 
syndromes or acute myeloid leukaemia. Molecular events in the malignant 
progression include acquired mutations in CSF3R (encoding G-CSF receptor) and 
subsequently in other leukaemia-associated genes (such as RUNX1) in a majority 
of patients. Diagnosis is based on clinical manifestations, blood neutrophil 
count, bone marrow examination and genetic and immunological analyses. Daily 
subcutaneous G-CSF administration is the treatment of choice and leads to a 
substantial increase in blood neutrophil count, reduction of infections and 
drastic improvement of quality of life. Haematopoietic stem cell transplantation 
is the alternative treatment. Regular clinical assessments (including yearly 
bone marrow examinations) to monitor treatment course and detect chromosomal 
abnormalities (for example, monosomy 7 and trisomy 21) as well as somatic 
pre-leukaemic mutations are recommended.

DOI: 10.1038/nrdp.2017.32
PMCID: PMC5821468
PMID: 28593997 [Indexed for MEDLINE]