1. Biochemistry. 2017 Jul 11;56(27):3507-3517. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.7b00268. 
Epub 2017 Jun 30.

The Sulfur-Linked Analogue of O-GlcNAc (S-GlcNAc) Is an Enzymatically Stable and 
Reasonable Structural Surrogate for O-GlcNAc at the Peptide and Protein Levels.

De Leon CA, Levine PM, Craven TW(1), Pratt MR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington , Seattle, Washington 
98195, United States.

Synthetic proteins bearing site-specific posttranslational modifications have 
revolutionized our understanding of their biological functions in vitro and in 
vivo. One such modification, O-GlcNAcylation, is the dynamic addition of 
β-N-acetyl glucosamine to the side chains of serine and threonine residues of 
proteins, yet our understanding of the site-specific impact of O-GlcNAcylation 
remains difficult to evaluate in vivo because of the potential for enzymatic 
removal by endogenous O-GlcNAcase (OGA). Thioglycosides are generally perceived 
to be enzymatically stable structural mimics of O-GlcNAc; however, in vitro 
experiments with small-molecule GlcNAc thioglycosides have demonstrated that OGA 
can hydrolyze these linkages, indicating that S-linked β-N-acetyl glucosamine 
(S-GlcNAc) on peptides or proteins may not be completely stable. Here, we first 
develop a robust synthetic route to access an S-GlcNAcylated cysteine building 
block for peptide and protein synthesis. Using this modified amino acid, we 
establish that S-GlcNAc is an enzymatically stable surrogate for O-GlcNAcylation 
in its native protein setting. We also applied nuclear magnetic resonance 
spectroscopy and computational modeling to find that S-GlcNAc is an good 
structural mimic of O-GlcNAc. Finally, we demonstrate that site-specific 
S-GlcNAcylation results in biophysical characteristics that are the same as 
those of O-GlcNAc within the context of the protein α-synuclein. While this 
study is limited in focus to two model systems, these data suggest that S-GlcNAc 
broadly resembles O-GlcNAc and that it is indeed a stable analogue in the 
context of peptides and proteins.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.7b00268
PMCID: PMC5598463
PMID: 28627871 [Indexed for MEDLINE]