1. Cureus. 2017 May 18;9(5):e1258. doi: 10.7759/cureus.1258.

Cardio-Oncology: Cancer Therapy-related Cardiovascular Complications in a 
Molecular Targeted Era: New Concepts and Perspectives.

Hurtado-de-Mendoza D(1), Loaiza-Bonilla A(2), Bonilla-Reyes PA(3), Tinoco G(4), 
Alcorta R(5).

Author information:
(1)University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami Miller 
School of Medicine/Jackson Memorial Hospital, Florida, USA.
(2)Medicine, Hematology and Oncology, Cancer Treatment Centers of America.
(3)Facultad de Medicina, Pontificia Universidad Javeriana.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, The Ohio State University College of 
Medicine.
(5)Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Peruana Cayetano Heredia.

Cardio-oncology is a medical discipline that identifies, prevents, and treats 
the cardiovascular complications related to cancer therapy. Due to the 
remarkable proliferation of new cancer therapies causing cardiovascular 
complications, such as hypertension, heart failure, vascular complications, and 
cardiac arrhythmia, we provide an extensive, comprehensive revision of the most 
up-to-date scientific information available on the cardiovascular complications 
associated with the use of newer, novel chemotherapeutic agents, including their 
reported incidence, suggested pathophysiology, clinical manifestations, 
potential treatment, and prevention. The authors consider this topic to be 
relevant for the clinicians since cardiovascular complications associated with 
the administration of recently approved drugs are relatively underappreciated. 
The purpose of this article is to provide a state-of-the-art review of 
cardiovascular complications associated with the use of newer, novel 
chemotherapeutic agents and targeted therapies, including their reported 
incidence, suggested pathophysiology, clinical manifestations, potential 
treatment, and prevention.  Ongoing efforts are needed to provide a better 
understanding of the frequency, mechanisms of disease, prevention, and treatment 
of cardiovascular complications induced by the newer, novel chemotherapeutic 
agents. Development of a cardio-oncology discipline is warranted in order to 
promote task forces aimed at the creation of oncology patient-centered 
guidelines for the detection, prevention, and treatment of potential 
cardiovascular side effects associated with newer cancer therapies.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.1258
PMCID: PMC5473719
PMID: 28649481

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.