1. Clin Genet. 2018 Jan;93(1):111-118. doi: 10.1111/cge.13089. Epub 2017 Nov 21.

NDUFA9 point mutations cause a variable mitochondrial complex I assembly defect.

Baertling F(1)(2), Sánchez-Caballero L(1), van den Brand MAM(1), Fung CW(3), 
Chan SH(3), Wong VC(3), Hellebrekers DME(4), de Coo IFM(5), Smeitink JAM(1), 
Rodenburg RJT(1), Nijtmans LGJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Radboud Center for Mitochondrial Medicine, Radboud 
University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of General Pediatrics, Neonatology and Pediatric Cardiology, 
University Children's Hospital Düsseldorf, Heinrich Heine University, 
Düsseldorf, Germany.
(3)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital, Li Ka 
Shing Faculty of Medicine, University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
(4)Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht University Medical Centre (MUMC), 
Maastricht, the Netherlands.
(5)Department of Neurology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.

Mitochondrial respiratory chain complex I consists of 44 different subunits and 
contains 3 functional modules: the Q-, the N- and the P-module. NDUFA9 is a 
Q-module subunit required for complex I assembly or stability. However, its role 
in complex I biogenesis has not been studied in patient fibroblasts. So far, a 
single patient carrying an NDUFA9 variant with a severe neonatally fatal 
phenotype has been reported. Via exome sequencing, we identified a novel 
homozygous NDUFA9 missense variant in another patient with a milder phenotype 
including childhood-onset progressive generalized dystonia and axonal peripheral 
neuropathy. We performed complex I assembly analysis using primary skin 
fibroblasts of both patients. Reduced complex I abundance and an accumulation of 
Q-module subassemblies were present in both patients but more pronounced in the 
severe clinical phenotype patient. The latter displayed additional accumulation 
of P-module subassemblies, which was not present in the milder-phenotype 
patient. Lentiviral complementation of both patient fibroblast cell lines with 
wild-type NDUFA9 rescued complex I deficiency and the assembly defects. Our 
report further characterizes the phenotypic spectrum of NDUFA9 deficiency and 
demonstrates that the severity of the clinical phenotype correlates with the 
severity of the effects of the different NDUFA9 variants on complex I assembly.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cge.13089
PMID: 28671271 [Indexed for MEDLINE]