1. Mol Med Rep. 2017 Sep;16(3):3079-3086. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2017.6997. Epub 2017
Jul  15.

Adipose differentiation‑related protein knockdown inhibits vascular smooth 
muscle cell proliferation and migration and attenuates neointima formation.

Zhao H(1), Han T(1), Hong X(1), Sun D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Vascular Surgery, China‑Japan Union Hospital of Jilin 
University, Changchun, Jilin 130033, P.R. China.

Vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) have an important role in atherosclerosis 
development. Evidence has demonstrated that adipose differentiation‑related 
protein (ADRP) is associated with foam cell formation and atherosclerosis 
progression. However, to the best of our knowledge, no previous studies have 
investigated the role of ADRP knockdown in platelet‑derived growth factor 
(PDGF)‑stimulated proliferation and migration of VSMCs in vitro. Furthermore, 
the effect of ADRP knockdown on neointima formation in vivo remains unclear. In 
the present study, primary human aortic VSMCs were incubated with PDGF following 
ADRP small interfering (si)RNA transfection. Cell viability, migration and cell 
cycle distribution were analyzed by MTT, wound healing and Transwell assays and 
flow cytometry, respectively. Extracellular signal‑regulated kinase (ERK), 
phosphorylated (p)‑ERK, Akt, p‑Akt, proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA), 
matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)‑2 and MMP‑9 protein levels were determined by 
western blotting. Apolipoprotein E-/- mice fed an atherogenic diet were injected 
with siADRP or control siRNA twice a week. After 3 weeks of therapy, aortas were 
excised and ADRP mRNA and protein expression was determined. Neointima formation 
was assessed by hematoxylin and eosin staining. The results of the current study 
demonstrated that ADRP knockdown significantly inhibited PDGF‑induced increases 
in VSMC viability, caused G1 phase cell cycle arrest and decreased PCNA 
expression. Knockdown of ADRP inhibited PDGF‑induced migration of VSMCs by 
reducing MMP protein expression and activity. In addition, the present study 
also demonstrated that ADRP knockdown inhibited ERK and Akt signaling pathways 
in response to PDGF. Furthermore, siADRP administration suppressed neointima 
formation in the mouse model. The results of the present study indicate that 
ADRP may be a potential target for the treatment of atherosclerosis.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2017.6997
PMCID: PMC5548019
PMID: 28713961 [Indexed for MEDLINE]