1. PLoS One. 2017 Jul 17;12(7):e0181330. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0181330. 
eCollection 2017.

Dealing with foreign cultural paradigms: A systematic review on intercultural 
challenges of international medical graduates.

Michalski K(1), Farhan N(2), Motschall E(1), Vach W(1), Boeker M(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Medical Biometry and Statistics, Faculty of Medicine and 
Medical Center - University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(2)Freiburg International Academy - University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.

OBJECTIVES: An increasing number of International Medical Graduates (IMG), who 
are defined to be physicians working in a country other than their country of 
origin and training, immigrate to Western countries. In order to ensure safe and 
high-quality patient care, they have to take medical and language tests. This 
systematic review aims to (1) collect all empiric research on intercultural 
communication of IMGs in medical settings, (2) identify and categorize all text 
passages mentioning intercultural issues in the included studies, and (3) 
describe the most commonly reported intercultural areas of communication of 
IMGs.
METHODS: This review was based on the PRISMA-Guidelines for systematic reviews. 
We conducted a broad and systematic electronic literature search for empiric 
research in the following databases: MEDLINE, BIOSIS Citation Index, BIOSIS 
Previews, KCI-Korean Journal Database and SciELO Citation Index. The search 
results were synthesized and analyzed with the aid of coding systems. These 
coding systems were based on textual analysis and derived from the themes and 
topics of the results and discussion sections from the included studies. A 
quality assessment was performed, comparing the studies with their corresponding 
checklist (COREQ or STROBE). Textual results of the studies were extracted and 
categorized.
RESULTS: Among 10,630 search results, 47 studies were identified for analysis. 
31 studies were qualitative, 12 quantitative and 4 studies used mixed methods. 
The quality assessment revealed a low level of quality of the studies in 
general. The following intercultural problems were identified: IMGs were not 
familiar with shared decision-making and lower hierarchies in the health care 
system in general. They had difficulties with patient-centered care, the 
subtleties of the foreign language and with the organizational structures of the 
new health care system. In addition, they described the medical education in 
their home countries as science-oriented, without focusing on psychosocial 
aspects.
CONCLUSION: There is a need for a better training of IMGs on culture-related and 
not culture-related topics in the new workplace country. The topics that emerged 
in this review constitute a basis for developing these courses. Further empiric 
research is needed to describe the findings of this review more precisely and 
should be in accordance with the existing reporting guidelines.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0181330
PMCID: PMC5513557
PMID: 28715467 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.