1. Front Pharmacol. 2017 Jun 30;8:428. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2017.00428. eCollection
 2017.

Stimulation of Adenosine A(2B) Receptor Inhibits Endothelin-1-Induced Cardiac 
Fibroblast Proliferation and α-Smooth Muscle Actin Synthesis Through the 
cAMP/Epac/PI3K/Akt-Signaling Pathway.

Phosri S(1), Arieyawong A(1), Bunrukchai K(1), Parichatikanond W(1), Nishimura 
A(2), Nishida M(2)(3)(4), Mangmool S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Mahidol UniversityBangkok, 
Thailand.
(2)Division of Cardiocirculatory Signaling, Okazaki Institute for Integrative 
Bioscience (National Institute for Physiological Sciences), National Institutes 
of Natural SciencesAichi, Japan.
(3)Department of Translational Pharmaceutical Sciences, Graduate School of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyushu UniversityFukuoka, Japan.
(4)Precursory Research for Embryonic Science and Technology, Japan Science and 
Technology AgencyKawaguchi, Japan.

Background and Purpose: Cardiac fibrosis is characterized by an increase in 
fibroblast proliferation, overproduction of extracellular matrix proteins, and 
the formation of myofibroblast that express α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA). 
Endothelin-1 (ET-1) is involved in the pathogenesis of cardiac fibrosis. 
Overstimulation of endothelin receptors induced cell proliferation, collagen 
synthesis, and α-SMA expression in cardiac fibroblasts. Although adenosine was 
shown to have cardioprotective effects, the molecular mechanisms by which 
adenosine A2 receptor inhibit ET-1-induced fibroblast proliferation and α-SMA 
expression in cardiac fibroblasts are not clearly identified. Experimental 
Approach: This study aimed at evaluating the mechanisms of cardioprotective 
effects of adenosine receptor agonist in rat cardiac fibroblast by measurement 
of cell proliferation, and mRNA and protein levels of α-SMA. Key results: 
Stimulation of adenosine subtype 2B (A2B) receptor resulted in the inhibition of 
ET-1-induced fibroblast proliferation, and a reduction of ET-1-induced α-SMA 
expression that is dependent on cAMP/Epac/PI3K/Akt signaling pathways in cardiac 
fibroblasts. The data in this study confirm a critical role for Epac signaling 
on A2B receptor-mediated inhibition of ET-1-induced cardiac fibrosis via PI3K 
and Akt activation. Conclusion and Implications: This is the first work 
reporting a novel signaling pathway for the inhibition of ET-1-induced cardiac 
fibrosis mediated through the A2B receptor. Thus, A2B receptor agonists 
represent a promising perspective as therapeutic targets for the prevention of 
cardiac fibrosis.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2017.00428
PMCID: PMC5492828
PMID: 28713274