1. Physiol Rep. 2017 Jul;5(14):e13330. doi: 10.14814/phy2.13330.

Maxi-K channel (BK(C)(a)) activity veils the myogenic tone of mesenteric artery 
in rats.

Suh EY(1), Yin MZ(1), Lin H(1), Zhang YH(1), Yoo HY(2), Kim SJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Physiology and of Biomedical Sciences, Seoul National 
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Chung-Ang University Red Cross College of Nursing, Seoul, Korea.
(3)Departments of Physiology and of Biomedical Sciences, Seoul National 
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea sjoonkim@snu.ac.kr.

Arterioles and small arteries change their tone in response to transmural 
pressure changes, called myogenic tone (MT). In comparison to the branches of 
cerebral arteries (CA) showing prominent MT, the third branches of mesenteric 
arteries (MA) with similar diameters show weaker MT Here, we aimed to analyze 
the electrophysiological differences responsible for the weaker MT in MA (MTMA) 
than MT in CA (MTCA). We measured ionic current using patch clamp in isolated MA 
smooth muscle cells (MASMCs) and CA smooth muscle cells (CASMCs) of rats. MT was 
analyzed using video analysis of pressurized small arteries. Quantitative-PCR 
(q-PCR) and immunofluorescence confocal microscopy were used to compare the mRNA 
and protein expression level of big-conductance Ca2+-activated K+ channel (BKCa) 
subunits (Slo1α and Sloβ1). Whole-cell patch clamp study revealed higher density 
of voltage-operated Ca2+ channel current (ICaV) in the MASMCs than in CASMCs. 
Although voltage-gated K+ channel current (IKv) was also higher in MASMCs, 
treatment with Kv inhibitor (4-aminopyridine) did not affect MTMA Interestingly, 
BKCa current density and the frequency of spontaneous transient outward currents 
(STOCs) were consistently higher in MASMCs than in CASMCs. Inside-out patch 
clamp showed that the Ca2+-sensitivity of BKCa is higher in MASMCs than in 
CASMCs. Iberiotoxin, a selective BKCa inhibitor, augmented MTMA by a larger 
extent than MTCA Although q-PCR analysis did not reveal a significant difference 
of mRNAs for Slo1α and Sloβ1, immunofluorescence image suggested higher 
expression of Slo1α in MASMCs than in CASMCs. Despite the large ICaV density, 
the high activities of BKCa including the more frequent STOCs in MASMCs veils 
the potentially strong MTMA.

© 2017 The Authors. Physiological Reports published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. 
on behalf of The Physiological Society and the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.14814/phy2.13330
PMCID: PMC5532478
PMID: 28720714 [Indexed for MEDLINE]