1. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis. 2017 Aug;27(8):739-750. doi: 
10.1016/j.numecd.2017.05.010. Epub 2017 Jun 10.

Novel atherogenic pathways from the differential transcriptome analysis of 
diabetic epicardial adipose tissue.

Camarena V(1), Sant D(1), Mohseni M(2), Salerno T(3), Zaleski ML(2), Wang G(4), 
Iacobellis G(5).

Author information:
(1)John P. Hussman Institute for Human Genomics, Dr. John T. Macdonald 
Foundation Department of Human Genetics, Miami, FL, USA.
(2)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, 
Miami, FL, USA.
(3)Department of Surgery, Division of Thoracic and Cardiac Surgery, University 
of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA.
(4)John P. Hussman Institute for Human Genomics, Dr. John T. Macdonald 
Foundation Department of Human Genetics, Miami, FL, USA. Electronic address: 
gwang@med.miami.edu.
(5)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, 
Miami, FL, USA. Electronic address: giacobellis@med.miami.edu.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: To evaluate the epicardial adipose tissue (EAT) 
transcriptome in comparison to subcutaneous fat (SAT) in coronary artery disease 
(CAD) and type 2 diabetes (T2DM).
METHODS AND RESULTS: SAT and EAT samples were obtained from subjects with T2DM 
and CAD (n = 5) and those without CAD with or without T2DM (=3) undergoing 
elective cardiac surgery. RNA-sequencing analysis was performed in both EAT and 
SAT. Gene enrichment analysis was conducted to identify pathways affected by the 
differentially expressed genes. Changes of top genes were verified by 
quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR), western blot, and immunofluorescence. A total of 
592 genes were differentially expressed in diabetic EAT, whereas there was no 
obvious changes in SAT transcriptome between diabetics and non-diabetics. 
Diabetic EAT was mainly enriched in inflammatory genes, such as Colony 
Stimulating Factor 3 (CSF3), Interleukin-1b (IL-1b), IL-6. KEGG pathway analysis 
confirmed that upregulated genes were involved in inflammatory pathways, such as 
Tumor Necrosis Factor (TNF), Nuclear Factor-κB (NF-κB) and advanced glycation 
end-products-receptor advanced glycation end products (AGE-RAGE). The 
overexpression of inflammatory genes in diabetic EAT was largely correlated with 
upregulated transcription factors such as NF-κB and FOS.
CONCLUSIONS: Diabetic EAT transcriptome is significantly different when compared 
to diabetic SAT and highly enriched with genes involved in innate immune 
response and endothelium, like Pentraxin3 (PTX3) and Endothelial lipase G 
(LIPG). EAT inflammatory genes expression could be induced by upregulated 
transcription factors, mainly NF-kB and FOSL, primarily activated by the 
overexpressed AGE-RAGE signaling. This suggests a unique and novel atherogenic 
pathway in diabetes.

Copyright © 2017 The Italian Society of Diabetology, the Italian Society for the 
Study of Atherosclerosis, the Italian Society of Human Nutrition, and the 
Department of Clinical Medicine and Surgery, Federico II University. Published 
by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.numecd.2017.05.010
PMCID: PMC7540222
PMID: 28739185 [Indexed for MEDLINE]