1. PLoS One. 2017 Jul 25;12(7):e0181942. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0181942. 
eCollection 2017.

Identification of novel antigen candidates for a tuberculosis vaccine in the 
adult zebrafish (Danio rerio).

Myllymäki H(1), Niskanen M(1), Oksanen KE(1), Sherwood E(1), Ahava M(1), Parikka 
M(1)(2), Rämet M(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)BioMediTech Institute and Faculty of Medicine and Life Sciences, University 
of Tampere, Tampere, Finland.
(2)Oral and Maxillofacial Unit, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland.
(3)PEDEGO Research Unit, Medical Research Center Oulu, University of Oulu, Oulu, 
Finland, and Department of Children and Adolescents, Oulu University Hospital, 
Oulu, Finland.

Tuberculosis (TB) remains a major global health challenge and the development of 
a better vaccine takes center stage in fighting the disease. For this purpose, 
animal models that are capable of replicating the course of the disease and are 
suitable for the early-stage screening of vaccine candidates are needed. A 
Mycobacterium marinum infection in adult zebrafish resembles human TB. Here, we 
present a pre-clinical screen for a DNA-based tuberculosis vaccine in the adult 
zebrafish using an M. marinum infection model. We tested 15 antigens 
representing different types of mycobacterial proteins, including the 
Resuscitation Promoting factors (Rpf), PE/PPE protein family members, other 
membrane proteins and metabolic enzymes. The antigens were expressed as GFP 
fusion proteins, facilitating the validation of their expression in vivo. The 
efficiency of the antigens was tested against a low-dose intraperitoneal M. 
marinum infection (≈ 40 colony forming units), which mimics a primary M. 
tuberculosis infection. While none of the antigens was able to completely 
prevent a mycobacterial infection, four of them, namely RpfE, PE5_1, PE31 and 
cdh, led to significantly reduced bacterial burdens at four weeks post 
infection. Immunization with RpfE also improved the survival of the fish against 
a high-dose intraperitoneal injection with M. marinum (≈ 10.000 colony forming 
units), resembling the disseminated form of the disease. This study shows that 
the M. marinum infection model in adult zebrafish is suitable for the 
pre-clinical screening of tuberculosis vaccines and presents RpfE as a potential 
antigen candidate for further studies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0181942
PMCID: PMC5526617
PMID: 28742838 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.