1. BMC Vet Res. 2017 Aug 1;13(1):227. doi: 10.1186/s12917-017-1150-0.

African swine fever virus infection in Classical swine fever subclinically 
infected wild boars.

Cabezón O(1)(2), Muñoz-González S(1)(3), Colom-Cadena A(2), Pérez-Simó M(1)(3), 
Rosell R(1)(3)(4), Lavín S(2), Marco I(2), Fraile L(5), de la Riva PM(6), 
Rodríguez F(1), Domínguez J(6), Ganges L(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)IRTA, Centre de Recerca en Sanitat Animal (CReSA, IRTA-UAB), Campus de la 
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 08193, Bellaterra, Spain.
(2)Servei d'Ecopatologia de Fauna Salvatge, Departament de Medicina i Cirurgia 
Animals, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 08193, Bellaterra, Spain.
(3)OIE Reference Laboratory for Classical Swine Fever, IRTA-CReSA, Campus de la 
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 08193, Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Departament d'Agricultura, Ramaderia, Pesca i Alimentació (DARP), Centre de 
Recerca en Sanitat Animal (CReSA, IRTA-UAB), Campus de la Universitat Autònoma 
de Barcelona, 08193, Bellaterra, Spain.
(5)Departament de Producció Animal, ETSEA, Universidad de Lleida, 25198, Lleida, 
Spain.
(6)Departamento de Biotecnología, Instituto Nacional de Investigación y 
Tecnología Agraria y Alimentaria (INIA), 28040, Madrid, Spain.
(7)IRTA, Centre de Recerca en Sanitat Animal (CReSA, IRTA-UAB), Campus de la 
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 08193, Bellaterra, Spain. 
llilianne.ganges@irta.cat.
(8)OIE Reference Laboratory for Classical Swine Fever, IRTA-CReSA, Campus de la 
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 08193, Barcelona, Spain. 
llilianne.ganges@irta.cat.

BACKGROUND: Recently moderate-virulence classical swine fever virus (CSFV) 
strains have been proven capable of generating postnatal persistent infection 
(PI), defined by the maintenance of viremia and the inability to generate 
CSFV-specific immune responses in animals. These animals also showed a type I 
interferon blockade in the absence of clinical signs. In this study, we assessed 
the infection generated in 7-week-old CSFV PI wild boars after infection with 
the African swine fever virus (ASFV). The wild boars were divided in two groups 
and were infected with ASFV. Group A comprised boars who were CSFV PI in a 
subclinical form and Group B comprised pestivirus-free wild boars. Some relevant 
parameters related to CSFV replication and the immune response of CSFV PI 
animals were studied. Additionally, serum soluble factors such as IFN-α, TNF-α, 
IL-6, IL-10, IFN-γ and sCD163 were analysed before and after ASFV infection to 
assess their role in disease progression.
RESULTS: After ASFV infection, only the CSFV PI wild boars showed progressive 
acute haemorrhagic disease; however, the survival rates following ASFV infection 
was similar in both experimental groups. Notwithstanding, the CSFV RNA load of 
CSFV PI animals remained unaltered over the study; likewise, the ASFV DNA load 
detected after infection was similar between groups. Interestingly, systemic 
type I FN-α and IL-10 levels in sera were almost undetectable in CSFV PI 
animals, yet detectable in Group B, while detectable levels of IFN-γ were found 
in both groups. Finally, the flow cytometry analysis showed an increase in 
myelomonocytic cells (CD172a+) and a decrease in CD4+ T cells in the PBMCs from 
CSFV PI animals after ASFV infection.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results showed that the immune response plays a role in the 
progression of disease in CSFV subclinically infected wild boars after ASFV 
infection, and the immune response comprised the systemic type I interferon 
blockade. ASFV does not produce any interference with CSFV replication, or vice 
versa. ASFV infection could be a trigger factor for the disease progression in 
CSFV PI animals, as their survival after ASFV was similar to that of the 
pestivirus-free ASFV-infected group. This fact suggests a high resistance in 
CSFV PI animals even against a virus like ASFV; this may mean that there are 
relevant implications for CSF control in endemic countries. The diagnosis of 
ASFV and CSFV co-infection in endemic countries cannot be ruled out and need to 
be studied in greater depth.

DOI: 10.1186/s12917-017-1150-0
PMCID: PMC5540480
PMID: 28764692 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL: The care of animals and 
procedures were in accordance with the guidelines of the Good Experimental 
Practices (GEP), under the supervision of the Ethical and Animal Welfare 
Committee of the Autonomous University of Barcelona (UAB), and they were 
approved under number 8804, according to existing national and European 
regulations. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable COMPETING INTERESTS: The 
authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial 
or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of 
interest. The authors and their institutions never received payment or services 
from a third party for any aspect of the submitted work. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: 
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.