1. Front Aging Neurosci. 2017 Jul 19;9:229. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2017.00229. 
eCollection 2017.

Mild Inflammatory Profile without Gliosis in the c-Rel Deficient Mouse Modeling 
a Late-Onset Parkinsonism.

Porrini V(1), Mota M(1), Parrella E(1), Bellucci A(1), Benarese M(1), Faggi 
L(1), Tonin P(2), Spano PF(1)(2), Pizzi M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Pharmacology, Department of Molecular and Translational 
Medicine, University of BresciaBrescia, Italy.
(2)IRCCS, San Camillo HospitalVenice, Italy.

The impact of neuroinflammation and microglial activation to Parkinson's disease 
(PD) progression is still debated. Post-mortem analysis of PD brains has shown 
that neuroinflammation and microgliosis are key features of end-stage disease. 
However, microglia neuroimaging studies and evaluation of cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF) cytokines in PD patients at earlier stages do not support the occurrence 
of a pronounced neuroinflammatory process. PD animal models recapitulating the 
motor and non-motor features of the disease, and the slow and progressive 
neuropathology, can be of great advantage in understanding whether and how 
neuroinflammation associates with the onset of symptoms and neuronal loss. We 
recently described that 18-month-old NF-κB/c-Rel deficient mice (c-rel-/-) 
develop a spontaneous late-onset PD-like phenotype encompassing 
L-DOPA-responsive motor impairment, nigrostriatal neuron degeneration, 
α-synuclein and iron accumulation. To assess whether inflammation and microglial 
activation accompany the onset and the progression of PD-like pathology, we 
investigated the expression of cytokines (interleukin 1 beta (Il1b), interleukin 
6 (Il6)) and microglial/macrophage activation markers (Fc gamma receptor III 
(Fcgr3), mannose receptor 1 (Mrc1), chitinase-like 3 (Ym1), arginase 1 (Arg 1), 
triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2 (Trem2)), together with 
microglial ionized calcium binding adapter molecule 1 (Iba1) and astrocyte glial 
fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) immunolabeling, in the substantia nigra (SN) of 
c-rel-/- mice, at premotor (4- and 13-month-old) and motor phases 
(18-month-old). By quantitative real-time RT-PCR we found increased M2c 
microglial/macrophage markers expression (Mrc1 and Arg1) in 4-month-old c-rel-/- 
mice. M2-type transcription dropped down in 13-month-old c-rel-/- mice. At this 
age, the pro-inflammatory Il1b, but not Il6 or the microglia-macrophage 
M1-polarization marker Fcgr3/CD16, increased when compared to wild-type (wt). 
Furthermore, no significant variation in the transcription of inflammatory and 
microglial/macrophage activation genes was present in 18-month-old c-rel-/- 
mice, that display motor dysfunctions and dopaminergic neuronal loss. 
Immunofluorescence analysis of Iba1-positive cells in the SN revealed no sign of 
overt microglial activation in c-rel-/- mice at all the time-points. 
MRC1-Iba1-positive cells were identified as non-parenchymal macrophages in 
4-month-old c-rel-/- mice. Finally, no sign of astrogliosis was detected in the 
SN of the diverse animal groups. In conclusion, this study supports the presence 
of a mild inflammatory profile without evident signs of gliosis in c-rel-/- mice 
up to 18 months of age. It suggests that symptomatic PD-like phenotype can 
develop in the absence of concomitant severe inflammatory process.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2017.00229
PMCID: PMC5515865
PMID: 28769786