1. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 2017 Aug 1;18(1):325. doi:
10.1186/s12891-017-1682-2.

Objective impairments of gait and balance in adults living with HIV-1 infection: 
a systematic review and meta-analysis of observational studies.

Berner K(1), Morris L(2), Baumeister J(3), Louw Q(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Physiotherapy/Central Analytical Facilities (CAF) 3D Human 
Biomechanics Unit, Department of Rehabilitation & Health Sciences, Faculty of 
Medicine and Health Sciences, Stellenbosch University, PO Box 241, Cape Town, 
8000, South Africa. kberner@sun.ac.za.
(2)Division of Physiotherapy/Central Analytical Facilities (CAF) 3D Human 
Biomechanics Unit, Department of Rehabilitation & Health Sciences, Faculty of 
Medicine and Health Sciences, Stellenbosch University, PO Box 241, Cape Town, 
8000, South Africa.
(3)Exercise & Neuroscience Unit, Institute of Health, Nutrition and Sports 
Sciences, Europa-Universität Flensburg, Auf dem Campus 1, 24943, Flensburg, 
Germany.

BACKGROUND: Gait and balance deficits are reported in adults with HIV infection 
and are associated with reduced quality of life. Current research suggests an 
increased fall-incidence in this population, with fall rates among middle-aged 
adults with HIV approximating that in seronegative elderly populations. Gait and 
postural balance rely on a complex interaction of the motor system, sensory 
control, and cognitive function. However, due to disease progression and 
complications related to ongoing inflammation, these systems may be compromised 
in people with HIV. Consequently, locomotor impairments may result that can 
contribute to higher-than-expected fall rates. The aim of this review was to 
synthesize the evidence regarding objective gait and balance impairments in 
adults with HIV, and to emphasize those which could contribute to increased fall 
risk.
METHODS: This review followed the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic 
Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines. An electronic search of published 
observational studies was conducted in March 2016. Methodological quality was 
assessed using the NIH Quality Assessment Tool for Observational Cohort and 
Cross-Sectional Studies. Narrative synthesis of gait and balance outcomes was 
performed, and meta-analyses where possible.
RESULTS: Seventeen studies were included, with fair to low methodological 
quality. All studies used clinical tests for gait-assessment. Gait outcomes 
assessed were speed, initiation-time and cadence. No studies assessed kinetics 
or kinematics. Balance was assessed using both instrumented and clinical tests. 
Outcomes were mainly related to center of pressure, postural reflex latencies, 
and timed clinical tests. There is some agreement that adults with HIV walk 
slower and have increased center of pressure excursions and -long loop postural 
reflex latencies, particularly under challenging conditions.
CONCLUSIONS: Gait and balance impairments exist in people with HIV, resembling 
fall-associated parameters in the elderly. Impairments are more pronounced 
during challenging conditions, might be associated with disease severity, are 
not influenced by antiretroviral therapy, and might not be associated with 
peripheral neuropathy. Results should be interpreted cautiously due to overall 
poor methodological quality and heterogeneity. Locomotor impairments in adults 
with HIV are currently insufficiently quantified. Future research involving more 
methodological uniformity is warranted to better understand such impairments and 
to inform clinical decision-making, including fall-prevention strategies, in 
this population.

DOI: 10.1186/s12891-017-1682-2
PMCID: PMC5540197
PMID: 28764704 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: The 
authors declare that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: 
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.