1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2017 Aug;140(2):335-348. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaci.2017.06.003.

The pathophysiology of anaphylaxis.

Reber LL(1), Hernandez JD(2), Galli SJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, Unit of Antibodies in Therapy and Pathology, 
Institut Pasteur, Paris, France; Institut National de la Santé et de la 
Recherche Médicale, Paris, France; Department of Pathology, Stanford University 
School of Medicine, Stanford, Calif; Sean N. Parker Center for Allergy and 
Asthma Research, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, Calif.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Allergy, Immunology and Rheumatology, 
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, Calif.
(3)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, 
Calif; Sean N. Parker Center for Allergy and Asthma Research, Stanford 
University School of Medicine, Stanford, Calif; Department of Microbiology and 
Immunology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, Calif. Electronic 
address: sgalli@stanford.edu.

Anaphylaxis is a severe systemic hypersensitivity reaction that is rapid in 
onset; characterized by life-threatening airway, breathing, and/or circulatory 
problems; and usually associated with skin and mucosal changes. Because it can 
be triggered in some persons by minute amounts of antigen (eg, certain foods or 
single insect stings), anaphylaxis can be considered the most aberrant example 
of an imbalance between the cost and benefit of an immune response. This review 
will describe current understanding of the immunopathogenesis and 
pathophysiology of anaphylaxis, focusing on the roles of IgE and IgG antibodies, 
immune effector cells, and mediators thought to contribute to examples of the 
disorder. Evidence from studies of anaphylaxis in human subjects will be 
discussed, as well as insights gained from analyses of animal models, including 
mice genetically deficient in the antibodies, antibody receptors, effector 
cells, or mediators implicated in anaphylaxis and mice that have been 
"humanized" for some of these elements. We also review possible host factors 
that might influence the occurrence or severity of anaphylaxis. Finally, we will 
speculate about anaphylaxis from an evolutionary perspective and argue that, in 
the context of severe envenomation by arthropods or reptiles, anaphylaxis might 
even provide a survival advantage.

Copyright © 2017 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2017.06.003
PMCID: PMC5657389
PMID: 28780941 [Indexed for MEDLINE]