1. Cell Mol Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2017 Jun 10;4(2):285-297. doi: 
10.1016/j.jcmgh.2017.06.001. eCollection 2017 Sep.

The Microbiome Activates CD4 T-cell-mediated Immunity to Compensate for 
Increased Intestinal Permeability.

Edelblum KL(1)(2), Sharon G(3), Singh G(2)(4), Odenwald MA(2), Sailer A(2), Cao 
S(2), Ravens S(5), Thomsen I(5), El Bissati K(6)(7), McLeod R(6)(7), Dong C(8), 
Gurbuxani S(2), Prinz I(5), Mazmanian SK(3), Turner JR(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Rutgers New Jersey Medical 
School, Newark, New Jersey.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.
(3)Division of Biology and Biological Engineering, California Institute of 
Technology, Pasadena, California.
(4)Departments of Pathology and Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(5)Institute of Immunology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
(6)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Chicago, 
Chicago, Illinois.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.
(8)Institute for Immunology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Despite a prominent association, chronic intestinal barrier 
loss is insufficient to induce disease in human subjects or experimental 
animals. We hypothesized that compensatory mucosal immune activation might 
protect individuals with increased intestinal permeability from disease. We used 
a model in which intestinal barrier loss is triggered by intestinal 
epithelial-specific expression of constitutively active myosin light chain 
kinase (CA-MLCK). Here we asked whether constitutive tight junction barrier loss 
impacts susceptibility to enteric pathogens.
METHODS: Acute or chronic Toxoplasma gondii or Salmonella typhimurium infection 
was assessed in CA-MLCK transgenic or wild-type mice. Germ-free mice or those 
lacking specific immune cell populations were used to investigate the effect of 
microbial-activated immunity on pathogen translocation in the context of 
increased intestinal permeability.
RESULTS: Acute T gondii and S typhimurium translocation across the epithelial 
barrier was reduced in CA-MLCK mice. This protection was due to enhanced mucosal 
immune activation that required CD4+ T cells and interleukin 17A but not 
immunoglobulin A. The protective mucosal immune activation in CA-MLCK mice 
depended on segmented filamentous bacteria (SFB), because protection against 
early S typhimurium invasion was lost in germ-free CA-MLCK mice but could be 
restored by conventionalization with SFB-containing, not SFB-deficient, 
microbiota. In contrast, chronic S typhimurium infection was more severe in 
CA-MLCK mice, suggesting that despite activation of protective mucosal immunity, 
barrier defects ultimately result in enhanced disease progression.
CONCLUSIONS: Increased epithelial tight junction permeability synergizes with 
commensal bacteria to promote intestinal CD4+ T-cell expansion and interleukin 
17A production that limits enteric pathogen invasion.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcmgh.2017.06.001
PMCID: PMC5540699
PMID: 28795125