1. Int J Biol Sci. 2017 Jul 15;13(7):911-922. doi: 10.7150/ijbs.18402.
eCollection  2017.

In Search for Pheromone Receptors: Certain Members of the Odorant Receptor 
Family in the Desert Locust Schistocerca gregaria (Orthoptera: Acrididae) Are 
Co-expressed with SNMP1.

Pregitzer P(1), Jiang X(1), Grosse-Wilde E(2), Breer H(1), Krieger J(3), 
Fleischer J(3).

Author information:
(1)University of Hohenheim, Institute of Physiology (230), Stuttgart, Germany.
(2)Max Planck Institute for Chemical Ecology, Department of Evolutionary 
Neuroethology, Jena, Germany.
(3)Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, Institute of Biology/Zoology, 
Department of Animal Physiology, Halle (Saale), Germany.

Under given environmental conditions, the desert locust (Schistocera gregaria) 
forms destructive migratory swarms of billions of animals, leading to enormous 
crop losses in invaded regions. Swarm formation requires massive reproduction as 
well as aggregation of the animals. Pheromones that are detected via the 
olfactory system have been reported to control both reproductive and aggregation 
behavior. However, the molecular basis of pheromone detection in the antennae of 
Schistocerca gregaria is unknown. As an initial step to disclose pheromone 
receptors, we sequenced the antennal transcriptome of the desert locust. By 
subsequent bioinformatical approaches, 119 distinct nucleotide sequences 
encoding candidate odorant receptors (ORs) were identified. Phylogenetic 
analyses employing the identified ORs from Schistocerca gregaria (SgreORs) and 
OR sequences from the related species Locusta migratoria revealed a group of 
locust ORs positioned close to the root, i.e. at a basal site in a phylogenetic 
tree. Within this particular OR group (termed basal or b-OR group), the locust 
OR sequences were strictly orthologous, a trait reminiscent of pheromone 
receptors from lepidopteran species. In situ hybridization experiments with 
antennal tissue demonstrated expression of b-OR types from Schistocerca gregaria 
in olfactory sensory neurons (OSNs) of either sensilla trichodea or sensilla 
basiconica, both of which have been reported to respond to pheromonal 
substances. More importantly, two-color fluorescent in situ hybridization 
experiments showed that most b-OR types were expressed in cells co-expressing 
the "sensory neuron membrane protein 1" (SNMP1), a marker indicative of 
pheromone-sensitive OSNs in insects. Analyzing the expression of a larger number 
of SgreOR types outside the b-OR group revealed that only a few of them were 
co-expressed with SNMP1. In summary, we have identified several candidate 
pheromone receptors from Schistocerca gregaria that could mediate responses to 
pheromones implicated in controlling reproduction and aggregation behavior.

DOI: 10.7150/ijbs.18402
PMCID: PMC5555108
PMID: 28808423 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interest exists.