1. mBio. 2017 Aug 29;8(4):e00749-17. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00749-17.

Widespread Fosfomycin Resistance in Gram-Negative Bacteria Attributable to the 
Chromosomal fosA Gene.

Ito R(1), Mustapha MM(1)(2), Tomich AD(1), Callaghan JD(3), McElheny CL(1), 
Mettus RT(1), Shanks RMQ(3), Sluis-Cremer N(1)(2), Doi Y(4)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Center for Innovative Antimicrobial Therapy, University of Pittsburgh School 
of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.
(4)Division of Infectious Diseases, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA yod4@pitt.edu.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Fujita Health University, Aichi, Japan.

Fosfomycin is a decades-old antibiotic which is being revisited because of its 
perceived activity against many extensively drug-resistant Gram-negative 
pathogens. FosA proteins are Mn2+ and K+-dependent glutathione S-transferases 
which confer fosfomycin resistance in Gram-negative bacteria by conjugation of 
glutathione to the antibiotic. Plasmid-borne fosA variants have been reported in 
fosfomycin-resistant Escherichia coli strains. However, the prevalence and 
distribution of fosA in other Gram-negative bacteria are not known. We 
systematically surveyed the presence of fosA in Gram-negative bacteria in over 
18,000 published genomes from 18 Gram-negative species and investigated their 
contribution to fosfomycin resistance. We show that FosA homologues are present 
in the majority of genomes in some species (e.g., Klebsiella spp., Enterobacter 
spp., Serratia marcescens, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa), whereas they are largely 
absent in others (e.g., E. coli, Acinetobacter baumannii, and Burkholderia 
cepacia). FosA proteins in different bacterial pathogens are highly divergent, 
but key amino acid residues in the active site are conserved. Chromosomal fosA 
genes conferred high-level fosfomycin resistance when expressed in E. coli, and 
deletion of chromosomal fosA in S. marcescens eliminated fosfomycin resistance. 
Our results indicate that FosA is encoded by clinically relevant Gram-negative 
species and contributes to intrinsic fosfomycin resistance.IMPORTANCE There is a 
critical need to identify alternate approaches to treat infections caused by 
extensively drug-resistant (XDR) Gram-negative bacteria. Fosfomycin is an old 
antibiotic which is routinely used for the treatment of urinary tract 
infections, although there is substantial interest in expanding its use to 
systemic infections caused by XDR Gram-negative bacteria. In this study, we show 
that fosA genes, which encode dimeric Mn2+- and K+-dependent glutathione 
S-transferase, are widely distributed in the genomes of Gram-negative 
bacteria-particularly those belonging to the family Enterobacteriaceae-and 
confer fosfomycin resistance. This finding suggests that chromosomally located 
fosA genes represent a vast reservoir of fosfomycin resistance determinants that 
may be transferred to E. coli Furthermore, they suggest that inhibition of FosA 
activity may provide a viable strategy to potentiate the activity of fosfomycin 
against XDR Gram-negative bacteria.

Copyright © 2017 Ito et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.00749-17
PMCID: PMC5574708
PMID: 28851843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]