1. Indian J Community Med. 2017 Jul-Sep;42(3):167-169. doi: 
10.4103/ijcm.IJCM_334_16.

The Bone Pain Crisis of Sickle Cell Disease and Malaria: Observations from 
Gujarat, India.

Patel J(1), Patel B(2), Serjeant GR(3).

Author information:
(1)Chairman, Vision Medical Foundation for Rural Health and Research, Shishudeep 
Hospital, Bardoli, Gujarat, India.
(2)Secretary, Vision Medical Foundation for Rural Health and Research, 
Shishudeep Hospital, Bardoli, Gujarat, India.
(3)Sickle Cell Trust, Kingston, Jamaica, West Indies.

BACKGROUND: Sickle cell disease is a common problem across central India, but 
its clinical features may differ from that in African populations. There is a 
need to define the features of sickle cell disease in India, and the current 
study addresses some features of the bone pain crisis.
OBJECTIVES: The objective of the study was to describe the epidemiology of the 
bone pain crisis of sickle cell disease in Gujarat and explore the relationship 
with infection by Plasmodium vivax.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This was a prospective review of all admissions in 
patients with sickle cell disease to a private pediatric institution in Bardoli, 
Gujarat, in the year 2015. Hemoglobin electrophoresis of all patients was 
consistent with homozygous sickle cell disease, but family studies indicated 
that at least seven cases had the severe sickle cell-beta + thalassemia presumed 
to be the common IVS1-5G>C mutation. Clinical, hematological, and 
parasitological features were recorded.
RESULTS: There were 914 admissions among 654 patients who had between one and 
seven admissions. The bone pain crisis accounted for 763 (83%) of admissions and 
increased between July and October coinciding with the monsoon period. Blood 
smears were examined for malarial parasites in 811 admissions and were positive 
for P. vivax in 73% patients. There was no evidence that P. vivax infections 
varied with the cause of admission or increased during the monsoon period.
CONCLUSIONS: There was a high prevalence of P. vivax infection in hospital 
admissions of sickle cell patients, but the data did not support an etiological 
role in the bone pain crisis. A trial of malarial prophylaxis might determine 
its effect on the clinical features and outcome of sickle cell disease.

DOI: 10.4103/ijcm.IJCM_334_16
PMCID: PMC5561696
PMID: 28852282

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.