1. J Virol. 2017 Oct 27;91(22):e01182-17. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01182-17. Print 2017
Nov  15.

Lysine 242 within Helix 10 of the Pseudorabies Virus Nuclear Egress Complex 
pUL31 Component Is Critical for Primary Envelopment of Nucleocapsids.

Rönfeldt S(1), Klupp BG(1), Franzke K(2), Mettenleiter TC(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Virology and Cell Biology, Friedrich-Loeffler 
Institut, Greifswald-Insel Riems, Germany.
(2)Institute of Infectology, Friedrich-Loeffler Institut, Greifswald-Insel 
Riems, Germany.
(3)Institute of Molecular Virology and Cell Biology, Friedrich-Loeffler 
Institut, Greifswald-Insel Riems, Germany thomas.mettenleiter@fli.de.

Newly assembled herpesvirus nucleocapsids are translocated from the nucleus to 
the cytosol by a vesicle-mediated process engaging the nuclear membranes. This 
transport is governed by the conserved nuclear egress complex (NEC), consisting 
of the alphaherpesviral pUL34 and pUL31 homologs. The NEC is not only required 
for efficient nuclear egress but also sufficient for vesicle formation from the 
inner nuclear membrane (INM), as well as from synthetic lipid bilayers. The 
recently solved crystal structures for the NECs from different herpesviruses 
revealed molecular details of this membrane deformation and scission machinery 
uncovering the interfaces involved in complex and coat formation. However, the 
interaction domain with the nucleocapsid remained undefined. Since the NEC 
assembles a curved hexagonal coat on the nucleoplasmic side of the INM 
consisting of tightly interwoven pUL31/pUL34 heterodimers arranged in hexamers, 
only the membrane-distal end of the NEC formed by pUL31 residues appears to be 
accessible for interaction with the nucleocapsid cargo. To identify the amino 
acids involved in capsid incorporation, we mutated the corresponding regions in 
the alphaherpesvirus pseudorabies virus (PrV). Site-specifically mutated pUL31 
homologs were tested for localization, interaction with pUL34, and 
complementation of PrV-ΔUL31. We identified a conserved lysine residue at amino 
acid position 242 in PrV pUL31 located in the alpha-helical domain H10 exposed 
on the membrane-distal end of the NEC as a key residue for nucleocapsid 
incorporation into the nascent primary particle.IMPORTANCE Vesicular transport 
through the nuclear envelope is a focus of research but is still not well 
understood. Herpesviruses pioneered this mechanism for translocation of the 
newly assembled nucleocapsid from the nucleus into the cytosol via vesicles 
derived from the inner nuclear membrane which fuse in a well-tuned process with 
the outer nuclear membrane to release their content. The structure of the viral 
nuclear membrane budding and scission machinery has been solved recently, 
providing in-depth molecular details. However, how cargo is incorporated 
remained unclear. We identified a conserved lysine residue in the 
membrane-distal portion of the nuclear egress complex required for capsid uptake 
into inner nuclear membrane-derived vesicles.

Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01182-17
PMCID: PMC5660471
PMID: 28878082