1. Cell Discov. 2017 Aug 8;3:17027. doi: 10.1038/celldisc.2017.27. eCollection 
2017.

PP2A-B' holoenzyme substrate recognition, regulation and role in cytokinesis.

Wu CG(1)(2), Chen H(1), Guo F(1), Yadav VK(3), Mcilwain SJ(4), Rowse M(1), 
Choudhary A(5), Lin Z(6), Li Y(1), Gu T(1), Zheng A(1), Xu Q(6), Lee W(1), Resch 
E(7), Johnson B(1), Day J(1), Ge Y(6), Ong IM(4), Burkard ME(5), Ivarsson Y(3), 
Xing Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, Department of Oncology, University of 
Wisconsin at Madison, School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI, USA.
(2)Biophysics Program, University of Wisconsin at Madison, Madison, WI, USA.
(3)Department of Chemistry-BMC, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(4)Biostatistics and Medical Informatics, Wisconsin Institutes of Medical 
Research, University of Wisconsin at Madison, School of Medicine and Public 
Health, Madison, WI, USA.
(5)Department of Medicine, Hematology/Oncology, UW Carbone Cancer Center, 
University of Wisconsin at Madison, School of Medicine and Public Health, 
Madison, WI, USA.
(6)Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology, Human Proteomic Program, School 
of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI, USA.
(7)Fraunhofer Institute for Molecular Biology and Applied Ecology IME, Project 
Group Translational Medicine and Pharmacology TMP, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.

Protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) is a major Ser/Thr phosphatase; it forms diverse 
heterotrimeric holoenzymes that counteract kinase actions. Using a peptidome 
that tiles the disordered regions of the human proteome, we identified proteins 
containing [LMFI]xx[ILV]xEx motifs that serve as interaction sites for B'-family 
PP2A regulatory subunits and holoenzymes. The B'-binding motifs have important 
roles in substrate recognition and in competitive inhibition of substrate 
binding. With more than 100 novel ligands identified, we confirmed that the 
recently identified LxxIxEx B'α-binding motifs serve as common binding sites for 
B' subunits with minor variations, and that S/T phosphorylation or D/E residues 
at positions 2, 7, 8 and 9 of the motifs reinforce interactions. Hundreds of 
proteins in the human proteome harbor intrinsic or phosphorylation-responsive 
B'-interaction motifs, and localize at distinct cellular organelles, such as 
midbody, predicting kinase-facilitated recruitment of PP2A-B' holoenzymes for 
tight spatiotemporal control of phosphorylation at mitosis and cytokinesis. 
Moroever, Polo-like kinase 1-mediated phosphorylation of Cyk4/RACGAP1, a 
centralspindlin component at the midbody, facilitates binding of both RhoA 
guanine nucleotide exchange factor (epithelial cell transforming sequence 2 
(Ect2)) and PP2A-B' that in turn dephosphorylates Cyk4 and disrupts Ect2 
binding. This feedback signaling loop precisely controls RhoA activation and 
specifies a restricted region for cleavage furrow ingression. Our results 
provide a framework for further investigation of diverse signaling circuits 
formed by PP2A-B' holoenzymes in various cellular processes.

DOI: 10.1038/celldisc.2017.27
PMCID: PMC5586252
PMID: 28884018

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.