1. Cell Mol Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2017 Jul 19;4(3):339-363. doi: 
10.1016/j.jcmgh.2017.07.003. eCollection 2017 Nov.

Hepatitis B Virus Activates Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription 3 
Supporting Hepatocyte Survival and Virus Replication.

Hösel M(1), Quasdorff M(1)(2), Ringelhan M(3)(4), Kashkar H(1)(5), Debey-Pascher 
S(6), Sprinzl MF(3)(7), Bockmann JH(3)(8), Arzberger S(1)(3), Webb D(1), von 
Olshausen G(9), Weber A(10), Schultze JL(6), Büning H(1)(8)(11), Heikenwalder 
M(3)(8)(12), Protzer U(3)(8).

Author information:
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne, University of Cologne, Cologne, 
Germany.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Hospital of 
Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(3)Institute of Virology, Technische Universität München / Helmholtz Zentrum 
München, Munich, Germany.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine II, University Hospital of the Technical 
University of Munich, Munich, Germany.
(5)Institute of Medical Microbiology, Immunology and Hygiene, University 
Hospital of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(6)Institute for Life and Medical Sciences, Genomics and Immunoregulation, 
University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(7)1 Medical Department, University Hospital Mainz, Mainz, Germany.
(8)German Centre for Infection Research, Partner sites Bonn-Cologne, 
Hannover-Braunschweig, Hamburg, and Munich, Germany.
(9)Department of Internal Medicine I, University Hospital of the Technical 
University of Munich, Munich, Germany.
(10)Institute of Surgical Pathology, University Hospital Zürich, Zürich, 
Switzerland.
(11)Institute of Experimental Hematology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, 
Germany.
(12)Department Chronic Inflammation and Cancer, German Cancer Research Center, 
Heidelberg, Germany.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The human hepatitis B virus (HBV) is a major cause of chronic 
hepatitis and hepatocellular carcinoma, but molecular mechanisms driving liver 
disease and carcinogenesis are largely unknown. We therefore studied cellular 
pathways altered by HBV infection.
METHODS: We performed gene expression profiling of primary human hepatocytes 
infected with HBV and proved the results in HBV-replicating cell lines and human 
liver tissue using real-time polymerase chain reaction and Western blotting. 
Activation of signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT3) was 
examined in HBV-replicating human hepatocytes, HBV-replicating mice, and liver 
tissue from HBV-infected individuals using Western blotting, STAT3-luciferase 
reporter assay, and immunohistochemistry. The consequences of STAT3 activation 
on HBV infection and cell survival were studied by chemical inhibition of STAT3 
phosphorylation and small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of STAT3.
RESULTS: Gene expression profiling of HBV-infected primary human hepatocytes 
detected no interferon response, while genes encoding for acute phase and 
antiapoptotic proteins were up-regulated. This gene regulation was confirmed in 
liver tissue samples of patients with chronic HBV infection and in HBV-related 
hepatocellular carcinoma. Pathway analysis revealed activation of STAT3 to be 
the major regulator. Interleukin-6-dependent and -independent activation of 
STAT3 was detected in HBV-replicating hepatocytes in cell culture and in vivo. 
Prevention of STAT3 activation by inhibition of Janus tyrosine kinases as well 
as small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of STAT3-induced apoptosis and 
reduced HBV replication and gene expression.
CONCLUSIONS: HBV activates STAT3 signaling in hepatocytes to foster its own 
replication but also to prevent apoptosis of infected cells. This very likely 
supports HBV-related carcinogenesis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcmgh.2017.07.003
PMCID: PMC5581872
PMID: 28884137