1. mBio. 2017 Sep 12;8(5):e01096-17. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01096-17.

Sirtuin Lipoamidase Activity Is Conserved in Bacteria as a Regulator of 
Metabolic Enzyme Complexes.

Rowland EA(1), Greco TM(1), Snowden CK(1), McCabe AL(1), Silhavy TJ(1), Cristea 
IM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Lewis Thomas Laboratory, Princeton 
University, Princeton, New Jersey, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology, Lewis Thomas Laboratory, Princeton 
University, Princeton, New Jersey, USA icristea@princeton.edu.

Lipoic acid is an essential metabolic cofactor added as a posttranslational 
modification on several multimeric enzyme complexes. These protein complexes, 
evolutionarily conserved from bacteria to humans, are core regulators of 
cellular metabolism. While the multistep enzymatic process of adding lipoyl 
modifications has been well characterized in Escherichia coli, the enzyme 
required for the removal of these lipoyl moieties (i.e., a lipoamidase or 
delipoylase) has not yet been identified. Here, we describe our discovery of 
sirtuins as lipoamidases in bacteria and establish their conserved substrates. 
Specifically, by using a series of knockout, overexpression, biochemical, in 
vitro, proteomic, and functional assays, we determined the substrates of sirtuin 
CobB in E. coli as components of the pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH), 
α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase (KDH), and glycine cleavage (GCV) complexes. In 
vitro assays provided direct evidence for this specific CobB activity and its 
NAD+ dependence, a signature of all sirtuins. By designing a targeted 
quantitative mass spectrometry method, we further measured sirtuin-dependent, 
site-specific lipoylation on these substrates. The biological significance of 
CobB-modulated lipoylation was next established by its inhibition of both PDH 
and KDH activities. By restricting the carbon sources available to E. coli, we 
demonstrated that CobB regulates PDH and KDH under several growth conditions. 
Additionally, we found that SrtN, the sirtuin homolog in Gram-positive 
Bacillus subtilis, can also act as a lipoamidase. By demonstrating the 
evolutionary conservation of lipoamidase activity across sirtuin homologs, along 
with the conservation of common substrates, this work emphasizes the 
significance of protein lipoylation in regulating central metabolic 
processes.IMPORTANCE Here, we demonstrate that sirtuin lipoamidase activity 
exists in both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria and establishing its 
conservation from bacteria to humans. Specifically, we discovered that CobB and 
SrtN act as lipoamidases in E. coli and B. subtilis, respectively. Intriguingly, 
not only is this sirtuin enzymatic activity conserved, but also the lipoylated 
substrates and functions are conserved, as bacterial sirtuins negatively 
regulate the lipoylation levels and activities of PDH and KDH. Considering that 
PDH and KDH regulate two carbon entry points into the tricarboxylic acid cycle, 
our finding highlights lipoylation as a conserved molecular toggle that 
regulates central metabolic pathways. Indeed, our findings from tests in which 
we limited nutrient availability support this. Furthermore, this study 
illustrates how the integration of technologies from different disciplines 
provides avenues to uncover enzymatic activities at the core of cellular 
metabolism regulation.

Copyright © 2017 Rowland et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01096-17
PMCID: PMC5596343
PMID: 28900027 [Indexed for MEDLINE]