1. Ann Indian Acad Neurol. 2017 Jul-Sep;20(3):302-308. doi: 
10.4103/aian.AIAN_129_17.

Detection of Dysferlin Gene Pathogenic Variants in the Indian Population in 
Patients Predicted to have a Dysferlinopathy Using a Blood-based Monocyte Assay 
and Clinical Algorithm: A Model for Accurate and Cost-effective Diagnosis.

Dastur RS(1), Gaitonde PS(1), Kachwala M(1), Nallamilli BRR(2), Ankala A(2), 
Khadilkar SV(3), Atchayaram N(4), Gayathri N(4), Meena AK(5), Rufibach L(6), 
Shira S(6), Hegde M(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Advanced Molecular Diagnostics in Neuromuscular Disorders, 
Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(2)Department of Human Genetics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, 
Georgia, USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, Sir J J Group of Hospitals, Grant Medical College, 
Mumbai, Maharashtra, India.
(4)Department of Neurology, NIMHANS, Bengaluru, Karnataka.
(5)Department of Neurology, Nizam's Institute of Medical Sciences, Hyderabad, 
Telangana, India.
(6)Jain Foundation Inc., Seattle, WA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) is the most common adult-onset 
class of muscular dystrophies in India, but a majority of suspected LGMDs in 
India remain unclassified to the genetic subtype level. The next-generation 
sequencing (NGS)-based approaches have allowed molecular characterization and 
subtype diagnosis in a majority of these patients in India.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: (I) To select probable dysferlinopathy (LGMD2B) cases 
from other LGMD subtypes using two screening methods (i) to determine the status 
of dysferlin protein expression in blood (peripheral blood mononuclear cell) by 
monocyte assay (ii) using a predictive algorithm called automated LGMD 
diagnostic assistant (ALDA) to obtain possible LGMD subtypes based on clinical 
symptoms. (II) Identification of gene pathogenic variants by NGS for 34 genes 
associated with LGMD or LGMD like muscular dystrophies, in cases showing: 
absence of dysferlin protein by the monocyte assay and/or a typical 
dysferlinopathy phenotype, with medium to high predictive scores using the ALDA 
tool.
RESULTS: Out of the 125 patients screened by NGS, 96 were confirmed with two 
dysferlin variants, of which 84 were homozygous. Single dysferlin pathogenic 
variants were seen in 4 patients, whereas 25 showed no variants in the dysferlin 
gene.
CONCLUSION: In this study, 98.2% of patients with absence of the dysferlin 
protein showed one or more variants in the dysferlin gene and hence has a high 
predictive significance in diagnosing dysferlinopathies. However, collection of 
blood samples from all over India for protein analysis is expensive. Our 
analysis shows that the use of the "ALDA tool" could be a cost-effective 
alternative method. Identification of dysferlin pathogenic variants by NGS is 
the ultimate method for diagnosing dysferlinopathies though follow-up with the 
monocyte assay can be useful to understand the phenotype in relation to the 
dysferlin protein expression and also be a useful biomarker for future clinical 
trials.

DOI: 10.4103/aian.AIAN_129_17
PMCID: PMC5586129
PMID: 28904466

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.