1. PLoS One. 2017 Sep 25;12(9):e0184040. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0184040. 
eCollection 2017.

Proteasome impairment by α-synuclein.

Zondler L(1), Kostka M(2), Garidel P(2), Heinzelmann U(2), Hengerer B(2), Mayer 
B(3), Weishaupt JH(1), Gillardon F(2), Danzer KM(1).

Author information:
(1)Neurology Department, Ulm University, Ulm, Germany.
(2)Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH Co.KG, Biberach an der Riß, Germany.
(3)Institute for Epidemiology and Medical Biometry, Ulm University, Ulm, 
Germany.

Parkinson's disease (PD) is the second most prevalent neurodegenerative disorder 
worldwide and characterized by the loss of dopaminergic neurons in the patients' 
midbrains. Both the presence of the protein α-synuclein in intracellular protein 
aggregates in surviving neurons and the genetic linking of the α-synuclein 
encoding gene point towards a major role of α-synuclein in PD etiology. The 
exact pathogenic mechanisms of PD development are not entirely described to 
date, neither is the specific role of α-synuclein in this context. Previous 
studies indicate that one aspect of α-synuclein-related cellular toxicity might 
be direct proteasome impairment. The 20/26S proteasomal machinery is an 
important instrument of intracellular protein degradation. Thus, direct 
proteasome impairment by α-synuclein might explain or at least contribute to the 
formation of intracellular protein aggregates. Therefore this study investigates 
direct proteasomal impairment by α-synuclein both in vitro using recombinant 
α-synuclein and isolated proteasomes as well as in living cells. Our experiments 
demonstrate that the impairment of proteasome activity by α-synuclein is highly 
dependent upon the cellular background and origin. We show that recombinant 
α-synuclein oligomers and fibrils scarcely affect 20S proteasome function in 
vitro, neither does transient α-synuclein expression in U2OS ps 2042 
(Ubi(G76V)-GFP) cells. However, stable expression of both wild-type and mutant 
α-synuclein in dopaminergic SH-SY5Y and PC12 cells results in a prominent 
impairment of the chymotrypsin-like 20S/26S proteasomal protein cleavage. Thus, 
our results support the idea that α-synuclein in a specific cellular 
environment, potentially present in dopaminergic cells, cannot be processed by 
the proteasome and thus contributes to a selective vulnerability of dopaminergic 
cells to α-synuclein pathology.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0184040
PMCID: PMC5612461
PMID: 28945746 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors declare that no 
competing interests exist. The commercial affiliation with Boehringer Ingelheim 
Pharma GmbH & Co. KG does not alter the authors’ adherence to PLOS ONE policies 
on sharing data and materials. None of the authors currently serve as editorial 
board members to PLOS ONE, have acted as an expert witness in relevant legal 
proceedings or currently sit on a committee for an organization that might 
benefit from the publication of this data.