1. Nutrients. 2017 Sep 28;9(10):1076. doi: 10.3390/nu9101076.

Precision Nutrition for Targeting Lipid Metabolism in Colorectal Cancer.

Aguirre-Portolés C(1), Fernández LP(2), Ramírez de Molina A(3).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Oncology and Nutritional Genomics of Cancer Group, IMDEA Food 
Institute, CEI UAM + CSIC, Carretera de Cantoblanco 8, E-28049 Madrid, Spain. 
cristina.aguirre@imdea.org.
(2)Molecular Oncology and Nutritional Genomics of Cancer Group, IMDEA Food 
Institute, CEI UAM + CSIC, Carretera de Cantoblanco 8, E-28049 Madrid, Spain. 
lara.fernandez@imdea.org.
(3)Molecular Oncology and Nutritional Genomics of Cancer Group, IMDEA Food 
Institute, CEI UAM + CSIC, Carretera de Cantoblanco 8, E-28049 Madrid, Spain. 
ana.ramirez@imdea.org.

Cancer is a multistage and multifactorial condition with genetic and 
environmental factors modulating tumorogenesis and disease progression. 
Nevertheless, cancer is preventable, as one third of cancer deaths could be 
avoided by modifying key risk factors. Nutrients can directly affect fundamental 
cellular processes and are considered among the most important risk factors in 
colorectal cancer (CRC). Red and processed meat, poultry consumption, fiber, and 
folate are the best-known diet components that interact with colorectal cancer 
susceptibility. In addition, the direct association of an unhealthy diet with 
obesity and dysbiosis opens new routes in the understanding of how daily diet 
nutrients could influence cancer prognosis. In the "omics" era, traditional 
nutrition has been naturally evolved to precision nutrition where technical 
developments have contributed to a more accurate discipline. In this sense, 
genomic and transcriptomic studies have been extensively used in precision 
nutrition approaches. However, the relation between CRC carcinogenesis and 
nutrition factors is more complex than originally expected. Together with 
classical diet-nutrition-related genes, nowadays, lipid-metabolism-related genes 
have acquired relevant interest in precision nutrition studies. Lipids regulate 
very diverse cellular processes from ATP synthesis and the activation of 
essential cell-signaling pathways to membrane organization and plasticity. 
Therefore, a wide range of tumorogenic steps can be influenced by lipid 
metabolism, both in primary tumours and distal metastasis. The extent to which 
genetic variants, together with the intake of specific dietary components, 
affect the risk of CRC is currently under investigation, and new therapeutic or 
preventive applications must be explored in CRC models. In this review, we will 
go in depth into the study of co-occurring events, which orchestrate CRC 
tumorogenesis and are essential for the evolution of precision nutrition 
paradigms. Likewise, we will discuss the application of precision nutrition 
approaches to target lipid metabolism in CRC.

DOI: 10.3390/nu9101076
PMCID: PMC5691693
PMID: 28956850 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.