1. Oncotarget. 2017 Aug 7;8(40):68305-68316. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.20054. 
eCollection 2017 Sep 15.

Regorafenib in combination with silybin as a novel potential strategy for the 
treatment of metastatic colorectal cancer.

Belli V(1), Sforza V(1), Cardone C(1), Martinelli E(1), Barra G(2), Matrone 
N(1), Napolitano S(1), Morgillo F(1), Tuccillo C(3), Federico A(3), Dallio M(3), 
Loguercio C(3), Gravina AG(3), De Palma R(2), Ciardiello F(1), Troiani T(1).

Author information:
(1)Oncologia Medica, Dipartimento di Internistica Clinica e Sperimentale "F. 
Magrassi", Università degli Studi della Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", Napoli, 
Italy.
(2)Medicina Interna, Dipartimento di Internistica Clinica e Sperimentale "F. 
Magrassi", Università degli Studi della Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", Napoli, 
Italy.
(3)Gastroenterologia, Dipartimento di Internistica Clinica e Sperimentale "F. 
Magrassi", Università degli Studi della Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", Napoli, 
Italy.

PURPOSE: Regorafenib, an oral multikinase inhibitor, has demonstrated survival 
benefit in metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC) patients that have progressed 
after all standard therapies. However, novel strategies to improve tolerability 
and enhance anti-cancer efficacy are needed.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We have evaluated in vitro the effects of regorafenib in 
combination with silybin, a biologically active component extracted from the 
seeds of Silybum marianum, in a panel of human colon cancer cells. Furthermore, 
we have prospectively treated a cohort of 22 refractory mCRC patients with 
regorafenib plus silybin.
RESULTS: Treatment with regorafenib determined a dose-dependent growth 
inhibition whereas treatment with silybin had no anti-proliferative effects 
among all cancer cells tested. The combined treatment with regorafenib and 
silybin induced synergistic anti-proliferative and apoptotic effects by blocking 
PI3K/AKT/mTOR intracellular pathway. Moreover, combined treatment with 
regorafenib and silybin increased the production of reactive oxygen species 
levels within cells. In an exploratory proof of concept clinical study in a 
cohort of 22 mCRC patients after failure of all standard therapies, the clinical 
activity of regorafenib in combination with silybin was assessed. A median 
progression-free survival of 10.0 months and a median overall survival of 17.6 
months were observed in these patients. These results suggest that the combined 
treatment potentially increases the clinical efficacy of regorafenib. Moreover, 
due to its anti-oxidative properties, silybin could protect patients from 
drug-induced liver damages, allowing to continue an effective anti-cancer 
therapy.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study suggests that silybin in combination with 
regorafenib is a promising strategy for treatment of metastatic colorectal 
patients.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.20054
PMCID: PMC5620258
PMID: 28978118

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST Authors have no conflicts 
of interest to disclose.