1. Neurobiol Aging. 2018 Jan;61:52-65. doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2017.09.016.
 Epub 2017 Sep 22.

Intercellular transfer of pathogenic α-synuclein by extracellular vesicles is 
induced by the lipid peroxidation product 4-hydroxynonenal.

Zhang S(1), Eitan E(1), Wu TY(1), Mattson MP(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neurosciences, National Institute on Aging Intramural Research 
Program, BRC 5C214, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(2)Laboratory of Neurosciences, National Institute on Aging Intramural Research 
Program, BRC 5C214, Baltimore, MD, USA; Department of Neuroscience, Johns 
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA. Electronic address: 
mark.mattson@nih.gov.

Parkinson's disease (PD) is characterized by accumulations of toxic α-synuclein 
aggregates in vulnerable neuronal populations in the brainstem, midbrain, and 
cerebral cortex. Recent findings suggest that α-synuclein pathology can be 
propagated transneuronally, but the underlying molecular mechanisms are unknown. 
Advances in the genetics of rare early-onset familial PD indicate that increased 
production and/or reduced autophagic clearance of α-synuclein can cause PD. The 
cause of the most common late-onset PD is unclear, but may involve metabolic 
compromise and oxidative stress upstream of α-synuclein accumulation. As 
evidence, the lipid peroxidation product 4-hydroxynonenal (HNE) is elevated in 
the brain during normal aging and moreso in brain regions afflicted with 
α-synuclein pathology. Here, we report that HNE increases aggregation of 
endogenous α-synuclein in primary neurons and triggers the secretion of 
extracellular vesicles (EVs) containing cytotoxic oligomeric α-synuclein 
species. EVs released from HNE-treated neurons are internalized by healthy 
neurons which as a consequence degenerate. Levels of endogenously generated HNE 
are elevated in cultured cells overexpressing human α-synuclein, and EVs 
released from those cells are toxic to neurons. The EV-associated α-synuclein is 
located both inside the vesicles and on their surface, where it plays a role in 
EV internalization by neurons. On internalization, EVs harboring pathogenic 
α-synuclein are transported both anterogradely and retrogradely within axons. 
Focal injection of EVs containing α-synuclein into the striatum of wild-type 
mice results in spread of synuclein pathology to anatomically connected brain 
regions. Our findings suggest a scenario for late-onset PD in which lipid 
peroxidation promotes intracellular accumulation and then extrusion of EVs 
containing toxic α-synuclein species; the EVs are then internalized by adjacent 
neurons, so propagating the neurodegenerative process.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2017.09.016
PMCID: PMC5705257
PMID: 29035751 [Indexed for MEDLINE]