1. mBio. 2017 Oct 17;8(5):e01464-17. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01464-17.

A Single Dual-Function Enzyme Controls the Production of Inflammatory NOD 
Agonist Peptidoglycan Fragments by Neisseria gonorrhoeae.

Lenz JD(1), Hackett KT(1), Dillard JP(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of 
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, USA.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of 
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, USA jpdillard@wisc.edu.

Neisseria gonorrhoeae gonococcus (GC) is a Gram-negative betaproteobacterium and 
causative agent of the sexually transmitted infection gonorrhea. During growth, 
GC releases lipooligosaccharide (LOS) and peptidoglycan (PG) fragments, which 
contribute significantly to the inflammatory damage observed during human 
infection. In ascending infection of human Fallopian tubes, inflammation leads 
to increased risk of ectopic pregnancy, pelvic inflammatory disease, and 
sterility. Of the PG fragments released by GC, most are disaccharide peptide 
monomers, and of those, 80% have tripeptide stems despite the observation that 
tetrapeptide stems make up 80% of the assembled cell wall. We identified a 
serine-protease l,d-carboxypeptidase, NGO1274 (LdcA), as the enzyme responsible 
for converting cell wall tetrapeptide-stem PG to released tripeptide-stem PG. 
Unlike characterized cytoplasmic LdcA homologs in gammaproteobacteria, LdcA in 
GC is exported to the periplasm, and its localization is critical for its 
activity in modifying PG fragments for release. Distinct among other 
characterized l,d-carboxypeptidases, LdcA from GC is also capable of catalyzing 
the cleavage of specific peptide cross-bridges (endopeptidase activity). To 
define the role of ldcA in pathogenesis, we demonstrate that ldcA disruption 
results in both loss of NOD1-dependent NF-κB activation and decreased 
NOD2-dependent NF-κB activation while not affecting Toll-like receptor (TLR) 
agonist release. Since the human intracellular peptidoglycan receptor NOD1 
(hNOD1) specifically recognizes PG fragments with a terminal meso-DAP rather 
than d-alanine, we conclude that LdcA is required for GC to provoke 
NOD1-dependent responses in cells of the human host.IMPORTANCE The 
macromolecular meshwork of peptidoglycan serves essential functions in 
determining bacterial cell shape, protecting against osmotic lysis, and 
defending cells from external assaults. The conserved peptidoglycan structure, 
however, is also recognized by eukaryotic pattern recognition receptors, which 
can trigger immune responses against bacteria. Many bacteria can induce an 
inflammatory response through the intracellular peptidoglycan receptor NOD1, but 
Neisseria gonorrhoeae serves as an extreme example, releasing fragments of 
peptidoglycan into the environment during growth that specifically antagonize 
human NOD1. Understanding the peptidoglycan breakdown mechanisms that allow 
Neisseria to promote NOD1 activation, rather than avoiding or suppressing immune 
detection, is critical to understanding the pathogenesis of this increasingly 
drug-resistant organism. We identify a peptidoglycan l,d-carboxypeptidase 
responsible for converting liberated peptidoglycan fragments into the human NOD1 
agonist and find that the same enzyme has endopeptidase activity on certain 
peptidoglycan cross-links, the first described combination of those two 
activities in a single enzyme.

Copyright © 2017 Lenz et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01464-17
PMCID: PMC5646250
PMID: 29042497 [Indexed for MEDLINE]