1. Clinics (Sao Paulo). 2017 Oct;72(9):526-537. doi: 10.6061/clinics/2017(09)02.

Cytogenomic assessment of the diagnosis of 93 patients with developmental delay 
and multiple congenital abnormalities: The Brazilian experience.

Zanardo ÉA(1), Dutra RL(1), Piazzon FB(1), Dias AT(1), Novo-Filho GM(1), 
Nascimento AM(1), Montenegro MM(1), Damasceno JG(1), Madia FAR(1), da Costa 
TVMM(1), Melaragno MI(2), Kim CA(3), Kulikowski LD(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratorio de Citogenomica, Departamento de Patologia, Faculdade de Medicina 
FMUSP, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, SP, BR.
(2)Departamento de Morfologia e Genetica, Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo, Sao 
Paulo, SP, BR.
(3)Unidade de Genetica, Departamento de Pediatria, Instituto da Crianca, 
Hospital das Clinicas HCFMUSP, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de Sao Paulo, 
Sao Paulo, SP, BR.

OBJECTIVE: The human genome contains several types of variations, such as copy 
number variations, that can generate specific clinical abnormalities. Different 
techniques are used to detect these changes, and obtaining an unequivocal 
diagnosis is important to understand the physiopathology of the diseases. The 
objective of this study was to assess the diagnostic capacity of multiplex 
ligation-dependent probe amplification and array techniques for etiologic 
diagnosis of syndromic patients.
METHODS: We analyzed 93 patients with developmental delay and multiple 
congenital abnormalities using multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplifications 
and arrays.
RESULTS: Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification using different kits 
revealed several changes in approximately 33.3% of patients. The use of arrays 
with different platforms showed an approximately 53.75% detection rate for at 
least one pathogenic change and a 46.25% detection rate for patients with benign 
changes. A concomitant assessment of the two techniques showed an approximately 
97.8% rate of concordance, although the results were not the same in all cases. 
In contrast with the array results, the MLPA technique detected ∼70.6% of 
pathogenic changes.
CONCLUSION: The obtained results corroborated data reported in the literature, 
but the overall detection rate was higher than the rates previously reported, 
due in part to the criteria used to select patients. Although arrays are the 
most efficient tool for diagnosis, they are not always suitable as a first-line 
diagnostic approach because of their high cost for large-scale use in developing 
countries. Thus, clinical and laboratory interactions with skilled technicians 
are required to target patients for the most effective and beneficial molecular 
diagnosis.

DOI: 10.6061/clinics/2017(09)02
PMCID: PMC5629705
PMID: 29069255 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported.