1. Sci Rep. 2017 Oct 31;7(1):14690. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-15001-8.

Impact of Amyloid Burden on Regional Functional Synchronization in the 
Cognitively Normal Older Adults.

Kang DW(1), Choi WH(2), Jung WS(2), Um YH(3), Lee CU(1), Lim HK(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Seoul St. Mary's Hospital, College of Medicine, The 
Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Radiology, St. Vincent's Hospital, College of Medicine, The 
Catholic University of Korea, Suwon, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, St. Vincent's Hospital, College of Medicine, The 
Catholic University of Korea, Suwon, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, Yeoui-do St. Mary's Hospital, College of Medicine, 
The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea. 
drblues@catholic.ac.kr.

Previous studies have shown aberrant functional connectivity in preclinical 
Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, the effects of beta-amyloid (Aβ) retention on 
regional functional synchronization in cognitively normal older adults still 
remain unclear. The aim of this study was to explore the distinctive association 
pattern between Aβ retention and regional functional synchronization in 
cognitively normal older adults. Sixty-one older adults with normal cognition 
underwent functional magnetic resonance imaging and regional functional 
synchronizations were quantified using regional homogeneity (ReHo). Subjects 
were dichotomized using 18F-Florbetaben positron emission tomography imaging 
into subjects with (Aβ+; n = 30) and without (Aβ-; n = 31) Aβ burden. The Aβ+ 
group exhibited significantly higher ReHo in the fusiform gyrus and lower ReHo 
in the precuneus compared with the Aβ- group. We found significant negative 
correlations between global Aβ retention and ReHo in the precuneus and medial 
prefrontal cortex and positive correlations between global Aβ retention and ReHo 
in the bilateral lingual gyrus, left fusiform gyrus, and right middle temporal 
gyrus in the Aβ+ group. Our findings suggest that regional functional 
synchronization might have distinctive association patterns with Aβ retention in 
the cognitively normal older adults. These findings can enrich the functional 
characterization of early stages of disease progression in AD.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-15001-8
PMCID: PMC5665874
PMID: 29089631 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.