1. PLoS One. 2017 Nov 6;12(11):e0187546. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0187546. 
eCollection 2017.

Mutations that impair Eyes absent tyrosine phosphatase activity in vitro reduce 
robustness of retinal determination gene network output in Drosophila.

Davis TL(1)(2), Hoi CSL(1)(3), Rebay I(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Ben May Department for Cancer Research, The University of Chicago, Chicago, 
Illinois, United States of America.
(2)Committee on Development, Regeneration and Stem Cell Biology, The University 
of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, United States of America.
(3)Committee on Genetics, Genomics and Systems Biology, The University of 
Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, United States of America.

A limited collection of signaling networks and transcriptional effectors directs 
the full spectrum of cellular behaviors that comprise development. One mechanism 
to diversify regulatory potential is to combine multiple biochemical activities 
into the same protein. Exemplifying this principle of modularity, Eyes absent 
(Eya), originally identified as a transcriptional co-activator within the 
retinal determination gene network (RDGN), also harbors tyrosine and threonine 
phosphatase activities. Although mounting evidence argues for the importance of 
Eya's phosphatase activities to mammalian biology, genetic rescue experiments in 
Drosophila have shown that the tyrosine phosphatase function is dispensable for 
normal development. In this study, we repeated these rescue experiments in 
genetically sensitized backgrounds in which the dose of one or more RDGN factor 
was reduced. Heterozygosity for sine oculis or dachshund, both core RDGN 
members, compromised the ability of phosphatase-dead eya, but not of the control 
wild type eya transgene, to rescue the retinal defects and reduced viability 
associated with eya loss. We speculate that Eya's tyrosine phosphatase activity, 
although non-essential, confers robustness to RDGN output.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0187546
PMCID: PMC5673202
PMID: 29108015 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.