1. Front Immunol. 2017 Oct 27;8:1338. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.01338. eCollection 
2017.

B-Cell-Activating Factor and the B-Cell Compartment in HIV/SIV Infection.

Borhis G(1)(2)(3), Trovato M(1)(2)(3), Chaoul N(4), Ibrahim HM(1)(2)(3), Richard 
Y(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)INSERM u1016, Institut Cochin, Paris, France.
(2)CNRS UMR 8104, Paris, France.
(3)Université Paris-Descartes, Paris, France.
(4)Commissariat à l'Energie Atomique, Institut des maladies Emergentes et 
Thérapies innovantes, Service d'Immuno-Virologie, Fontenay-aux Roses, France.

With the goal to design effective HIV vaccines, intensive studies focused on 
broadly neutralizing antibodies, which arise in a fraction of HIV-infected 
people. Apart from identifying new vulnerability sites in the viral envelope 
proteins, these studies have shown that a fraction of these antibodies are 
produced by self/poly-reactive B-cells. These findings prompted us to revisit 
the B-cell differentiation and selection process during HIV/SIV infection and to 
consider B-cells as active players possibly shaping the helper T-cell program 
within germinal centers (GCs). In this context, we paid a particular attention 
to B-cell-activating factor (BAFF), a key cytokine in B-cell development and 
immune response that is overproduced during HIV/SIV infection. As it does in 
autoimmune diseases, BAFF excess might contribute to the abnormal rescue of 
self-reactive B-cells at several checkpoints of the B-cell development and 
impair memory B-cell generation and functions. In this review, we first point 
out what is known about the functions of BAFF/a proliferation-inducing ligand 
and their receptors [B-cell maturation, transmembrane activator and CAML 
interactor (TACI), and BAFF-R], in physiological and pathophysiological 
settings, in mice and humans. In particular, we highlight recent results on the 
previously underappreciated regulatory functions of TACI and on the highly 
regulated production of soluble TACI and BAFF-R that act as decoy receptors. In 
light of recent data on BAFF, TACI, and BAFF-R, we then revisit the altered 
phenotypes and functions of B-cell subsets during the acute and chronic phase of 
HIV/SIV infection. Given the atypical phenotype and reduced functions of memory 
B-cells in HIV/SIV infection, we particularly discuss the GC reaction, a key 
checkpoint where self-reactive B-cells are eliminated and pathogen-specific 
memory B-cells and plasmablasts/cells are generated in physiological settings. 
Through its capacity to differentially bind and process BAFF-R and TACI on GC 
B-cells and possibly on follicular helper T-cells, BAFF appears as a key 
regulator of the physiological GC reaction. Its local excess during HIV/SIV 
infection could play a key role in B-cell dysregulations.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.01338
PMCID: PMC5663724
PMID: 29163465