1. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2017 Nov 23;36(1):165. doi: 10.1186/s13046-017-0634-x.

Hypermethylation and loss of retinoic acid receptor responder 1 expression in 
human choriocarcinoma.

Huebner H(1), Strick R(1), Wachter DL(2), Kehl S(1), Strissel PL(1), 
Schneider-Stock R(2), Hartner A(3), Rascher W(3), Horn LC(4), Beckmann MW(1), 
Ruebner M(1), Fahlbusch FB(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, University Hospital Erlangen, 
Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Comprehensive Cancer Center 
Erlangen-EMN, Erlangen, Germany.
(2)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Erlangen, Friedrich-Alexander 
University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Comprehensive Cancer Center Erlangen-EMN, 
Erlangen, Germany.
(3)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University Hospital 
Erlangen, Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Loschgestraße 15, 
91054 Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany.
(4)Division Molecular Pathology, Institute of Pathology, University of Leipzig, 
Leipzig, Germany.
(5)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University Hospital 
Erlangen, Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Loschgestraße 15, 
91054 Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany. Fabian.Fahlbusch@uk-erlangen.de.

BACKGROUND: Human placental development resembles tumorigenesis, due to the 
invasive and fusogenic potential of trophoblasts. However, these features are 
tightly controlled in trophoblasts. Disturbance of this spatial and temporal 
regulation is thought to contribute to the rare formation of choriocarcinomas. 
Promoter hypermethylation and loss of the tumor suppressor Retinoic acid 
receptor responder 1 (RARRES1) were shown to contribute to cancer progression. 
Our study investigated the epigenetic and transcriptional regulation of RARRES1 
in healthy human placenta in comparison to choriocarcinoma cell lines and cases.
METHODS: Three choriocarcinoma cell lines (Jeg-3, JAR and BeWo) were treated 
with three different retinoic acid derivates (Am580, Tazarotene and all-trans 
retinoic acid) and 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine. We analyzed RARRES1 promoter 
methylation by pyrosequencing and performed realtime-PCR quantification to 
determine RARRES1 expression in placental tissue and trophoblastic cell lines. 
Additionally, RARRES1 was stained in healthy placentas and in biopsies of 
choriocarcinoma cases (n = 10) as well as the first trimester trophoblast cell 
line Swan71 by immunofluorescence and immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: In the choriocarcinoma cell lines, RARRES1 expression could not be 
induced by sole retinoic acid treatment. Stimulation with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine 
significantly induced RARRES1 expression, which then could be further increased 
with Am580, Tazarotene and all-trans retinoic acid. In comparison to healthy 
placenta, choriocarcinoma cell lines showed a hypermethylation of the RARRES1 
promoter, which correlated with a reduced RARRES1 expression. In concordance, 
RARRES1 protein expression was lost in choriocarcinoma tissue. Additionally, in 
the trophoblastic cell line Swan71, we found a significant induction of RARRES1 
expression with increased cell density, during mitosis and in syncytial knots.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings showed that RARRES1 expression is absent in 
choriocarcinoma due to promoter methylation. Based on our analysis, we 
hypothesize that RARRES1 might exert tumor suppressive functions in multiple 
cellular processes (e.g. cell cycle regulation, adhesion, invasion and 
apoptosis).

DOI: 10.1186/s13046-017-0634-x
PMCID: PMC5701501
PMID: 29169400 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: 
Handling of patients and tissues was approved by the Ethics Committee at the 
University Erlangen-Nuremberg (No. 2180). A written informed consent was 
obtained from all participants. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable 
COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no competing interests. 
PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.