1. Sci Rep. 2017 Nov 28;7(1):16483. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-16633-6.

A meta-proteomics approach to study the interspecies interactions affecting 
microbial biofilm development in a model community.

Herschend J(1), Damholt ZBV(2), Marquard AM(3), Svensson B(2), Sørensen SJ(1), 
Hägglund P(2)(4), Burmølle M(5).

Author information:
(1)Section of Microbiology, Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Technical University of Denmark, 
Lyngby, Denmark.
(3)Section for Immunology and Vaccinology, National Veterinary Institute, 
Technical University of Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark.
(4)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, 
Denmark.
(5)Section of Microbiology, Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen, 
Copenhagen, Denmark. burmolle@bio.ku.dk.

Microbial biofilms are omnipresent in nature and relevant to a broad spectrum of 
industries ranging from bioremediation and food production to biomedical 
applications. To date little is understood about how multi-species biofilm 
communities develop and function on a molecular level, due to the complexity of 
these biological systems. Here we apply a meta-proteomics approach to 
investigate the mechanisms influencing biofilm formation in a model consortium 
of four bacterial soil isolates; Stenotrophomonas rhizophila, Xanthomonas 
retroflexus, Microbacterium oxydans and Paenibacillus amylolyticus. Protein 
abundances in community and single species biofilms were compared to describe 
occurring inter-species interactions and the resulting changes in active 
metabolic pathways. To obtain full taxonomic resolution between closely related 
species and empower correct protein quantification, we developed a novel 
pipeline for generating reduced reference proteomes for spectral database 
searches. Meta-proteomics profiling indicated that community development is 
dependent on cooperative interactions between community members facilitating 
cross-feeding on specific amino acids. Opposite regulation patterns of 
fermentation and nitrogen pathways in Paenibacillus amylolyticus and Xanthomonas 
retroflexus may, however, indicate that competition for limited resources also 
affects community development. Overall our results demonstrate the multitude of 
pathways involved in biofilm formation in mixed communities.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-16633-6
PMCID: PMC5705676
PMID: 29184101 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.