1. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2018 Jan;38(1):19-25. doi: 
10.1161/ATVBAHA.117.310292. Epub 2017 Nov 30.

Sortilin and Its Multiple Roles in Cardiovascular and Metabolic Diseases.

Goettsch C(1), Kjolby M(1), Aikawa E(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Internal Medicine I-Cardiology, RWTH Aachen 
University, Germany (C.G.); The Danish Research Institute of Translational 
Neuroscience, Nordic European Molecular Biology Laboratory Partnership for 
Molecular Medicine, Danish Diabetes Academy, Denmark (M.K.); Department of 
Biomedicine (M.K.) and Department of Cardiology (M.K.), Aarhus University, 
Denmark; and Center for Interdisciplinary Cardiovascular Sciences (E.A.) and 
Center for Excellence in Vascular Biology, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine 
(E.A.), Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.
(2)From the Department of Internal Medicine I-Cardiology, RWTH Aachen 
University, Germany (C.G.); The Danish Research Institute of Translational 
Neuroscience, Nordic European Molecular Biology Laboratory Partnership for 
Molecular Medicine, Danish Diabetes Academy, Denmark (M.K.); Department of 
Biomedicine (M.K.) and Department of Cardiology (M.K.), Aarhus University, 
Denmark; and Center for Interdisciplinary Cardiovascular Sciences (E.A.) and 
Center for Excellence in Vascular Biology, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine 
(E.A.), Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA. 
eaikawa@bwh.harvard.edu.

Cardiovascular disease is a leading cause of morbidity and mortality in the 
Western world. Studies of sortilin's influence on cardiovascular and metabolic 
diseases goes far beyond the genome-wide association studies that have revealed 
an association between cardiovascular diseases and the 1p13 locus that encodes 
sortilin. Emerging evidence suggests a significant role of sortilin in the 
pathogenesis of vascular and metabolic diseases; this includes type II diabetes 
mellitus via regulation of insulin resistance, atherosclerosis through arterial 
wall inflammation and calcification, and dysregulated lipoprotein metabolism. 
Sortilin is also known for its functional role in neurological disorders. It 
serves as a key receptor for cytokines, lipids, and enzymes and participates in 
pathological cargo loading to and trafficking of extracellular vesicles. This 
article provides a comprehensive review of sortilin's contributions to 
cardiovascular and metabolic diseases but focuses particularly on 
atherosclerosis. We summarize recent clinical findings that suggest that 
sortilin may be a cardiovascular risk biomarker and also discuss sortilin as a 
potential drug target.

© 2017 American Heart Association, Inc.

DOI: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.117.310292
PMCID: PMC5746432
PMID: 29191923 [Indexed for MEDLINE]