1. Front Mol Biosci. 2017 Nov 22;4:74. doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2017.00074. eCollection
 2017.

Off-Target Effects of Drugs that Disrupt Human Mitochondrial DNA Maintenance.

Young MJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Southern Illinois 
University School of Medicine, Carbondale, IL, United States.

Nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs) were the first drugs used to 
treat human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) the cause of acquired immunodeficiency 
syndrome. Development of severe mitochondrial toxicity has been well documented 
in patients infected with HIV and administered NRTIs. In vitro biochemical 
experiments have demonstrated that the replicative mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) 
polymerase gamma, Polg, is a sensitive target for inhibition by metabolically 
active forms of NRTIs, nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NtRTIs). 
Once incorporated into newly synthesized daughter strands NtRTIs block further 
DNA polymerization reactions. Human cell culture and animal studies have 
demonstrated that cell lines and mice exposed to NRTIs display mtDNA depletion. 
Further complicating NRTI off-target effects on mtDNA maintenance, two 
additional DNA polymerases, Pol beta and PrimPol, were recently reported to 
localize to mitochondria as well as the nucleus. Similar to Polg, in vitro work 
has demonstrated both Pol beta and PrimPol incorporate NtRTIs into nascent DNA. 
Cell culture and biochemical experiments have also demonstrated that antiviral 
ribonucleoside drugs developed to treat hepatitis C infection act as off-target 
substrates for POLRMT, the mitochondrial RNA polymerase and primase. 
Accompanying the above-mentioned topics, this review examines: (1) mtDNA 
maintenance in human health and disease, (2) reports of DNA polymerases theta 
and zeta (Rev3) localizing to mitochondria, and (3) additional drugs with 
off-target effects on mitochondrial function. Lastly, mtDNA damage may induce 
cell death; therefore, the possibility of utilizing compounds that disrupt mtDNA 
maintenance to kill cancer cells is discussed.

DOI: 10.3389/fmolb.2017.00074
PMCID: PMC5702650
PMID: 29214156