1. Front Neuroanat. 2017 Nov 16;11:103. doi: 10.3389/fnana.2017.00103.
eCollection  2017.

The Suprachiasmatic Nucleus of the Dromedary Camel (Camelus dromedarius): 
Cytoarchitecture and Neurochemical Anatomy.

El Allali K(1), Achaâban MR(1), Piro M(2), Ouassat M(1), Challet E(3), Errami 
M(4), Lakhdar-Ghazal N(5), Calas A(6), Pévet P(3).

Author information:
(1)Comparative Anatomy Unit/URAC49, Department of Biological and Pharmaceutical 
Veterinary Sciences, Hassan II Agronomy and Veterinary Medicine Institute, 
Rabat, Morocco.
(2)PMC-EC, Department of Medicine, Surgery and Reproduction, Hassan II Agronomy 
and Veterinary Medicine Institute, Rabat, Morocco.
(3)Neurobiology of Rhythms UPR 3212 CNRS, Institute for Cellular and Integrative 
Neurosciences, University of Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France.
(4)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Abdelmalek Essaâdi University, 
Tétouan, Morocco.
(5)Unit of Research on Biological Rhythms, Neuroscience and Environment, Faculty 
of Science, Mohammed V-Agdal University, Rabat, Morocco.
(6)IINS, CNRS UMR 5297, University of Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France.

In mammals, biological rhythms are driven by a master circadian clock located in 
the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) of the hypothalamus. Recently, we have 
demonstrated that in the camel, the daily cycle of environmental temperature is 
able to entrain the master clock. This raises several questions about the 
structure and function of the SCN in this species. The current work is the first 
neuroanatomical investigation of the camel SCN. We carried out a cartography and 
cytoarchitectural study of the nucleus and then studied its cell types and 
chemical neuroanatomy. Relevant neuropeptides involved in the circadian system 
were investigated, including arginine-vasopressin (AVP), vasoactive intestinal 
polypeptide (VIP), met-enkephalin (Met-Enk), neuropeptide Y (NPY), as well as 
oxytocin (OT). The neurotransmitter serotonin (5-HT) and the enzymes tyrosine 
hydroxylase (TH) and aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase (AADC) were also 
studied. The camel SCN is a large and elongated nucleus, extending 
rostrocaudally for 9.55 ± 0.10 mm. Based on histological and immunofluorescence 
findings, we subdivided the camel SCN into rostral/preoptic (rSCN), middle/main 
body (mSCN) and caudal/retrochiasmatic (cSCN) divisions. Among mammals, the rSCN 
is unusual and appears as an assembly of neurons that protrudes from the main 
mass of the hypothalamus. The mSCN exhibits the triangular shape described in 
rodents, while the cSCN is located in the retrochiasmatic area. As expected, 
VIP-immunoreactive (ir) neurons were observed in the ventral part of mSCN. 
AVP-ir neurons were located in the rSCN and mSCN. Results also showed the 
presence of OT-ir and TH-ir neurons which seem to be a peculiarity of the camel 
SCN. OT-ir neurons were either scattered or gathered in one isolated cluster, 
while TH-ir neurons constituted two defined populations, dorsal parvicellular 
and ventral magnocellular neurons, respectively. TH colocalized with VIP in some 
rSCN neurons. Moreover, a high density of Met-Enk-ir, 5-HT-ir and NPY-ir fibers 
were observed within the SCN. Both the cytoarchitecture and the distribution of 
neuropeptides are unusual in the camel SCN as compared to other mammals. The 
presence of OT and TH in the camel SCN suggests their role in the modulation of 
circadian rhythms and the adaptation to photic and non-photic cues under desert 
conditions.

DOI: 10.3389/fnana.2017.00103
PMCID: PMC5715321
PMID: 29249943