1. BMC Genomics. 2017 Dec 20;18(1):983. doi: 10.1186/s12864-017-4378-y.

Genes uniquely expressed in human growth plate chondrocytes uncover a distinct 
regulatory network.

Li B(1), Balasubramanian K(1), Krakow D(2)(3)(4), Cohn DH(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular, Cell, and Developmental Biology, University of 
California Los Angeles, CA, Los Angeles, USA.
(2)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, David Geffen School of Medicine at the 
University of California Los Angeles, CA, Los Angeles, USA.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, David Geffen School of Medicine at 
the University of California at Los Angeles, CA, Los Angeles, USA.
(4)Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine at the 
University of California Los Angeles, CA, Los Angeles, USA.
(5)Department of Molecular, Cell, and Developmental Biology, University of 
California Los Angeles, CA, Los Angeles, USA. dcohn@mcdb.ucla.edu.
(6)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, David Geffen School of Medicine at the 
University of California Los Angeles, CA, Los Angeles, USA. dcohn@mcdb.ucla.edu.

BACKGROUND: Chondrogenesis is the earliest stage of skeletal development and is 
a highly dynamic process, integrating the activities and functions of 
transcription factors, cell signaling molecules and extracellular matrix 
proteins. The molecular mechanisms underlying chondrogenesis have been 
extensively studied and multiple key regulators of this process have been 
identified. However, a genome-wide overview of the gene regulatory network in 
chondrogenesis has not been achieved.
RESULTS: In this study, employing RNA sequencing, we identified 332 protein 
coding genes and 34 long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) genes that are highly 
selectively expressed in human fetal growth plate chondrocytes. Among the 
protein coding genes, 32 genes were associated with 62 distinct human skeletal 
disorders and 153 genes were associated with skeletal defects in knockout mice, 
confirming their essential roles in skeletal formation. These gene products 
formed a comprehensive physical interaction network and participated in multiple 
cellular processes regulating skeletal development. The data also revealed 34 
transcription factors and 11,334 distal enhancers that were uniquely active in 
chondrocytes, functioning as transcriptional regulators for the 
cartilage-selective genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings revealed a complex gene regulatory network controlling 
skeletal development whereby transcription factors, enhancers and lncRNAs 
participate in chondrogenesis by transcriptional regulation of key genes. 
Additionally, the cartilage-selective genes represent candidate genes for 
unsolved human skeletal disorders.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-017-4378-y
PMCID: PMC5738906
PMID: 29262782 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: 
Under a UCLA IRB-approved human subjects protocol, five independent 14-18 week 
distal human femur growth plate cartilage samples were obtained with informed 
consent. (Protocol ID: IRB#14-000177). CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable 
COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no competing interests. 
PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.