1. NPJ Vaccines. 2016 Nov 10;1:16021. doi: 10.1038/npjvaccines.2016.21.
eCollection  2016.

In vivo protection against ZIKV infection and pathogenesis through passive 
antibody transfer and active immunisation with a prMEnv DNA vaccine.

Muthumani K(1), Griffin BD(2)(3), Agarwal S(1), Kudchodkar SB(1), Reuschel 
EL(1), Choi H(1), Kraynyak KA(4), Duperret EK(1), Keaton AA(5), Chung C(1), Kim 
YK(1), Booth SA(2)(3), Racine T(2)(3), Yan J(4), Morrow MP(4), Jiang J(4), Lee 
B(4), Ramos S(4), Broderick KE(4), Reed CC(4), Khan AS(4), Humeau L(4), Ugen 
KE(6), Park YK(7), Maslow JN(7), Sardesai NY(4), Joseph Kim J(4), Kobinger 
GP(2)(3), Weiner DB(1).

Author information:
(1)The Wistar Institute, 3601 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)Special Pathogens Program, National Microbiology Laboratory, Public Health 
Agency of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada R3E 3R2.
(3)Department of Medical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, University of 
Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada R3E 0J9.
(4)Inovio Pharmaceuticals Inc., Plymouth Meeting, PA, USA.
(5)Division of Infectious Diseases, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(6)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of South Florida Morsani College 
of Medicine, Tampa, FL, USA.
(7)GeneOne Life Science Inc., Teheran-Ro, Gangnam-Gu, Seoul, Korea.

Significant concerns have been raised owing to the rapid global spread of 
infection and disease caused by the mosquito-borne Zika virus (ZIKV). Recent 
studies suggest that ZIKV can also be transmitted sexually, further increasing 
the exposure risk for this virus. Associated with this spread is a dramatic 
increase in cases of microcephaly and additional congenital abnormalities in 
infants of ZIKV-infected mothers, as well as a rise in the occurrence of 
Guillain Barre' syndrome in infected adults. Importantly, there are no licensed 
therapies or vaccines against ZIKV infection. In this study, we generate and 
evaluate the in vivo efficacy of a novel, synthetic, DNA vaccine targeting the 
pre-membrane+envelope proteins (prME) of ZIKV. Following initial in vitro 
development and evaluation studies of the plasmid construct, mice and non-human 
primates were immunised with this prME DNA-based immunogen through 
electroporation-mediated enhanced DNA delivery. Vaccinated animals were found to 
generate antigen-specific cellular and humoral immunity and neutralisation 
activity. In mice lacking receptors for interferon (IFN)-α/β (designated 
IFNAR-/-) immunisation with this DNA vaccine induced, following in vivo viral 
challenge, 100% protection against infection-associated weight loss or death in 
addition to preventing viral pathology in brain tissue. In addition, passive 
transfer of non-human primate anti-ZIKV immune serum protected IFNAR-/- mice 
against subsequent viral challenge. This study in NHP and in a pathogenic mouse 
model supports the importance of immune responses targeting prME in ZIKV 
infection and suggests that additional research on this vaccine approach may 
have relevance for ZIKV control and disease prevention in humans.

DOI: 10.1038/npjvaccines.2016.21
PMCID: PMC5707885
PMID: 29263859

Conflict of interest statement: D.B.W. has grant funding, participates in 
industry collaborations, has received speaking honoraria and fees for 
consulting. This service includes serving on scientific review committees and 
advisory boards. Remuneration includes direct payments and/or stock or stock 
options and in the interest of disclosure; therefore, he notes potential 
conflicts associated with this work with Inovio where he serves on the BOD, 
Merck, VGXI, OncoSec, Roche, Aldevron and possibly others. Licensing of 
technology from this laboratory has created over 200 jobs in the biotech/pharma 
industry. The remaining authors declare no conflict of interest.