1. Bio Protoc. 2017 Nov 20;7(22):e2604. doi: 10.21769/BioProtoc.2604.

Markerless Gene Editing in the Hyperthermophilic Archaeon Thermococcus 
kodakarensis.

Gehring AM(1), Sanders TJ(1), Santangelo TJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Colorado State University, 
Fort Collins, CO, USA.

The advent of single cell genomics and the continued use of metagenomic 
profiling in diverse environments has exponentially increased the known 
diversity of life. The recovered and assembled genomes predict physiology, 
consortium interactions and gene function, but experimental validation of 
metabolisms and molecular pathways requires more directed approaches. Gene 
function-and the correlation between phenotype and genotype is most obviously 
studied with genetics, and it is therefore critical to develop techniques 
permitting rapid and facile strain construction. Many new and candidate archaeal 
lineages have recently been discovered, but experimental, genetic access to 
archaeal genomes is currently limited to a few model organisms. The results 
obtained from manipulating the genomes of these genetically-accessible organisms 
have already had profound effects on our understanding of archaeal physiology 
and information processing systems, and these continued studies also help 
resolve phylogenetic reconstruction of the tree of life. The hyperthermophilic, 
planktonic, marine heterotrophic archaeon Thermococcus kodakarensis, has emerged 
as an ideal genetic system with a suite of techniques available to add or delete 
encoded activities, or modify expression of genes in vivo. We outline here 
techniques to rapidly and markerlessly delete a single, or repetitively delete 
several, continuous sequences from the T. kodakarensis genome. Our procedure 
includes details on the construction of the plasmid DNA necessary for 
transformation that directs, via homologous recombination, integration into the 
genome, identification of strains that have incorporated plasmid sequences 
(termed intermediate strains), and confirmation of plasmid excision, leading to 
deletion of the target gene in final strains. Near identical procedures can be 
employed to modify, rather than delete, a genomic locus.

DOI: 10.21769/BioProtoc.2604
PMCID: PMC5739306
PMID: 29276725

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest or 
competing interests.