1. Sci Rep. 2018 Jan 10;8(1):380. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-18764-2.

Systems pharmacology analysis of synergy of TCM: an example using saffron 
formula.

Liu J(1), Liu J(1), Shen F(1), Qin Z(1), Jiang M(1), Zhu J(1), Wang Z(2), Zhou 
J(2), Fu Y(3), Chen X(3), Huang C(3), Xiao W(4), Zheng C(5), Wang Y(6).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Resource Biology and Biotechnology in Western China, 
Ministry of Education, School of Life Sciences, Northwest University, Xi'an, 
China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of New-tech for Chinese Medicine Pharmaceutical Process, 
Jiangsu Kanion Parmaceutical Co. Ltd., Lianyungang, China.
(3)Lab of Systems Pharmacology, Center of Bioinformatics, College of Life 
Science, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of New-tech for Chinese Medicine Pharmaceutical Process, 
Jiangsu Kanion Parmaceutical Co. Ltd., Lianyungang, China. xw_kanion@163.com.
(5)Key Laboratory of Resource Biology and Biotechnology in Western China, 
Ministry of Education, School of Life Sciences, Northwest University, Xi'an, 
China. chunlizheng@126.com.
(6)Key Laboratory of Resource Biology and Biotechnology in Western China, 
Ministry of Education, School of Life Sciences, Northwest University, Xi'an, 
China. yh_wang@nwsuaf.edu.cn.

Traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) follows the principle of formulae, in which 
the pharmacological activity of a single herb can be enhanced or potentiated by 
addition of other herbs. Nevertheless, the involved synergy mechanisms in 
formulae remain unknown. Here, a systems-based method is proposed and applied to 
three representative Chinese medicines in compound saffron formula (CSF): two 
animal spices (Moschus, Beaver Castoreum), and one herb Crocus sativus which 
exert synergistic effects for cardiovascular diseases (CVDs). From the formula, 
42 ingredients and 66 corresponding targets are acquired based on the ADME 
evaluation and target fishing model. The network relationships between the 
compounds and targets are assembled with CVDs pathways to elucidate the 
synergistic therapeutic effects between the spices and the herbs. The results 
show that different compounds of the three medicines show similar curative 
activity in CVDs. Additionally, the active compounds from them shared 
CVDs-relevant targets (multiple compounds-one target), or functional diversity 
targets but with clinical relevance (multiple compounds-multiple targets-one 
disease). Moreover, the targets of them are largely enriched in the same CVDs 
pathways (multiple targets-one pathway). These results elucidate why animal 
spices and herbs can have pharmacologically synergistic effects on CVDs, which 
provides a new way for drug discovery.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-18764-2
PMCID: PMC5762866
PMID: 29321678 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.