1. Front Physiol. 2017 Dec 15;8:1001. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2017.01001. eCollection 
2017.

The Gastric Ganglion of Octopus vulgaris: Preliminary Characterization of Gene- 
and Putative Neurochemical-Complexity, and the Effect of Aggregata octopiana 
Digestive Tract Infection on Gene Expression.

Baldascino E(1), Di Cristina G(1), Tedesco P(1), Hobbs C(2), Shaw TJ(3), Ponte 
G(1)(4), Andrews PLR(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology and Evolution of Marine Organisms, Stazione Zoologica 
Anton Dohrn, Napoli, Italy.
(2)Wolfson Centre for Age-Related Diseases, King's College London, London, 
United Kingdom.
(3)Centre for Inflammation Biology and Cancer Immunology, King's College London, 
London, United Kingdom.
(4)Association for Cephalopod Research - CephRes, Napoli, Italy.

The gastric ganglion is the largest visceral ganglion in cephalopods. It is 
connected to the brain and is implicated in regulation of digestive tract 
functions. Here we have investigated the neurochemical complexity (through in 
silico gene expression analysis and immunohistochemistry) of the gastric 
ganglion in Octopus vulgaris and tested whether the expression of a selected 
number of genes was influenced by the magnitude of digestive tract parasitic 
infection by Aggregata octopiana. Novel evidence was obtained for putative 
peptide and non-peptide neurotransmitters in the gastric ganglion: cephalotocin, 
corticotrophin releasing factor, FMRFamide, gamma amino butyric acid, 
5-hydroxytryptamine, molluscan insulin-related peptide 3, peptide PRQFV-amide, 
and tachykinin-related peptide. Receptors for cholecystokininA and 
cholecystokininB, and orexin2 were also identified in this context for the first 
time. We report evidence for acetylcholine, dopamine, noradrenaline, octopamine, 
small cardioactive peptide related peptide, and receptors for cephalotocin and 
octopressin, confirming previous publications. The effects of Aggregata observed 
here extend those previously described by showing effects on the gastric 
ganglion; in animals with a higher level of infection, genes implicated in 
inflammation (NFκB, fascin, serpinB10 and the toll-like 3 receptor) increased 
their relative expression, but TNF-α gene expression was lower as was expression 
of other genes implicated in oxidative stress (i.e., superoxide dismutase, 
peroxiredoxin 6, and glutathione peroxidase). Elevated Aggregata levels in the 
octopuses corresponded to an increase in the expression of the cholecystokininA 
receptor and the small cardioactive peptide-related peptide. In contrast, we 
observed decreased relative expression of cephalotocin, dopamine β-hydroxylase, 
peptide PRQFV-amide, and tachykinin-related peptide genes. A discussion is 
provided on (i) potential roles of the various molecules in food intake 
regulation and digestive tract motility control and (ii) the difference in 
relative gene expression in the gastric ganglion in octopus with relatively high 
and low parasitic loads and the similarities to changes in the enteric 
innervation of mammals with digestive tract parasites. Our results provide 
additional data to the described neurochemical complexity of O. vulgaris gastric 
ganglion.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2017.01001
PMCID: PMC5736919
PMID: 29326594