1. PLoS One. 2018 Jan 18;13(1):e0191503. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0191503. 
eCollection 2018.

Acute multi-sgRNA knockdown of KEOPS complex genes reproduces the microcephaly 
phenotype of the stable knockout zebrafish model.

Jobst-Schwan T(1), Schmidt JM(1), Schneider R(1), Hoogstraten CA(1), Ullmann 
JFP(2), Schapiro D(1), Majmundar AJ(1), Kolb A(1), Eddy K(1), Shril S(1), Braun 
DA(1), Poduri A(2), Hildebrandt F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(2)Epilepsy Genetics Program and F.M. Kirby Neurobiology Center, Department of 
Neurology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts, United States of America.

Until recently, morpholino oligonucleotides have been widely employed in 
zebrafish as an acute and efficient loss-of-function assay. However, off-target 
effects and reproducibility issues when compared to stable knockout lines have 
compromised their further use. Here we employed an acute CRISPR/Cas approach 
using multiple single guide RNAs targeting simultaneously different positions in 
two exemplar genes (osgep or tprkb) to increase the likelihood of generating 
mutations on both alleles in the injected F0 generation and to achieve a similar 
effect as morpholinos but with the reproducibility of stable lines. This multi 
single guide RNA approach resulted in median likelihoods for at least one 
mutation on each allele of >99% and sgRNA specific insertion/deletion profiles 
as revealed by deep-sequencing. Immunoblot showed a significant reduction for 
Osgep and Tprkb proteins. For both genes, the acute multi-sgRNA knockout 
recapitulated the microcephaly phenotype and reduction in survival that we 
observed previously in stable knockout lines, though milder in the acute 
multi-sgRNA knockout. Finally, we quantify the degree of mutagenesis by deep 
sequencing, and provide a mathematical model to quantitate the chance for a 
biallelic loss-of-function mutation. Our findings can be generalized to acute 
and stable CRISPR/Cas targeting for any zebrafish gene of interest.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0191503
PMCID: PMC5773193
PMID: 29346415 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Friedhelm Hildebrandt 
receives royalties from Claritas and is a cofounder of Goldfinch-Bio. This does 
not alter our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials. No 
other authors have competing financial interests.