1. J Cell Mol Med. 2018 Apr;22(4):2240-2251. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.13506. Epub 2018
Jan  25.

Inducibly decreased MITF levels do not affect proliferation and phenotype 
switching but reduce differentiation of melanoma cells.

Vlčková K(1), Vachtenheim J(1), Réda J(1), Horák P(1), Ondrušová L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Transcription and Cell Signaling, Institute of Medical 
Biochemistry and Laboratory Diagnostics, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles 
University, Prague, Czech Republic.

Melanoma arises from neural crest-derived melanocytes which reside mostly in the 
skin in an adult organism. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a 
tumorigenic programme through which cells acquire mesenchymal, more 
pro-oncogenic phenotype. The reversible phenotype switching is an event still 
not completely understood in melanoma. The EMT features and increased 
invasiveness are associated with lower levels of the pivotal lineage identity 
maintaining and melanoma-specific transcription factor MITF 
(microphthalmia-associated transcription factor), whereas increased 
proliferation is linked to higher MITF levels. However, the precise role of MITF 
in phenotype switching is still loosely characterized. To exclude the changes 
occurring upstream of MITF during MITF regulation in vivo, we employed a model 
whereby MITF expression was inducibly regulated by shRNA in melanoma cell lines. 
We found that the decrease in MITF caused only moderate attenuation of 
proliferation of the whole cell line population. Proliferation was decreased in 
five of 15 isolated clones, in three of them profoundly. Reduction in MITF 
levels alone did not generally produce EMT-like characteristics. The stem cell 
marker levels also did not change appreciably, only a sharp increase in SOX2 
accompanied MITF down-regulation. Oppositely, the downstream differentiation 
markers and the MITF transcriptional targets melastatin and tyrosinase were 
profoundly decreased, as well as the downstream target livin. Surprisingly, 
after the MITF decline, invasiveness was not appreciably affected, independently 
of proliferation. The results suggest that low levels of MITF may still maintain 
relatively high proliferation and might reflect, rather than cause, the EMT-like 
changes occurring in melanoma.

© 2018 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd and Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine.

DOI: 10.1111/jcmm.13506
PMCID: PMC5867098
PMID: 29369499 [Indexed for MEDLINE]