1. Neuromuscul Disord. 2018 Apr;28(4):350-360. doi: 10.1016/j.nmd.2017.11.006.
Epub  2017 Nov 23.

Disclosing the functional changes of two genetic alterations in a patient with 
Chronic Progressive External Ophthalmoplegia: Report of the novel mtDNA 
m.7486G>A variant.

Bacalhau M(1), Simões M(2), Rocha MC(3), Hardy SA(3), Vincent AE(3), Durães 
J(4), Macário MC(4), Santos MJ(1), Rebelo O(4), Lopes C(5), Pratas J(2), Mendes 
C(2), Zuzarte M(6), Rego AC(7), Girão H(8), Wong LC(9), Taylor RW(3), Grazina 
M(10).

Author information:
(1)FMUC - Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal; CNC - 
Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, Laboratory of Biochemical Genetics, 
University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal.
(2)CNC - Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, Laboratory of Biochemical 
Genetics, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal.
(3)Wellcome Centre for Mitochondrial Research, Institute of Neuroscience, The 
Medical School, Newcastle University, Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK.
(4)CHUC - Neurology Department of Coimbra University Hospitals, Coimbra, 
Portugal.
(5)CNC - Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra, 
Coimbra, Portugal.
(6)IBILI - Institute for Biomedical Imaging and Life Sciences, University of 
Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal.
(7)FMUC - Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal; CNC - 
Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, 
Portugal.
(8)FMUC - Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal; IBILI - 
Institute for Biomedical Imaging and Life Sciences, University of Coimbra, 
Coimbra, Portugal.
(9)Mitochondrial Diagnostic Laboratory, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, 
USA.
(10)FMUC - Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal; CNC - 
Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, Laboratory of Biochemical Genetics, 
University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal. Electronic address: 
mgrazina.fmuc@gmail.com.

Chronic Progressive External Ophthalmoplegia (CPEO) is characterized by ptosis 
and ophthalmoplegia and is usually caused by mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) deletions 
or mt-tRNA mutations. The aim of the present work was to clarify the genetic 
defect in a patient presenting with CPEO and elucidate the underlying pathogenic 
mechanism. This 62-year-old female first developed ptosis of the right eye at 
the age of 12 and subsequently the left eye at 45 years, and was found to have 
external ophthalmoplegia at the age of 55 years. Histopathological abnormalities 
were detected in the patient's muscle, including ragged-red fibres, a mosaic 
pattern of COX-deficient muscle fibres and combined deficiency of respiratory 
chain complexes I and IV. Genetic investigation revealed the "common deletion" 
in the patient's muscle and fibroblasts. Moreover, a novel, heteroplasmic 
mt-tRNASer(UCN) variant (m.7486G>A) in the anticodon loop was detected in muscle 
homogenate (50%), fibroblasts (11%) and blood (4%). Single-fibre analysis showed 
segregation with COX-deficient fibres for both genetic alterations. Assembly 
defects of mtDNA-encoded complexes were demonstrated in fibroblasts. Functional 
analyses showed significant bioenergetic dysfunction, reduction in respiration 
rate and ATP production and mitochondrial depolarization. Multilamellar bodies 
were detected by electron microscopy, suggesting disturbance in autophagy. In 
conclusion, we report a CPEO patient with two possible genetic origins, both 
segregating with biochemical and histochemical defect. The "common mtDNA 
deletion" is the most likely cause, yet the potential pathogenic effect of a 
novel mt-tRNASer(UCN) variant cannot be fully excluded.

Copyright © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nmd.2017.11.006
PMCID: PMC5952895
PMID: 29398297 [Indexed for MEDLINE]