1. Ther Clin Risk Manag. 2018 Jan 17;14:129-140. doi: 10.2147/TCRM.S152369. 
eCollection 2018.

Ticagrelor - toward more efficient platelet inhibition and beyond.

Kubisa MJ(1), Jezewski MP(1), Gasecka A(2)(3), Siller-Matula JM(4), Postuła 
M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology, Centre for Preclinical 
Research and Technology (CEPT).
(2)1st Chair and Department of Cardiology, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, 
Poland.
(3)Vesicle Observation Centre, Laboratory of Experimental Clinical Chemistry, 
Academic Medical Centre, University of Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(4)Department of Cardiology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

Novel antiplatelet drugs, including ticagrelor, are being successively 
introduced into the therapy of atherothrombotic conditions due to their 
superiority over a standard combination of clopidogrel with acetylsalicylic acid 
in patients with acute coronary syndromes (ACS). A P2Y12 receptor antagonist, 
ticagrelor, is unique among antiplatelet drugs, because ticagrelor inhibits the 
platelet P2Y12 receptor in a reversible manner, and because it demonstrates a 
wide palette of advantageous pleiotropic effects associated with the increased 
concentration of adenosine. The pleiotropic effects of ticagrelor comprise 
cardioprotection, restoration of the myocardium after an ischemic event, 
promotion of the release of anticoagulative factors and, eventually, 
anti-inflammatory effects. Beyond the advantageous effects, the increased 
concentration of adenosine is responsible for some of ticagrelor's adverse 
effects, including dyspnea and bradycardia. Large-scale clinical trials 
demonstrated that both standard 12-month therapy and long-term use of ticagrelor 
reduce the risk of cardiovascular events in patients with ACS, but at the 
expense of a higher risk of major bleeding. Further trials focused on the use of 
ticagrelor in conditions other than ACS, including ischemic stroke, peripheral 
artery disease and status after coronary artery bypass grafting. The results of 
these trials suggest comparable efficacy and safety of ticagrelor and 
clopidogrel in extra-coronary indications, but firm conclusions are anticipated 
from currently ongoing studies. Here, we summarize current evidence on the 
superiority of ticagrelor over other P2Y12 antagonists in ACS, discuss the 
mechanism underlying the drug-drug interactions and pleiotropic effects of 
ticagrelor, and present future perspectives of non-coronary indications for 
ticagrelor.

DOI: 10.2147/TCRM.S152369
PMCID: PMC5775739
PMID: 29398917

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure Research subject was implemented with 
CEPT infrastructure financed by the European Union – the European Regional 
Development Fund within the Operational Program “Innovative economy” for 
2007–2013. The study was supported financially as part of the research grant 
from the National Science Center OPUS research grant (grant number 
2013/11/B/NZ7/01541). The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this 
work.