1. PLoS One. 2018 Feb 8;13(2):e0192488. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0192488. 
eCollection 2018.

The first dipeptidyl peptidase III from a thermophile: Structural basis for 
thermal stability and reduced activity.

Sabljić I(1), Tomin M(2), Matovina M(2), Sučec I(2), Tomašić Paić A(2), Tomić 
A(2), Abramić M(2), Tomić S(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Physical Chemistry, Ruđer Bošković Institute, Zagreb, Croatia.
(2)Division of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry, Ruđer Bošković Institute, 
Zagreb, Croatia.

Dipeptidyl peptidase III (DPP III) isolated from the thermophilic bacteria 
Caldithrix abyssi (Ca) is a two-domain zinc exopeptidase, a member of the M49 
family. Like other DPPs III, it cleaves dipeptides from the N-terminus of its 
substrates but differently from human, yeast and Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron 
(mesophile) orthologs, it has the pentapeptide zinc binding motif (HEISH) in the 
active site instead of the hexapeptide (HEXXGH). The aim of our study was to 
investigate structure, dynamics and activity of CaDPP III, as well as to find 
possible differences with already characterized DPPs III from mesophiles, 
especially B. thetaiotaomicron. The enzyme structure was determined by X-ray 
diffraction, while stability and flexibility were investigated using MD 
simulations. Using molecular modeling approach we determined the way of ligands 
binding into the enzyme active site and identified the possible reasons for the 
decreased substrate specificity compared to other DPPs III. The obtained results 
gave us possible explanation for higher stability, as well as higher temperature 
optimum of CaDPP III. The structural features explaining its altered substrate 
specificity are also given. The possible structural and catalytic significance 
of the HEISH motive, unique to CaDPP III, was studied computationally, comparing 
the results of long MD simulations of the wild type enzyme with those obtained 
for the HEISGH mutant. This study presents the first structural and biochemical 
characterization of DPP III from a thermophile.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0192488
PMCID: PMC5805324
PMID: 29420664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.