1. Gut. 2018 Jun;67(6):1168-1180. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2017-315537. Epub 2018 Feb
6.

Integrative analysis of exogenous, endogenous, tumour and immune factors for 
precision medicine.

Ogino S(1)(2)(3)(4), Nowak JA(1), Hamada T(2), Phipps AI(5)(6), Peters U(5)(6), 
Milner DA Jr(7), Giovannucci EL(3)(8)(9), Nishihara R(1)(3)(4)(8)(10), Giannakis 
M(4)(11)(12), Garrett WS(4)(11)(13), Song M(8)(14)(15).

Author information:
(1)Program in MPE Molecular Pathological Epidemiology, Department of Pathology, 
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, 
USA.
(2)Department of Oncologic Pathology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Department of Epidemiology, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, 
Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(4)Broad Institute of Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.
(5)Public Health Sciences Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, 
Seattle, Washington, USA.
(6)Department of Epidemiology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, 
USA.
(7)American Society for Clinical Pathology, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(8)Department of Nutrition, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA.
(9)Channing Division of Network Medicine, Department of Medicine, Brigham and 
Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(10)Department of Biostatistics, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, 
Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(11)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(12)Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(13)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard T.H. Chan School 
of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(14)Clinical and Translational Epidemiology Unit, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(15)Division of Gastroenterology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Immunotherapy strategies targeting immune checkpoints such as the CTLA4 and 
CD274 (programmed cell death 1 ligand 1, PD-L1)/PDCD1 (programmed cell death 1, 
PD-1) T-cell coreceptor pathways are revolutionising oncology. The approval of 
pembrolizumab use for solid tumours with high-level microsatellite instability 
or mismatch repair deficiency by the US Food and Drug Administration highlights 
promise of precision immuno-oncology. However, despite evidence indicating 
influences of exogenous and endogenous factors such as diet, nutrients, alcohol, 
smoking, obesity, lifestyle, environmental exposures and microbiome on 
tumour-immune interactions, integrative analyses of those factors and immunity 
lag behind. Immune cell analyses in the tumour microenvironment have not 
adequately been integrated into large-scale studies. Addressing this gap, the 
transdisciplinary field of molecular pathological epidemiology (MPE) offers 
research frameworks to integrate tumour immunology into population health 
sciences, and link the exposures and germline genetics (eg, HLA genotypes) to 
tumour and immune characteristics. Multilevel research using bioinformatics, in 
vivo pathology and omics (genomics, epigenomics, transcriptomics, proteomics and 
metabolomics) technologies is possible with use of tissue, peripheral blood 
circulating cells, cell-free plasma, stool, sputum, urine and other body fluids. 
This immunology-MPE model can synergise with experimental immunology, 
microbiology and systems biology. GI neoplasms represent exemplary diseases for 
the immunology-MPE model, given rich microbiota and immune tissues of 
intestines, and the well-established carcinogenic role of intestinal 
inflammation. Proof-of-principle studies on colorectal cancer provided insights 
into immunomodulating effects of aspirin, vitamin D, inflammatory diets and 
omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids. The integrated immunology-MPE model can 
contribute to better understanding of environment-tumour-immune interactions, 
and effective immunoprevention and immunotherapy strategies for precision 
medicine.

© Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise stated in the text of 
the article) 2018. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless 
otherwise expressly granted.

DOI: 10.1136/gutjnl-2017-315537
PMCID: PMC5943183
PMID: 29437869 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.