1. Immunol Rev. 2018 Mar;282(1):151-167. doi: 10.1111/imr.12638.

Human eosinophils and mast cells: Birds of a feather flock together.

Robida PA(1), Puzzovio PG(2), Pahima H(2), Levi-Schaffer F(2), Bochner BS(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Allergy and Immunology, Department of Medicine, Northwestern 
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA.
(2)Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics Unit, School of Pharmacy, 
Institute for Drug Research, Faculty of Medicine, Hebrew University of 
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel.

While the origin of the phrase "birds of a feather flock together" is unclear, 
it has been in use for centuries and is typically employed to describe the 
phenomenon that people with similar tastes or interests tend to seek each other 
out and congregate together. In this review, we have co-opted this phrase to 
compare innate immune cells of related origin, the eosinophil and mast cell, 
because they very often accumulate together in tissue sites under both 
homeostatic and inflammatory conditions. To highlight overlapping yet distinct 
features, their hematopoietic development, cell surface phenotype, mediator 
release profiles and roles in diseases have been compared and contrasted. What 
emerges is a sense that these two cell types often interact with each other and 
their tissue environment to provide synergistic contributions to a variety of 
normal and pathologic immune responses.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/imr.12638
PMCID: PMC5812359
PMID: 29431215 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: B.S.B. has current or 
recent consulting or scientific advisory board arrangements with or has received 
honoraria from Sanofi-Aventis, TEVA, GlaxoSmithKline, AstraZeneca and Allakos, 
and owns stock in Allakos and Glycomimetics. He receives publication-related 
royalty payments from Elsevier and UpToDate™ and is a co-inventor on existing 
Siglec-8-related patents and thus may be entitled to a share of royalties 
received by Johns Hopkins University on the potential sales of such products. 
B.S.B. is also a co-founder of Allakos, which makes him subject to certain 
restrictions under University policy. The terms of this arrangement are being 
managed by the Johns Hopkins University and Northwestern University in 
accordance with their conflict of interest policies. The authors have no 
additional competing financial interests.