1. Front Neurol. 2018 Jan 30;9:25. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2018.00025. eCollection
2018.

Altered Brain Functional Connectome in Migraine with and without Restless Legs 
Syndrome: A Resting-State Functional MRI Study.

Yang FC(1)(2), Chou KH(3)(4), Hsu AL(5), Fuh JL(6)(7), Lirng JF(8)(9), Kao 
HW(10), Lin CP(2)(3)(4)(11), Wang SJ(2)(4)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Tri-Service General Hospital, National Defense 
Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Institute of Brain Science, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Institute of Neuroscience, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Brain Research Center, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)Graduate Institute of Biomedical Electronics and Bioinformatics, National 
Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(6)Faculty of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University School of Medicine, 
Taipei, Taiwan.
(7)Neurological Institute, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(8)Department of Radiology, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(9)Department of Radiology, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(10)Department of Radiology, Tri-Service General Hospital, National Defense 
Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan.
(11)Department of Biomedical Imaging and Radiological Sciences, National 
Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Migraine is frequently comorbid with restless legs syndrome (RLS), 
both displaying functional connectivity (FC) alterations in multiple brain 
networks, although the neurological basis of this association is unknown.
METHODS: We performed resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging and 
network-wise analysis of FC in migraine patients with and without RLS and 
healthy controls (CRL). Network-based statistics (NBS) and composite FC matrix 
analyses were performed to identify the patterns of FC changes. Correlation 
analyses were performed to identify associations between alterations in FC and 
clinical profiles.
RESULTS: NBS results revealed that both migraine patients with and without RLS 
exhibited lower FC than CRL in the dorsal attention, salience, default mode, 
cingulo-opercular, visual, frontoparietal, auditory, and sensory/somatomotor 
networks. Further composite FC matrix analyses revealed differences in FC of the 
salience, default mode to subcortical and frontoparietal, auditory to salience, 
and memory retrieval networks between migraine patients with and without RLS. 
There was a trend toward a negative association between RLS severity and 
cross-network abnormalities in the default mode to subcortical network.
DISCUSSION: Migraine patients with and without RLS exhibit disruptions of brain 
FC. Such findings suggest that these disorders are associated with differential 
neuropathological mechanisms and may aid in the future development of 
neuroimaging-driven biomarkers for these conditions.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2018.00025
PMCID: PMC5797592
PMID: 29441041