1. Stem Cell Res Ther. 2018 Feb 26;9(1):46. doi: 10.1186/s13287-018-0779-3.

One-step genetic correction of hemoglobin E/beta-thalassemia patient-derived 
iPSCs by the CRISPR/Cas9 system.

Wattanapanitch M(1)(2), Damkham N(1), Potirat P(1), Trakarnsanga K(3), Janan 
M(1), U-Pratya Y(1)(4), Kheolamai P(5), Klincumhom N(6), Issaragrisil S(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Siriraj Center of Excellence for Stem Cell Research, Faculty of Medicine 
Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(2)Department of Research and Development, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, 
Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol 
University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(4)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj 
Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(5)Division of Cell Biology, Department of Pre-clinical Sciences, Faculty of 
Medicine, Thammasat University, Pathumthani, Thailand.
(6)Department of Anatomy, Faculty of Dentistry, Chulalongkorn University, 
Bangkok, Thailand.
(7)Siriraj Center of Excellence for Stem Cell Research, Faculty of Medicine 
Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand. surapolsi@gmail.com.
(8)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj 
Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand. surapolsi@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Thalassemia is the most common genetic disease worldwide; those with 
severe disease require lifelong blood transfusion and iron chelation therapy. 
The definitive cure for thalassemia is allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation, which is limited due to lack of HLA-matched donors and the risk 
of post-transplant complications. Induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) 
technology offers prospects for autologous cell-based therapy which could avoid 
the immunological problems. We now report genetic correction of the beta 
hemoglobin (HBB) gene in iPSCs derived from a patient with a double heterozygote 
for hemoglobin E and β-thalassemia (HbE/β-thalassemia), the most common 
thalassemia syndrome in Thailand and Southeast Asia.
METHODS: We used the CRISPR/Cas9 system to target the hemoglobin E mutation from 
one allele of the HBB gene by homology-directed repair with a single-stranded 
DNA oligonucleotide template. DNA sequences of the corrected iPSCs were 
validated by Sanger sequencing. The corrected clones were differentiated into 
hematopoietic progenitor and erythroid cells to confirm their multilineage 
differentiation potential and hemoglobin expression.
RESULTS: The hemoglobin E mutation of HbE/β-thalassemia iPSCs was seamlessly 
corrected by the CRISPR/Cas9 system. The corrected clones were differentiated 
into hematopoietic progenitor cells under feeder-free and OP9 coculture systems. 
These progenitor cells were further expanded in erythroid liquid culture system 
and developed into erythroid cells that expressed mature HBB gene and HBB 
protein.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study provides a strategy to correct hemoglobin E mutation in 
one step and these corrected iPSCs can be differentiated into hematopoietic stem 
cells to be used for autologous transplantation in patients with 
HbE/β-thalassemia in the future.

DOI: 10.1186/s13287-018-0779-3
PMCID: PMC5828150
PMID: 29482624 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: The 
study was approved by the Siriraj Institutional Review Board (no. Si248/2011), 
in accordance with the Helsinki Declaration of 1975. All patients were provided 
with an explanation and with a participant information sheet and signed the 
informed consent. COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no 
competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with 
regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional 
affiliations.