1. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2018 Jul;45(8):1432-1441. doi: 
10.1007/s00259-018-3984-5. Epub 2018 Mar 9.

Parametric mapping using spectral analysis for (11)C-PBR28 PET reveals 
neuroinflammation in mild cognitive impairment subjects.

Fan Z(1), Dani M(1), Femminella GD(1), Wood M(1), Calsolaro V(1), Veronese M(2), 
Turkheimer F(2), Gentleman S(1), Brooks DJ(1)(3), Hinz R(4), Edison P(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Neurology Imaging Unit, Imperial College London, 
London, W12 0NN, UK.
(2)Department of Neuroimaging, Institute of Psychiatry, Kings College London, 
London, WC2R 2LS, UK.
(3)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus C, Denmark.
(4)Wolfson Molecular Imaging Centre, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(5)Department of Medicine, Neurology Imaging Unit, Imperial College London, 
London, W12 0NN, UK. paul.edison@imperial.ac.uk.

PURPOSE: Neuroinflammation and microglial activation play an important role in 
amnestic mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and Alzheimer's disease. In this study, 
we investigated the spatial distribution of neuroinflammation in MCI subjects, 
using spectral analysis (SA) to generate parametric maps and quantify 11C-PBR28 
PET, and compared these with compartmental and other kinetic models of 
quantification.
METHODS: Thirteen MCI and nine healthy controls were enrolled in this study. 
Subjects underwent 11C-PBR28 PET scans with arterial cannulation. Spectral 
analysis with an arterial plasma input function was used to generate 11C-PBR28 
parametric maps. These maps were then compared with regional 11C-PBR28 VT 
(volume of distribution) using a two-tissue compartment model and Logan graphic 
analysis. Amyloid load was also assessed with 18F-Flutemetamol PET.
RESULTS: With SA, three component peaks were identified in addition to blood 
volume. The 11C-PBR28 impulse response function (IRF) at 90 min produced the 
lowest coefficient of variation. Single-subject analysis using this IRF 
demonstrated microglial activation in five out of seven amyloid-positive MCI 
subjects. IRF parametric maps of 11C-PBR28 uptake revealed a group-wise 
significant increase in neuroinflammation in amyloid-positive MCI subjects 
versus HC in multiple cortical association areas, and particularly in the 
temporal lobe. Interestingly, compartmental analysis detected group-wise 
increase in 11C-PBR28 binding in the thalamus of amyloid-positive MCI subjects, 
while Logan parametric maps did not perform well.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates for the first time that spectral analysis 
can be used to generate parametric maps of 11C-PBR28 uptake, and is able to 
detect microglial activation in amyloid-positive MCI subjects. IRF parametric 
maps of 11C-PBR28 uptake allow voxel-wise single-subject analysis and could be 
used to evaluate microglial activation in individual subjects.

DOI: 10.1007/s00259-018-3984-5
PMCID: PMC5993844
PMID: 29523926 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST: Dr. Edison was funded by 
the Medical Research Council and now by Higher Education Funding Council for 
England (HEFCE). He has also received grants from Alzheimer’s Research UK, 
Alzheimer’s Drug Discovery Foundation, Alzheimer’s Society, UK, Novo Nordisk, 
and GE Healthcare. He is also a consultant to Pfizer. Prof. Brooks has received 
research grants and non-financial support from the Medical Research Council, 
grants from Alzheimer’s Research Trust, during the conduct of the study; other 
from GE Healthcare, personal fees from AstraZeneca, personal fees from Cytox, 
personal fees from Shire, personal fees from Novartis, personal fees from GSK, 
Holland, personal fees from Navidea, personal fees from UCB, personal fees from 
Acadia, grants from Michael J Fox Foundation, grants from European Commission, 
outside the submitted work. Mattia Veronese is supported by the National 
Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Biomedical Research Centre at South London 
and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust and by King’s College London. ETHICAL 
APPROVAL: All procedures performed in studies involving human participants were 
in accordance with the ethical standards of the institutional and/or national 
research committee and with the 1964 Helsinki Declaration and its later 
amendments or comparable ethical standards. INFORMED CONSENT: Informed consent 
was obtained from all individual participants included in the study.