1. Anatol J Cardiol. 2018 Mar;19(3):213-221. doi: 
10.14744/AnatolJCardiol.2018.53059.

Protective effects of curcumin and beta-carotene on cisplatin-induced 
cardiotoxicity: An experimental rat model.

Bahadır A(1), Ceyhan A, Öz Gergin Ö, Yalçın B, Ülger M, Özyazgan TM, Yay A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biophysics, Faculty of Medicine, Düzce University; 
Düzce-Turkey. anzel78@hotmail.com.

OBJECTIVE: Cisplatin (CDDP) has been known to be an effective antineoplastic 
drug; however, it has a cardiotoxic effect. Curcumin (CMN) and beta-carotene 
(BC) have been suggested to protect biological systems against CDDP-induced 
damage. The current study was conducted to evaluate the possible protective 
roles of CMN and BC on CDDP-induced cardiotoxicity in rat cardiac tissues.
METHODS: A total of 49 adult female Wistar albino rats were equally divided into 
seven groups as follows: control (no medication), sesame oil (1 mg/kg), CDDP 
(single dose injection two times as once a week, 5 mg/kg/week), BC (100 mg/kg), 
CDDP+BC (pretreated BC for 30 min before CDDP injection), CMN (200 mg/kg), and 
CDDP+CMN (pretreated CMN for 30 min before CDDP injection). These treatments 
were applied intraperitoneally for CDDP and with gavage for CMN and BC. The 
oxidative/antioxidant indicators, inflammatory cytokines, and histopathological 
alterations were examined.
RESULTS: These alterations included a marked increase in malondialdehyde (MDA) 
level, significant decrease in catalase (CAT) and superoxide dismutase (SOD) 
activities, and significant elevation of tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, 
interleukin (IL)-1ß, interleukin (IL)-6 in the CDDP group compared with the 
other groups. Histopathologically, CDDP-induced severe myocardial degenerative 
changes were observed. However, the CDDP-induced disturbances in the 
above-mentioned parameters significantly improved by treatment with BC and 
particularly CMN.
CONCLUSION: This study indicated that CDDP treatment markedly caused 
cardiotoxicity; however, treatment with CMN or BC ameliorated this 
cardiotoxicity in rats. Furthermore, these findings revealed that treatment with 
CMN has a higher cardioprotective effect than that with BC against CDDP-induced 
cardiotoxicity in rat cardiac tissues.

DOI: 10.14744/AnatolJCardiol.2018.53059
PMCID: PMC5864772
PMID: 29521316 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: None declared.