1. World J Nephrol. 2018 Mar 6;7(2):51-57. doi: 10.5527/wjn.v7.i2.51.

Is serum copeptin a modifiable biomarker in autosomal dominant polycystic kidney 
disease?

Tasneem M(1), Mannix C(1), Wong A(1), Zhang J(1), Rangan G(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Transplant and Renal Research, Westmead Institute for Medical 
Research, the University of Sydney, Sydney 2145, Australia.

The availability of disease-modifying drugs for the management of autosomal 
dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) has accelerated the need to 
accurately predict renal prognosis and/or treatment response in this condition. 
Arginine vasopressin (AVP) is a critical determinant of postnatal kidney cyst 
growth in ADPKD. Copeptin (the C-terminal glycoprotein of the precursor AVP 
peptide) is an accurate surrogate marker of AVP release that is stable and 
easily measured by immunoassay. Cohort studies show that serum copeptin is 
correlated with disease severity in ADPKD, and predicts future renal events 
[decline in renal function and increase in total kidney volume (TKV)]. However, 
serum copeptin is strongly correlated with creatinine, and its additional value 
as a prognostic biomarker over estimated glomerular filtration rate and TKV is 
not certain. It has also been suggested that copeptin could be a predictive 
biomarker to select ADPKD patients who are most likely to benefit from 
AVP-modifying therapies, but prospective data to validate this assumption are 
required. In this regard, long-term randomised clinical trials evaluating the 
effect of prescribed water intake on renal cyst growth may contribute to 
addressing this hypothesis. In conclusion, although serum copeptin is aligned 
with the basic pathogenesis of ADPKD, further rigorous studies are needed to 
define if it will contribute to enabling the delivery of personalised care in 
ADPKD.

DOI: 10.5527/wjn.v7.i2.51
PMCID: PMC5838414
PMID: 29527508

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: No potential 
conflicts of interest relevant to this article were reported. Rangan R is 
recipient of an investigator initiated grant from the Danone Nutricia Research 
(manufacturer of bottled water).