1. Genome Med. 2018 Mar 15;10(1):18. doi: 10.1186/s13073-018-0529-2.

From somatic variants towards precision oncology: Evidence-driven reporting of 
treatment options in molecular tumor boards.

Perera-Bel J(1), Hutter B(2), Heining C(3), Bleckmann A(1)(4), Fröhlich M(2), 
Fröhling S(3)(5), Glimm H(5)(6), Brors B(2), Beißbarth T(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Statistics, University Medical Center Göttingen, 37073, 
Göttingen, Germany.
(2)Division Applied Bioinformatics, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) and 
National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT), 69120, Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Division Translational Oncology, National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT) and 
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), 69120, Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, University Medical Center 
Göttingen, 37075, Göttingen, Germany.
(5)German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), 69120, Heidelberg, Germany.
(6)Department of Translational Medical Oncology, NCT-Dresden, University 
Hospital, Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden, 01307 Dresden and 
DKFZ, Heidelberg, 69120, Germany.
(7)Department of Medical Statistics, University Medical Center Göttingen, 37073, 
Göttingen, Germany. Tim.Beissbarth@ams.med.uni-goettingen.de.

BACKGROUND: A comprehensive understanding of cancer has been furthered with 
technological improvements and decreasing costs of next-generation sequencing 
(NGS). However, the complexity of interpreting genomic data is hindering the 
implementation of high-throughput technologies in the clinical context: 
increasing evidence on gene-drug interactions complicates the task of assigning 
clinical significance to genomic variants.
METHODS: Here we present a method that automatically matches patient-specific 
genomic alterations to treatment options. The method relies entirely on public 
knowledge of somatic variants with predictive evidence on drug response. The 
output report is aimed at supporting clinicians in the task of finding the 
clinical meaning of genomic variants. We applied the method to 1) The Cancer 
Genome Atlas (TCGA) and Genomics Evidence Neoplasia Information Exchange (GENIE) 
cohorts and 2) 11 patients from the NCT MASTER trial whose treatment discussions 
included information on their genomic profiles.
RESULTS: Our reporting strategy showed a substantial number of patients with 
actionable variants in the analyses of TCGA and GENIE samples. Notably, it was 
able to reproduce experts' treatment suggestions in a retrospective study of 11 
patients from the NCT MASTER trial. Our results establish a proof of concept for 
comprehensive, evidence-based reports as a supporting tool for discussing 
treatment options in tumor boards.
CONCLUSIONS: We believe that a standardized method to report actionable somatic 
variants will smooth the incorporation of NGS in the clinical context. We 
anticipate that tools like the one we present here will become essential in 
summarizing for clinicians the growing evidence in the field of precision 
medicine. The R code of the presented method is provided in Additional file 6 
and available at https://github.com/jperera-bel/MTB-Report .

DOI: 10.1186/s13073-018-0529-2
PMCID: PMC5856211
PMID: 29544535 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: All 
patient data were obtained following written informed consent under the NCT 
MASTER trial, an institutional review board-approved clinical sequencing program 
for younger patients with advanced-stage hematological and oncological diseases 
across all malignancies. The trial protocol was approved by the Ethics Committee 
of Heidelberg University. Research within NCT MASTER was conducted in accordance 
with the Declaration of Helsinki. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Written informed 
consent for publication was obtained under the NCT MASTER trial. COMPETING 
INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no competing interests. 
PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.