1. Mol Neurodegener. 2018 Mar 15;13(1):13. doi: 10.1186/s13024-018-0245-9.

Tau oligomers mediate α-synuclein toxicity and can be targeted by immunotherapy.

Gerson JE(1)(2), Farmer KM(1), Henson N(1), Castillo-Carranza DL(1), Carretero 
Murillo M(1), Sengupta U(1), Barrett A(2), Kayed R(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Neurology, Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Texas 
Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, 77555, USA.
(2)Sealy Center for Vaccine Development, University of Texas Medical Branch, 
Galveston, TX, 77555, USA.
(3)Departments of Neurology, Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Texas 
Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, 77555, USA. rakayed@utmb.edu.
(4)Sealy Center for Vaccine Development, University of Texas Medical Branch, 
Galveston, TX, 77555, USA. rakayed@utmb.edu.

BACKGROUND: We have evaluated the efficacy of targeting the toxic, oligomeric 
form of tau protein by passive immunotherapy in a mouse model of 
synucleinopathy. Parkinson's disease and Lewy body dementia are two of the most 
common neurodegenerative disorders and are primarily characterized by the 
accumulation of α-synuclein in Lewy bodies. However, evidence shows that 
smaller, oligomeric aggregates are likely the most toxic form of the protein. 
Moreover, a large body of research suggests that α-synuclein interacts with tau 
in disease and may act in a synergistic mechanism, implicating tau oligomers as 
a potential therapeutic target.
METHODS: We treated seven-month-old mice overexpressing mutated α-synuclein 
(A53T mice) with tau oligomer-specific monoclonal antibody (TOMA) and a control 
antibody and assessed both behavioral and pathological phenotypes.
RESULTS: We found that A53T mice treated with TOMA were protected from cognitive 
and motor deficits two weeks after a single injection. Levels of toxic tau 
oligomers were specifically decreased in the brains of TOMA-treated mice. Tau 
oligomer depletion also protected against dopamine and synaptic protein loss.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that targeting tau oligomers is beneficial 
for a mouse model of synucleinopathy and may be a viable therapeutic strategy 
for treating diseases in which tau and α-synuclein have a synergistic toxicity.

DOI: 10.1186/s13024-018-0245-9
PMCID: PMC5856311
PMID: 29544548 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL: This study was conducted in a 
facility approved by the American Association for the Accreditation of 
Laboratory Animal Care, and all experiments were performed in accordance with 
the National Institutes of Health Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory 
Animals and approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the 
University of Texas Medical Branch (UTMB). CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not 
applicable COMPETING INTERESTS: RK has patent applications on the compositions 
and methods related to tau oligomers and antibodies. All other authors declare 
that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains 
neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional 
affiliations.