1. Blood. 2018 Jul 26;132(4):393-404. doi: 10.1182/blood-2016-09-739086. Epub
2018  Mar 22.

Ponatinib efficacy and safety in Philadelphia chromosome-positive leukemia: 
final 5-year results of the phase 2 PACE trial.

Cortes JE(1), Kim DW(2), Pinilla-Ibarz J(3), le Coutre PD(4), Paquette R(5), 
Chuah C(6), Nicolini FE(7), Apperley JF(8), Khoury HJ(9), Talpaz M(10), DeAngelo 
DJ(11), Abruzzese E(12), Rea D(13), Baccarani M(14), Müller MC(15), 
Gambacorti-Passerini C(16), Lustgarten S(17), Rivera VM(17), Haluska FG(17), 
Guilhot F(18)(19), Deininger MW(20), Hochhaus A(21), Hughes TP(22), Shah NP(23), 
Kantarjian HM(1).

Author information:
(1)The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX.
(2)Seoul St. Mary's Hospital, Leukemia Research Institute, The Catholic 
University of Korea, Seoul, South Korea.
(3)H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute, Tampa, FL.
(4)Charité, Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(5)Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA.
(6)Singapore General Hospital, Duke-National University of Singapore (NUS) 
Medical School, Singapore.
(7)Centre Hospitalier Lyon-Sud, Pierre-Bénite, Lyon, France.
(8)Centre for Haematology, Imperial College, London, United Kingdom.
(9)Winship Cancer Institute of Emory University, Atlanta, GA.
(10)Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.
(11)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA.
(12)S. Eugenio Hospital, Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy.
(13)Service d'Hématologie Adulte et Centre d'Investigation Clinique, Hôpital 
Saint Louis, Paris, France.
(14)Department of Experimental, Diagnostic, and Specialty Medicine, University 
of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(15)III. Medizinische Klinik, Universitätsmedizin Mannheim, Mannheim, Germany.
(16)University of Milano-Bicocca/San Gerardo Hospital, Monza, Italy.
(17)ARIAD Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Cambridge, MA, a wholly owned subsidiary of 
Takeda Pharmaceutical Company Limited.
(18)Centre d'Investigation Clinique (CIC) 1402, INSERM, Poitiers, France.
(19)Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Poitiers, Poitiers, France.
(20)Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT.
(21)Hematology/Oncology, Jena University Hospital, Jena, Germany.
(22)University of Adelaide/South Australian Health and Medical Research 
Institute (SAHMRI), Adelaide, SA, Australia; and.
(23)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology and Oncology, University of 
California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA.

Ponatinib has potent activity against native and mutant BCR-ABL1, including 
BCR-ABL1T315I The pivotal phase 2 Ponatinib Ph+ ALL and CML Evaluation (PACE) 
trial evaluated efficacy and safety of ponatinib at a starting dose of 45 mg 
once daily in 449 patients with chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) or Philadelphia 
chromosome-positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) resistant/intolerant to 
dasatinib or nilotinib, or with BCR-ABL1T315I This analysis focuses on 
chronic-phase CML (CP-CML) patients (n = 270) with 56.8-month median follow-up. 
Among 267 evaluable patients, 60%, 40%, and 24% achieved major cytogenetic 
response (MCyR), major molecular response (MMR), and 4.5-log molecular response, 
respectively. The probability of maintaining MCyR for 5 years was 82% among 
responders. Dose reductions were implemented in October 2013 to decrease the 
risk of arterial occlusive events (AOEs); ≥90% of CP-CML patients who had 
achieved MCyR or MMR maintained response 40 months after elective dose 
reductions. Estimated 5-year overall survival was 73%. In CP-CML patients, the 
most common treatment-emergent adverse events were rash (47%), abdominal pain 
(46%), thrombocytopenia (46%), headache (43%), dry skin (42%), and constipation 
(41%). The cumulative incidence of AOEs in CP-CML patients increased over time 
to 31%, while the exposure-adjusted incidence of new AOEs (15.8 and 4.9 per 100 
patient-years in years 1 and 5, respectively) did not increase over time. These 
final PACE results demonstrate ponatinib provides durable and clinically 
meaningful responses, irrespective of dose reductions, in this population of 
heavily pretreated CP-CML patients. This trial was registered at 
www.clinicaltrials.gov as #NCT01207440.

© 2018 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2016-09-739086
PMCID: PMC6071555
PMID: 29567798 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest disclosure: J.E.C. has 
received research funding from ARIAD, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Novartis, Pfizer, 
and Teva, and has served as a consultant for ARIAD, Bristol-Myers Squibb, 
Novartis, and Pfizer. D.-W.K. has received research funding from ARIAD. J.P.-I. 
has received honoraria from Bristol-Myers Squibb; has received research funding 
from ARIAD and Novartis; and has served as a consultant or speaker for ARIAD, 
Bristol-Myers Squibb, Novartis, Pfizer, and Teva. P.D.l.C. has received 
honoraria from ARIAD, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Novartis, and Pfizer, and research 
funding from ARIAD. R.P. has received honoraria from, and has served as a 
speaker for, ARIAD, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Incyte, and Novartis; has served in a 
consulting or advisory role for AstraZeneca; and has received research funding 
from ARIAD. C.C. has received research funding from ARIAD. F.E.N. has received 
honoraria from ARIAD, Bristol-Myers Squibb, and Novartis; has served in a 
consulting or advisory role for Bristol-Myers Squibb and Novartis; has served on 
speakers’ bureaus for ARIAD, Bristol-Myers Squibb, and Novartis; has received 
research funding from ARIAD and Novartis; and has received travel, 
accommodations, or other expense reimbursements from Bristol-Myers Squibb and 
Novartis. J.F.A. has received honoraria from ARIAD, Bristol-Myers Squibb, MSD, 
Novartis, and Pfizer, and has received research funding from ARIAD and Novartis. 
H.J.K. received honoraria and research funding from ARIAD. M.T. has served in a 
consulting or advisory role for ARIAD, Novartis, and Pfizer; has received 
research funding from ARIAD, Incyte, Novartis, Pfizer, and Sanofi; and has 
received travel, accommodations, or other expense reimbursements from ARIAD, 
Incyte, Novartis, and Pfizer. D.J.D. has served in a consulting or advisory role 
for Amgen, ARIAD, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Incyte, Novartis, and Pfizer, and has 
received research funding from ARIAD. E.A. has served in a consulting or 
advisory role for ARIAD, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Novartis, and Pfizer, and has 
received research funding from ARIAD. D.R. has received honoraria for 
nonpromotional oral presentations from, and has served on advisory boards for, 
ARIAD, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Novartis, and Pfizer, and has received research 
funding from ARIAD. M.B. has served as a consultant and speaker for, and 
received honoraria from, ARIAD, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Novartis, and Pfizer, and 
has received research funding from ARIAD. M.C.M. has received honoraria for 
consulting or advisory roles and research funding from ARIAD, Bristol-Myers 
Squibb, and Novartis. C.G.-P. has served in an advisory role to Bristol-Myers 
Squibb and Pfizer and has received research funding from ARIAD. S.L. is an 
employee of, and may own stock/stock options in, ARIAD. V.M.R. is an employee 
of, and may own stock/stock options in, ARIAD. F.G.H. was an employee of, and 
may have owned stock/stock options in, ARIAD at the time the work was conducted. 
F.G. has received honoraria from Novartis and Pfizer; has served in a consulting 
or advisory role for Celgene; has received travel, accommodations, or other 
expense reimbursements from Novartis; and has received research funding from 
ARIAD. M.W.D. has served in a consulting or advisory role for ARIAD, 
Bristol-Myers Squibb, Incyte, Novartis, and Pfizer; has received travel, 
accommodations, or other expense reimbursements from ARIAD, Bristol-Myers 
Squibb, CTI BioPharma, Novartis, and Pfizer; has provided expert testimony for 
Bristol-Myers Squibb; has received honoraria from ARIAD, Bristol-Myers Squibb, 
CTI BioPharma, Incyte, Novartis, and Pfizer; and has received research funding 
from ARIAD, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Celgene, Incyte, and Novartis. A.H. has 
received research funding from ARIAD, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Novartis, and 
Pfizer. T.P.H. has received honoraria from, has served in a consulting or 
advisory role for, and has received research funding from ARIAD, Bristol-Myers 
Squibb, and Novartis, and has received travel, accommodations, or other expense 
reimbursements from Bristol-Myers Squibb and Novartis. N.P.S. has received 
research funding from ARIAD, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Daiichi-Sankyo, Pfizer, and 
Plexxikon. H.M.K. has received research funding from Amgen, Bristol-Myers 
Squibb, Novartis, and Pfizer.