1. Gastroenterol Hepatol Bed Bench. 2018 Winter;11(1):27-33.

Protein-protein interaction analysis of Alzheimer`s disease and NAFLD based on 
systems biology methods unhide common ancestor pathways.

Karbalaei R(1), Allahyari M(2), Rezaei-Tavirani M(1), Asadzadeh-Aghdaei H(3), 
Zali MR(4).

Author information:
(1)Proteomics Research Center, Faculty of Paramedical Sciences, Shahid Beheshti 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Drug Design and Bioinformatics Unit, Medical Biotechnology Department, 
Biotechnology Research Center, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Basic and Molecular Epidemiology of Gastrointestinal Disorders Research 
Center, Research Institute for Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases, Shahid 
Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases Research Center, Research Institute for 
Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

AIM: Analysis reconstruction networks from two diseases, NAFLD and Alzheimer`s 
diseases and their relationship based on systems biology methods.
BACKGROUND: NAFLD and Alzheimer`s diseases are two complex diseases, with 
progressive prevalence and high cost for countries. There are some reports on 
relation and same spreading pathways of these two diseases. In addition, they 
have some similar risk factors, exclusively lifestyle such as feeding, exercises 
and so on. Therefore, systems biology approach can help to discover their 
relationship.
METHODS: DisGeNET and STRING databases were sources of disease genes and 
constructing networks. Three plugins of Cytoscape software, including 
ClusterONE, ClueGO and CluePedia, were used to analyze and cluster networks and 
enrichment of pathways. An R package used to define best centrality method. 
Finally, based on degree and Betweenness, hubs and bottleneck nodes were 
defined.
RESULTS: Common genes between NAFLD and Alzheimer`s disease were 190 genes that 
used construct a network with STRING database. The resulting network contained 
182 nodes and 2591 edges and comprises from four clusters. Enrichment of these 
clusters separately lead to carbohydrate metabolism, long chain fatty acid and 
regulation of JAK-STAT and IL-17 signaling pathways, respectively. Also seven 
genes selected as hub-bottleneck include: IL6, AKT1, TP53, TNF, JUN, VEGFA and 
PPARG. Enrichment of these proteins and their first neighbors in network by OMIM 
database lead to diabetes and obesity as ancestors of NAFLD and AD.
CONCLUSION: Systems biology methods, specifically PPI networks, can be useful 
for analyzing complicated related diseases. Finding Hub and bottleneck proteins 
should be the goal of drug designing and introducing disease markers.

PMCID: PMC5849115
PMID: 29564062