1. Nat Microbiol. 2018 Apr;3(4):494-502. doi: 10.1038/s41564-018-0133-7. Epub
2018  Mar 27.

Campylobacter jejuni transcriptional and genetic adaptation during human 
infection.

Crofts AA(1), Poly FM(2), Ewing CP(2), Kuroiwa JM(2), Rimmer JE(2)(3)(4), Harro 
C(5), Sack D(5), Talaat KR(5), Porter CK(2), Gutierrez RL(2), DeNearing B(5), 
Brubaker J(5), Laird RM(2), Maue AC(2), Jaep K(2), Alcala A(2), Tribble DR(6), 
Riddle MS(2), Ramakrishnan A(7), McCoy AJ(7), Davies BW(1)(8), Guerry P(9), 
Trent MS(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, 
TX, USA.
(2)Enteric Diseases Department, Naval Medical Research Center, Silver Spring, 
MD, USA.
(3)School of Immunity and Infection, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.
(4)Academic Department of Military Medicine, Royal Centre for Defense Medicine, 
Medical Directorate, Joint Medical Command, Birmingham Research Park, 
Birmingham, UK.
(5)Department of International Health, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public 
Health, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(6)Infectious Disease Clinical Research Program, Uniformed Services University 
of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(7)Naval Medical Research Unit-6, Lima, Peru.
(8)Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of Texas at Austin, 
Austin, TX, USA.
(9)Enteric Diseases Department, Naval Medical Research Center, Silver Spring, 
MD, USA. patricia.guerry-kopecko.civ@mail.mil.
(10)Department of Infectious Diseases, University of Georgia at Athens, College 
of Veterinary Medicine, Athens, GA, USA. strent@uga.edu.
(11)Center for Vaccines and Immunology, University of Georgia at Athens, College 
of Veterinary Medicine, Athens, GA, USA. strent@uga.edu.

Campylobacter jejuni infections are a leading cause of bacterial food-borne 
diarrhoeal illness worldwide, and Campylobacter infections in children are 
associated with stunted growth and therefore long-term deficits into adulthood. 
Despite this global impact on health and human capital, how zoonotic C. jejuni 
responds to the human host remains unclear. Unlike other intestinal pathogens, 
C. jejuni does not harbour pathogen-defining toxins that explicitly contribute 
to disease in humans. This makes understanding Campylobacter pathogenesis 
challenging and supports a broad examination of bacterial factors that 
contribute to C. jejuni infection. Here, we use a controlled human infection 
model to characterize C. jejuni transcriptional and genetic adaptations in vivo, 
along with a non-human primate infection model to validate our approach. We 
found that variation in 11 genes is associated with either acute or persistent 
human infections and includes products involved in host cell invasion, bile 
sensing and flagella modification, plus additional potential therapeutic 
targets. In particular, a functional version of the cell invasion protein A 
(cipA) gene product is strongly associated with persistently infecting bacteria 
and we identified its biochemical role in flagella modification. These data 
characterize the adaptive C. jejuni response to primate infections and suggest 
therapy design should consider the intrinsic differences between acute and 
persistently infecting bacteria. In addition, RNA sequencing revealed conserved 
responses during natural host commensalism and human infections. Thirty-nine 
genes were differentially regulated in vivo across hosts, lifestyles and C. 
jejuni strains. This conserved in vivo response highlights important C. jejuni 
survival mechanisms such as iron acquisition and evasion of the host mucosal 
immune response. These advances highlight pathogen adaptability across host 
species and demonstrate the utility of multidisciplinary collaborations in 
future clinical trials to study pathogens in vivo.

DOI: 10.1038/s41564-018-0133-7
PMCID: PMC5876760
PMID: 29588538 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Financial interest: The authors declare no 
competing financial interests with this work.