1. Biophys J. 2018 Mar 27;114(6):1267-1273. doi: 10.1016/j.bpj.2018.01.033.

CONAN: A Tool to Decode Dynamical Information from Molecular Interaction Maps.

Mercadante D(1), Gräter F(2), Daday C(3).

Author information:
(1)Interdisciplinary Center for Scientific Computing, Heidelberg University, 
Mathematikon, Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Interdisciplinary Center for Scientific Computing, Heidelberg University, 
Mathematikon, Heidelberg, Germany; Molecular Biomechanics Group, Heidelberg 
Institute for Theoretical Studies, Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Interdisciplinary Center for Scientific Computing, Heidelberg University, 
Mathematikon, Heidelberg, Germany; Molecular Biomechanics Group, Heidelberg 
Institute for Theoretical Studies, Heidelberg, Germany. Electronic address: 
csaba.daday@h-its.org.

The analysis of contacts is a powerful tool to understand biomolecular function 
in a series of contexts, from the investigation of dynamical behavior at 
equilibrium to the study of nonequilibrium dynamics in which the system moves 
between multiple states. We thus propose a tool called CONtact ANalysis (CONAN) 
that, from molecular dynamics (MD) trajectories, analyzes interresidue contacts, 
creates videos of time-resolved contact maps, and performs correlation, 
principal component, and cluster analysis, revealing how specific contacts 
relate to functionally relevant states sampled by MD. We present how CONAN can 
identify features describing the dynamics of ubiquitin both at equilibrium and 
during mechanical unfolding. Additionally, we show the analysis of MD 
trajectories of an α-synuclein mutant peptide that undergoes an α-β 
conformational transition that can be easily monitored using CONAN, which 
identifies the multiple states that the peptide explores along its 
conformational dynamics. The high versatility and ease of use of the software 
make CONAN a tool that can significantly facilitate the understanding of the 
complex dynamical behavior of proteins or other biomolecules. CONAN and its 
documentation are freely available for download on GitHub.

Copyright © 2018 Biophysical Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bpj.2018.01.033
PMCID: PMC5883949
PMID: 29590584 [Indexed for MEDLINE]