1. Front Pharmacol. 2018 Mar 9;9:150. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2018.00150. eCollection 
2018.

A Statistical Thermodynamic Model for Ligands Interacting With Ion Channels: 
Theoretical Model and Experimental Validation of the KCNQ2 Channel.

Bai F(1)(2), Pi X(2)(3), Li P(2), Zhou P(2), Yang H(2), Wang X(1), Li M(4), Gao 
Z(2)(3), Jiang H(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Engineering Mechanics, State Key Laboratory of Structural 
Analysis for Industrial Equipment, and Faculty of Chemical, Environmental, and 
Biological Science and Technology, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, 
China.
(2)Drug Discovery and Design Center, State Key Laboratory of Drug Research, CAS 
Key Laboratory of Receptor Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.
(3)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(4)Department of Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, United 
States.

Ion channels are important therapeutic targets, and their pharmacology is 
becoming increasingly important. However, knowledge of the mechanism of 
interaction of the activators and ion channels is still limited due to the 
complexity of the mechanisms. A statistical thermodynamic model has been 
developed in this study to characterize the cooperative binding of activators to 
ion channels. By fitting experimental concentration-response data, the model 
gives eight parameters for revealing the mechanism of an activator potentiating 
an ion channel, i.e., the binding affinity (KA ), the binding cooperative 
coefficients for two to four activator molecules interacting with one channel 
(γ, μ, and ν), and the channel conductance coefficients for four activator 
binding configurations of the channel (a, b, c, and d). Values for the model 
parameters and the mechanism underlying the interaction of ztz240, a proven 
KCNQ2 activator, with the wild-type channel have been obtained and revealed by 
fitting the concentration-response data of this activator potentiating the 
outward current amplitudes of KCNQ2. With these parameters, our model predicted 
an unexpected bi-sigmoid concentration-response curve of ztz240 activation of 
the WT-F137A mutant heteromeric channel that was in good agreement with the 
experimental data determined in parallel in this study, lending credence to the 
assumptions on which the model is based and to the model itself. Our model can 
provide a better fit to the measured data than the Hill equation and estimates 
the binding affinity, as well as the cooperative coefficients for the binding of 
activators and conductance coefficients for binding states, which validates its 
use in studying ligand-channel interaction mechanisms.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2018.00150
PMCID: PMC5855359
PMID: 29593528