1. PLoS One. 2018 Mar 28;13(3):e0192067. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0192067. 
eCollection 2018.

Impaired neuronal maturation of hippocampal neural progenitor cells in mice 
lacking CRAF.

Pfeiffer V(1)(2), Götz R(2)(3), Camarero G(2), Heinsen H(4)(5), Blum R(3), Rapp 
UR(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)University of Würzburg, Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology, 
Koellikerstraße 6, Würzburg, Germany.
(2)University of Würzburg, Institute for Medical Radiation and Cell Research 
(MSZ), Versbacher Strasse 5, Würzburg, Germany.
(3)Institute for Clinical Neurobiology, University Hospital Würzburg, Versbacher 
Strasse 5, Würzburg, Germany.
(4)University of Würzburg, Department of Psychiatry, Psychosomatics and 
Psychotherapy, Margarethe-Höppel-Platz 1, Würzburg, Germany.
(5)Universidade de Sao Paulo Faculdade de Medicina, Pathology-LIM 44 Sao Paulo, 
SP, Brazil.
(6)Department of Lung Development and Remodeling, Max Planck Institute for Heart 
and Lung Research, Parkstr.1, Bad Nauheim, Germany.

RAF kinases are major constituents of the mitogen activated signaling pathway, 
regulating cell proliferation, differentiation and cell survival of many cell 
types, including neurons. In mammals, the family of RAF proteins consists of 
three members, ARAF, BRAF, and CRAF. Ablation of CRAF kinase in inbred mouse 
strains causes major developmental defects during fetal growth and embryonic or 
perinatal lethality. Heterozygous germline mutations in CRAF result in Noonan 
syndrome, which is characterized by neurocognitive impairment that may involve 
hippocampal physiology. The role of CRAF signaling during hippocampal 
development and generation of new postnatal hippocampal granule neurons has not 
been examined and may provide novel insight into the cause of hippocampal 
dysfunction in Noonan syndrome. In this study, by crossing CRAF-deficiency to 
CD-1 outbred mice, a CRAF mouse model was established which enabled us to 
investigate the interplay of neural progenitor proliferation and postmitotic 
differentiation during adult neurogenesis in the hippocampus. Albeit the general 
morphology of the hippocampus was unchanged, CRAF-deficient mice displayed 
smaller granule cell layer (GCL) volume at postnatal day 30 (P30). In 
CRAF-deficient mice a substantial number of abnormal, chromophilic, fast 
dividing cells were found in the subgranular zone (SGZ) and hilus of the dentate 
gyrus (DG), indicating that CRAF signaling contributes to hippocampal neural 
progenitor proliferation. CRAF-deficient neural progenitor cells showed an 
increased cell death rate and reduced neuronal maturation. These results 
indicate that CRAF function affects postmitotic neural cell differentiation and 
points to a critical role of CRAF-dependent growth factor signaling pathway in 
the postmitotic development of adult-born neurons.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0192067
PMCID: PMC5873938
PMID: 29590115 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.