1. Methods Mol Biol. 2018;1762:455-472. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-7756-7_23.

Understanding G Protein-Coupled Receptor Allostery via Molecular Dynamics 
Simulations: Implications for Drug Discovery.

Basith S(1), Lee Y(1), Choi S(2).

Author information:
(1)National Leading Research Laboratory (NLRL) of Molecular Modeling & Drug 
Design, College of Pharmacy and Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Ewha 
Womans University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)National Leading Research Laboratory (NLRL) of Molecular Modeling & Drug 
Design, College of Pharmacy and Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Ewha 
Womans University, Seoul, Republic of Korea. sunchoi@ewha.ac.kr.

Unraveling the mystery of protein allostery has been one of the greatest 
challenges in both structural and computational biology. However, recent 
advances in computational methods, particularly molecular dynamics (MD) 
simulations, have led to its utility as a powerful and popular tool for the 
study of protein allostery. By capturing the motions of a protein's constituent 
atoms, simulations can enable the discovery of allosteric hot spots and the 
determination of the mechanistic basis for allostery. These structural and 
dynamic studies can provide a foundation for a wide range of applications, 
including rational drug design and protein engineering. In our laboratory, the 
use of MD simulations and network analysis assisted in the elucidation of the 
allosteric hotspots and intracellular signal transduction of G protein-coupled 
receptors (GPCRs), primarily on one of the adenosine receptor subtypes, A2A 
adenosine receptor (A2AAR). In this chapter, we describe a method for 
calculating the map of allosteric signal flow in different GPCR conformational 
states and illustrate how these concepts have been utilized in understanding the 
mechanism of GPCR allostery. These structural studies will provide valuable 
insights into the allosteric and orthosteric modulations that would be of great 
help to design novel drugs targeting GPCRs in pathological states.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-7756-7_23
PMID: 29594786 [Indexed for MEDLINE]