1. Nat Protoc. 2018 May;13(5):927-945. doi: 10.1038/nprot.2018.016. Epub 2018 Apr
 5.

Generation and customization of biosynthetic excitable tissues for 
electrophysiological studies and cell-based therapies.

Nguyen HX(1), Kirkton RD(1), Bursac N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Duke University, Durham, North 
Carolina, USA.

We describe a two-stage protocol to generate electrically excitable and actively 
conducting cell networks with stable and customizable electrophysiological 
phenotypes. Using this method, we have engineered monoclonally derived excitable 
tissues as a robust and reproducible platform to investigate how specific ion 
channels and mutations affect action potential (AP) shape and conduction. In the 
first stage of the protocol, we combine computational modeling, site-directed 
mutagenesis, and electrophysiological techniques to derive optimal sets of 
mammalian and/or prokaryotic ion channels that produce specific AP shape and 
conduction characteristics. In the second stage of the protocol, selected ion 
channels are stably expressed in unexcitable human cells by means of viral or 
nonviral delivery, followed by flow cytometry or antibiotic selection to purify 
the desired phenotype. This protocol can be used with traditional heterologous 
expression systems or primary excitable cells, and application of this method to 
primary fibroblasts may enable an alternative approach to cardiac cell therapy. 
Compared with existing methods, this protocol generates a well-defined, 
relatively homogeneous electrophysiological phenotype of excitable cells that 
facilitates experimental and computational studies of AP conduction and can 
decrease arrhythmogenic risk upon cell transplantation. Although basic cell 
culture and molecular biology techniques are sufficient to generate excitable 
tissues using the described protocol, experience with patch-clamp techniques is 
required to characterize and optimize derived cell populations.

DOI: 10.1038/nprot.2018.016
PMCID: PMC6050172
PMID: 29622805 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: COMPETING INTERESTS The authors declare no 
competing interests.