1. PLoS One. 2018 Apr 9;13(4):e0195442. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0195442. 
eCollection 2018.

An antibody with Fab-constant domains exchanged for a pair of CH3 domains.

Wozniak-Knopp G(1), Stadlmayr G(1), Perthold JW(2), Stadlbauer K(1), Gotsmy 
M(1), Becker S(3), Rüker F(1).

Author information:
(1)Christian Doppler Laboratory for Innovative Immunotherapeutics, Department of 
Biotechnology, University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences (BOKU), Vienna, 
Austria.
(2)Institute of Molecular Modeling and Simulation, Department of Material 
Sciences, University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences (BOKU), Vienna, 
Austria.
(3)Protein Engineering and Antibody Technologies, Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, 
Germany.

We have designed a complete antibody-like construct where the CH1 and Cκ domains 
are exchanged for a pair of the CH3 domains and efficient pairing of the heavy 
and light variable domain is achieved using "Knobs-into-Holes" strategy. This 
construct, composed of only naturally occurring immunoglobulin sequences without 
artificial linkers, expressed at a high level in mammalian cells, however 
exhibited low solubility. Rational mutagenesis aimed at the amino acid residues 
located at the interface of the variable domains and the exchanged CH3 domains 
was applied to improve the biophysical properties of the molecule. The 
domain-exchanged construct, including variable domains of the HER2/neu specific 
antibody trastuzumab, was able to bind to the surface of the strongly HER2/neu 
positive cell line SK-BR3 4-fold weaker than trastuzumab, but could nevertheless 
incite a more potent response in an antibody-dependent cell cytotoxicity (ADCC) 
reporter assay with FcγRIIIa-overexpressing T-cells. This could be explained 
with a stronger binding to the FcγRIIIa. Importantly, the novel construct could 
mediate a specific ADCC effect with natural killer cells similar to the parental 
antibody.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0195442
PMCID: PMC5891013
PMID: 29630643 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: We have the following 
interests: Stefan Becker is an employee of Merck KgaA. Partial funding for this 
study was received from F-star (www.f-star.com). There are no patents, products 
in development or marketed products to declare. This does not alter our 
adherence to all the PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.