1. Asian J Androl. 2018 Sep-Oct;20(5):448-453. doi: 10.4103/aja.aja_23_18.

Pancreatic kininogenase improves erectile function in streptozotocin-induced 
type 2 diabetic rats with erectile dysfunction.

Chen GT(1), Yang BB(1), Chen JH(1), Zhang Z(1), Zhu LL(1), Jiang HS(1), Yu W(1), 
Chen Y(1), Dai YT(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Andrology, Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital, Affiliated Hospital of 
Nanjing University Medical School, Nanjing 210008, China.

Erectile dysfunction (ED) associated with type 2 diabetes is a severe problem 
that requires effective treatment. Pancreatic kininogenase (PK) has the 
potential to improve the erectile function of ED patients. This study aims to 
investigate the effect of PK on erectile function in streptozotocin-induced type 
2 diabetic ED rats. To achieve this goal, we divided male Sprague-Dawley rats 
into five groups. One group was not treated, and the other four groups were 
treated with saline, sildenafil, PK or sildenafil, and PK, respectively, for 4 
weeks after the induction of type 2 diabetic ED. Then, intracavernous pressure 
under cavernous nerve stimulation was measured, and penile tissue was collected 
for further study. Endothelial nitric oxide synthase levels, smooth muscle 
content, endothelium content, cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) levels in 
the corpus cavernosum, and neuronal nitric oxide synthase levels in the dorsal 
penile nerve were measured. Improved erectile function and endothelium and 
smooth muscle content in the corpus cavernosum were observed in diabetic ED 
rats. When treating diabetic ED rats with PK and sildenafil at the same time, a 
better therapeutic effect was achieved. These data demonstrate that 
intraperitoneal injection of PK can improve erectile function in a rat model of 
type 2 diabetic ED. With further research on specific mechanisms of erectile 
function improvement, PK may become a novel treatment for diabetic ED.

DOI: 10.4103/aja.aja_23_18
PMCID: PMC6116675
PMID: 29676291 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declared no competing interests