1. Front Neurol. 2018 Apr 6;9:222. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2018.00222. eCollection
2018.

Glutathione S-Transferase Alpha 4 Prevents Dopamine Neurodegeneration in a Rat 
Alpha-Synuclein Model of Parkinson's Disease.

Jewett M(1), Dickson E(1), Brolin K(1), Negrini M(1), Jimenez-Ferrer I(1), 
Swanberg M(1).

Author information:
(1)Translational Neurogenetics Unit, Department of Experimental Medical Science, 
Wallenberg Neuroscience Center, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.

Parkinson's disease (PD) is a common, progressive neurodegenerative disease, 
which typically presents itself with a range of motor symptoms, like resting 
tremor, bradykinesia, and rigidity, but also non-motor symptoms such as fatigue, 
constipation, and sleep disturbance. Neuropathologically, PD is characterized by 
loss of dopaminergic cells in the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc) and Lewy 
bodies, neuronal inclusions containing α-synuclein (α-syn). Mutations and copy 
number variations of SNCA, the gene encoding α-syn, are linked to familial PD 
and common SNCA gene variants are associated to idiopathic PD. Large-scale 
genome-wide association studies have identified risk variants across another 40 
loci associated to idiopathic PD. These risk variants do not, however, explain 
all the genetic contribution to idiopathic PD. The rat Vra1 locus has been 
linked to neuroprotection after nerve- and brain injury in rats. Vra1 includes 
the glutathione S-transferase alpha 4 (Gsta4) gene, which encodes a protein 
involved in clearing lipid peroxidation by-products. The DA.VRA1 congenic rat 
strain, carrying PVG alleles in Vra1 on a DA strain background, was recently 
reported to express higher levels of Gsta4 transcripts and to display partial 
neuroprotection of SNpc dopaminergic neurons in a 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) 
induced model for PD. Since α-syn expression increases the risk for PD in a 
dose-dependent manner, we assessed the neuroprotective effects of Vra1 in an 
α-syn-induced PD model. Human wild-type α-syn was overexpressed by unilateral 
injections of the rAAV6-α-syn vector in the SNpc of DA and DA.VRA1 congenic 
rats. Gsta4 gene expression levels were significantly higher in the striatum and 
midbrain of DA.VRA1 compared to DA rats at 3 weeks post surgery, in both the 
ipsilateral and contralateral sides. At 8 weeks post surgery, DA.VRA1 rats 
suffered significantly lower fiber loss in the striatum and lower loss of 
dopaminergic neurons in the SNpc compared to DA. Immunofluorescent stainings 
showed co-expression of Gsta4 with Gfap at 8 weeks suggesting that astrocytic 
expression of Gsta4 underlies Vra1-mediated neuroprotection to α-syn induced 
pathology. This is the second PD model in which Vra1 is linked to protection of 
the nigrostriatal pathway, solidifying Gsta4 as a potential therapeutic target 
in PD.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2018.00222
PMCID: PMC5897443
PMID: 29681884