1. Cancer Res Treat. 2019 Jan;51(1):211-222. doi: 10.4143/crt.2018.132. Epub 2018
 Apr 23.

Landscape of Actionable Genetic Alterations Profiled from 1,071 Tumor Samples in 
Korean Cancer Patients.

Lee SH(1)(2), Lee B(2)(3), Shim JH(2)(3), Lee KW(3), Yun JW(2)(3), Kim SY(3), 
Kim TY(4), Kim YH(5), Ko YH(6), Chung HC(7), Yu CS(8), Lee J(1), Rha SY(7), Kim 
TW(9), Jung KH(9), Im SA(4), Moon HG(10), Cho S(11), Kang JH(12), Kim J(13), Kim 
SK(14), Ryu HS(15), Ha SY(6), Kim JI(16), Chung YJ(17), Kim C(18), Kim HL(19), 
Park WY(2)(3)(20), Noh DY(10), Park K(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical 
Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Department of Health Science and Technology, Samsung Advanced Institute of 
Health Science and Technology, Sungkyunkwan University, Seoul, Korea.
(3)Samsung Genome Institute, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University 
School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul 
National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Korea University Anam Hospital, Korea 
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(6)Department of Pathology, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University 
School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(7)Division of Medical Oncology, Yonsei Cancer Center, Yonsei University College 
of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(8)Department of Colon & Rectal Surgery, Asan Medical Center, University of 
Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(9)Department of Oncology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of 
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(10)Department of Surgery, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul National 
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(11)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Seoul National University 
Bundang Hospital, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seongnam, 
Korea.
(12)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul St. Mary's Hospital, College of 
Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea.
(13)Department of Pathology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of 
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(14)Department of Pathology, Severance Hospital, Yonsei University College of 
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(15)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul National 
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(16)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Seoul National University 
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(17)Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of 
Korea, Seoul, Korea.
(18)Department of Medical Informatics, Pusan National University School of 
Medicine, Yangsan, Korea.
(19)Department of Biochemistry, Ewha Womans University School of Medicine, 
Seoul, Korea.
(20)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Sungkyunkwan University School of 
Medicine, Seoul, Kor.

PURPOSE: With the emergence of next-generation sequencing (NGS) technology, 
profiling a wide range of genomic alterations has become a possibility resulting 
in improved implementation of targeted cancer therapy. In Asian populations, the 
prevalence and spectrum of clinically actionable genetic alterations has not yet 
been determined because of a lack of studies examining high-throughput cancer 
genomic data.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: To address this issue, 1,071 tumor samples were collected 
from five major cancer institutes in Korea and analyzed using targeted NGS at a 
centralized laboratory. Samples were either fresh frozen or formalin-fixed, 
paraffin embedded (FFPE) and the quality and yield of extracted genomic DNA was 
assessed. In order to estimate the effect of sample condition on the quality of 
sequencing results, tissue preparation method, specimen type (resected or 
biopsied) and tissue storage time were compared.
RESULTS: We detected 7,360 non-synonymous point mutations, 1,164 small 
insertions and deletions, 3,173 copy number alterations, and 462 structural 
variants. Fifty-four percent of tumors had one or more clinically relevant 
genetic mutation. The distribution of actionable variants was variable among 
different genes. Fresh frozen tissues, surgically resected specimens, and 
recently obtained specimens generated superior sequencing results over FFPE 
tissues, biopsied specimens, and tissues with long storage duration.
CONCLUSION: In order to overcome, challenges involved in bringing NGS testing 
into routine clinical use, a centralized laboratory model was designed that 
could improve the NGS workflows, provide appropriate turnaround times and 
control costs with goal of enabling precision medicine.

DOI: 10.4143/crt.2018.132
PMCID: PMC6333975
PMID: 29690749 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interests. This research was mainly funded by Illumina Inc. (San Diego, CA, 
USA).