1. Pharmgenomics Pers Med. 2018 Apr 10;11:59-66. doi: 10.2147/PGPM.S141546. 
eCollection 2018.

H3Africa: current perspectives.

Mulder N(1), Abimiku A(2), Adebamowo SN(3), de Vries J(4), Matimba A(5), Olowoyo 
P(6), Ramsay M(7), Skelton M(1), Stein DJ(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Computational Biology Division, Department of Integrative Biomedical 
Sciences, Institute of Infectious Disease and Molecular Medicine, University of 
Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.
(2)International Research Center of Excellence, Institute of Human Virology, 
Abuja, Nigeria.
(3)Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, University of Maryland School 
of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.
(5)Advanced Courses and Scientific Conferences, Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton, 
UK.
(6)Federal Teaching Hospital, College of Medicine and Health Sciences, Afe 
Babalola University, Ado-Ekiti, Nigeria.
(7)Sydney Brenner Institute for Molecular Bioscience, Division of Human 
Genetics, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of the Witwatersrand, 
Johannesburg.
(8)Department of Psychiatry and Mental Health, University of Cape Town.
(9)MRC Unit on Risk and Resilience in Mental Disorders, Cape Town, South Africa.

Precision medicine is being enabled in high-income countries by the growing 
availability of health data, increasing knowledge of the genetic determinants of 
disease and variation in response to treatment (pharmacogenomics), and the 
decreasing costs of data generation, which promote routine application of 
genomic technologies in the health sector. However, there is uncertainty about 
the feasibility of applying precision medicine approaches in low- and 
middle-income countries, due to the lack of population-specific knowledge, 
skills, and resources. The Human Heredity and Health in Africa (H3Africa) 
initiative was established to drive new research into the genetic and 
environmental basis for human diseases of relevance to Africans as well as to 
build capacity for genomic research on the continent. Precision medicine 
requires this capacity, in addition to reference data on local populations, and 
skills to analyze and interpret genomic data from the bedside. The H3Africa 
consortium is collectively processing samples and data for over 70,000 
participants across the continent, accompanied in most cases by rich clinical 
information on a variety of non-communicable and infectious diseases. These 
projects are increasingly providing novel insights into the genetic basis of 
diseases in indigenous populations, insights that have the potential to drive 
the development of new diagnostics and treatments. The consortium has also 
invested significant resources into establishing high-quality biorepositories in 
Africa, a bioinformatic network, and a strong training program that has 
developed skills in genomic data analysis and interpretation among 
bioinformaticians, wet-lab researchers, and health-care professionals. Here, we 
describe the current perspectives of the H3Africa consortium and how it can 
contribute to making precision medicine in Africa a reality.

DOI: 10.2147/PGPM.S141546
PMCID: PMC5903476
PMID: 29692621

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of 
interest in this work.