1. Cancer Sci. 2018 Jun;109(6):2063-2073. doi: 10.1111/cas.13624.

Collagen type I induces EGFR-TKI resistance in EGFR-mutated cancer cells by mTOR 
activation through Akt-independent pathway.

Yamazaki S(1)(2), Higuchi Y(1)(2), Ishibashi M(2)(3), Hashimoto H(2), Yasunaga 
M(1)(4), Matsumura Y(1)(4), Tsuchihara K(1)(5), Tsuboi M(6), Goto K(3), Ochiai 
A(1)(7), Ishii G(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Biology, Department of Integrated Biosciences, Graduate 
School of Frontier Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Kashiwa, Chiba, Japan.
(2)Division of Pathology, Exploratory Oncology Research and Clinical Trial 
Center, National Cancer Center, Kashiwa, Chiba, Japan.
(3)Department of Thoracic Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital East, 
Kashiwa, Chiba, Japan.
(4)Division of Developmental Therapeutics, Exploratory Oncology Research and 
Clinical Trial Center, National Cancer Center, Kashiwa, Chiba, Japan.
(5)Division of Genome Translational Research, Exploratory Oncology Research and 
Clinical Trial Center, National Cancer Center, Kashiwa, Chiba, Japan.
(6)Department of Thoracic Surgery, National Cancer Center Hospital East, 
Kashiwa, Chiba, Japan.
(7)Exploratory Oncology Research and Clinical Trial Center, National Cancer 
Center, Kashiwa, Chiba, Japan.

Primary resistance to epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase 
inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) is a serious problem in lung adenocarcinoma patients 
harboring EGFR mutations. The aim of this study was to examine whether and how 
collagen type I (Col I), the most abundantly deposited matrix in tumor stroma, 
affects EGFR-TKI sensitivity in EGFR-mutant cells. We evaluated the EGFR-TKI 
sensitivity of EGFR-mutated cancer cells cultured with Col I. Changes in the 
activation of downstream signaling molecules of EGFR were analyzed. We also 
examined the association between the Col I expression in tumor stroma in 
surgical specimens and EGFR-TKI response of postoperative recurrence patients 
with EGFR mutations. Compared to cancer cells without Col I, the survival rate 
of cancer cells cultured with Col I was significantly higher after EGFR-TKI 
treatment. In cancer cells cultured with and without Col I, EGFR-TKI suppressed 
the levels of phosphorylated (p-)EGFR, p-ERK1/2, and p-Akt. When compared to 
cancer cells without Col I, expression of p-P70S6K, a hallmark of mTOR 
activation, was dramatically upregulated in cancer cells with Col I. This 
activation was maintained even after EGFR-TKI treatment. Simultaneous treatment 
with EGFR-TKI and mTOR inhibitor abrogated Col I-induced resistance to EGFR-TKI. 
Patients with Col I-rich stroma had a significantly shorter progression-free 
survival time after EGFR-TKI therapy (238 days vs 404 days; P < .05). Collagen 
type I induces mTOR activation through an Akt-independent pathway, which results 
in EGFR-TKI resistance. Combination therapy using EGFR-TKI and mTOR inhibitor 
could be a possible strategy to combat this resistance.

© 2018 The Authors. Cancer Science published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd 
on behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

DOI: 10.1111/cas.13624
PMCID: PMC5989854
PMID: 29701925 [Indexed for MEDLINE]