1. Hematol Rep. 2018 Mar 2;10(1):7221. doi: 10.4081/hr.2018.7221. eCollection
2018  Mar 2.

Congenital methemoglobinemia misdiagnosed as polycythemia vera: Case report and 
review of literature.

Soliman DS(1)(2), Yassin M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, National Center for Cancer 
Care and Research, Hamad Medical Corporation, Doha, Qatar.
(2)Department of Clinical Pathology, National Cancer Institute, Cairo 
University, Cairo, Egypt.
(3)Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, National Center for Cancer 
Care and Research, Hamad Medical Corporation, Doha, Qatar.

Methemoglobinemia is a rare overlooked differential diagnosis in patients 
presented with cyanosis and dyspnea unrelated to cardiopulmonary causes. Our 
patient is 29 year old Indian non-smoker male, his story started 6 months prior 
to presentation to our center when he had generalized fatigue and discoloration 
of hands. He presented with persistent polycythemia with elevated hemoglobin 
level. The patient was misdiagnosed in another center as polycythemia and 
treated with Imatinib. The diagnosis of PV was revisited and ruled out in view 
of negative JAK2, normal erythropoietin level and absence of features of 
panmyelosis. Clinical cyanosis and lowoxygen saturation in the presence of 
normal arterial oxygen tension was highly suggestive of methemoglobinemia. 
Arterial blood gas revealed a methemoglobin level of 38% (normal: 0-1.5%). 
Cytochrome B5 reductase (Methemoglobin reductase B) was deficient at level of 
<2.6 U/g Hb) (normal: 6.6-13.3), consistent with methemoglobin reductase 
(cytochrome b5) deficiency and hence the diagnosis of congenital 
methemoglobinemia was established. The role of Imatinib in provoking 
methemoglobinemia is questionable and association between Imatinib and 
methemoglobinemia never described before. In our case, there were no other 
offending drugs in aggravating the patients' symptoms and cyanosis. The patient 
started on Vitamin C 500 mg once daily for which he responded well with less 
cyanosis and significant reduction of methemoglobin level. Congenital 
methemoglobinemia is a rare underreported hemoglobin disease and often 
clinically missed. Upon extensive review of English literature for cases of 
congenital methemoglobinemia due to deficiency of cytochrome b5 reductase, we 
found 23 cases diagnosed as type I (including the case reported here). 17 cases 
(~74%) of type I and 6 cases (27%) of type II. There is male predominance 73% 
versus 26% in females. Almost half of reported cases 12 cases (52%) are Indian, 
2 Japanese, 3 English, 2 Arabic, one case Spanish and one case Italian. For type 
I, the median calculated age is 31 years with cyanosis and shortness of breath 
being the most common sign and symptoms. For type II: Six cases were reported in 
English literature, all in pediatric age group with median calculated age at 
presentation is 6 years with neurologic manifestations and mental retardation 
are the most common type II associated symptoms. Due to lack of systematic 
epidemiological studies, congenital methemoglobinemia is under diagnosed as it 
is under investigated and usually overlooked especially when presenting in 
adulthood and in absence of obvious acquired agents.

DOI: 10.4081/hr.2018.7221
PMCID: PMC5907642
PMID: 29721250

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: the authors declare no 
potential conflict of interest.