1. J Neurosci Rural Pract. 2018 Apr-Jun;9(2):245-251. doi: 
10.4103/jnrp.jnrp_446_17.

Involvement of the Spinal Cord in Mitochondrial Disorders.

Finsterer J(1), Zarrouk-Mahjoub S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Krankenanstalt Rudolfstiftung, Vienna, Austria.
(2)Pasteur Institute of Tunis, University of Tunis El Manar and Genomics 
Platform, Pasteur Institute of Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia.

This review aims at summarising and discussing the current status concerning the 
clinical presentation, pathogenesis, diagnosis, and treatment of spinal cord 
affection in mitochondrial disorders (MIDs). A literature search using the 
database Pubmed was carried out by application of appropriate search terms and 
their combinations. Involvement of the spinal cord in MIDs is more frequent than 
anticipated. It occurs in specific and non-specific MIDs. Among the specific 
MIDs it has been most frequently described in LBSL, LS, MERRF, KSS, IOSCA, 
MIRAS, and PCH and only rarely in MELAS, CPEO, and LHON. Clinically, spinal cord 
involvement manifests as monoparesis, paraparesis, quadruparesis, sensory 
disturbances, hypotonia, spasticity, urinary or defecation dysfunction, spinal 
column deformities, or as transverse syndrome. Diagnosing spinal cord 
involvement in MIDs requires a thoroughly taken history, clinical exam, and 
imaging studies. Additionally, transcranial magnetic stimulation, 
somato-sensory-evoked potentials, and cerebro-spinal fluid can be supportive. 
Treatment is generally not at variance compared to the underlying MID but 
occasionally surgical stabilisation of the spinal column may be necessary. It is 
concluded that spinal cord involvement in MIDs is more frequent than anticipated 
but may be missed if cerebral manifestations prevail. Spinal cord involvement in 
MIDs may strongly determine the mobility of these patients.

DOI: 10.4103/jnrp.jnrp_446_17
PMCID: PMC5912032
PMID: 29725177

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.