1. Clin Exp Dermatol. 2018 Aug;43(6):713-717. doi: 10.1111/ced.13543. Epub 2018
May  10.

Cartilage hair hypoplasia with cutaneous lymphomatoid granulomatosis.

Sathishkumar D(1), Gach JE(1), Ogboli M(1), Desai M(2), Cole T(3), Högler W(4), 
Motwani J(5), Norton A(5), Morland B(6), Colmenero I(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Birmingham Children's Hospital, Birmingham Women's 
and Children's NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, UK.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Birmingham Children's Hospital, 
Birmingham Women's and Children's NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, UK.
(3)Department of Clinical Genetics, Birmingham Women's Hospital, Birmingham 
Women's and Children's NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, UK.
(4)Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Birmingham Children's Hospital, 
Birmingham Women's and Children's NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, UK.
(5)Department of Haematology, Birmingham Children's Hospital, Birmingham Women's 
and Children's NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, UK.
(6)Department of Oncology, Birmingham Children's Hospital, Birmingham Women's 
and Children's NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, UK.
(7)Department of Pathology, Birmingham Children's Hospital, Birmingham Women's 
and Children's NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, UK.

Cartilage-hair hypoplasia (CHH) is an autosomal recessive chondrodysplasia 
characterized by short-stature, sparse hair and impaired cellular immunity. We 
describe a young girl who was diagnosed with CHH based on the findings of 
recurrent infections, short stature with metaphyseal chondrodysplasia, and a 
confirmed bi-allelic RMRP gene mutation. At 13 years, the patient developed an 
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-driven lymphoproliferative disorder involving the lung, 
which responded partially to chemotherapy. Simultaneously, she developed 
multiple indurated plaques involving her face, which had histological findings 
of granulomatous inflammation and EBV-associated low-grade lymphomatoid 
granulomatosis. The patient received a matched unrelated peripheral blood stem 
cell transplant at 15 years of age, and her immunological parameters and skin 
lesions improved. Lymphomatoid forms of granulomatosis and cutaneous 
EBV-associated malignancies have not been described previously in CHH. This case 
highlights the possibility of EBV-associated cutaneous malignancy in CHH.

© 2018 British Association of Dermatologists.

DOI: 10.1111/ced.13543
PMID: 29744913 [Indexed for MEDLINE]