1. Clin Genitourin Cancer. 2018 Oct;16(5):341-348. doi:
10.1016/j.clgc.2018.04.001.  Epub 2018 Apr 25.

Comprehensive Genomic Profiling of Metastatic Tumors in a Phase 2 Biomarker 
Study of Everolimus in Advanced Renal Cell Carcinoma.

Gao X(1), Jegede O(2), Gray C(1), Catalano PJ(3), Novak J(4), Kwiatkowski DJ(5), 
McKay RR(6), George DJ(7), Choueiri TK(6), McDermott DF(1), Signoretti S(4), 
Bhatt RS(8).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel 
Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.
(2)Department of Biostatistics and Computational Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer 
Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.
(3)Department of Biostatistics and Computational Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer 
Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA; Department of Biostatistics, 
Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA.
(4)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA.
(5)Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA.
(6)Lank Center for Genitourinary Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA.
(7)Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Medicine, Duke Cancer Institute, 
Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC.
(8)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel 
Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA. Electronic 
address: rbhatt@bidmc.harvard.edu.

INTRODUCTION: Genomic events leading to activation of mechanistic target of 
rapamycin (mTOR) are common in renal cell carcinoma (RCC). Everolimus is an 
allosteric mTOR inhibitor with efficacy in metastatic RCC. We characterized the 
genomic profile of RCC tumors from metastatic sites and assessed whether 
particular alterations correlate with clinical response to everolimus.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: An open-label, single-arm phase 2 biomarker study of 
everolimus 10 mg daily was conducted in metastatic RCC patients. Needle biopsy 
or metastasectomy was performed on metastatic tumors before everolimus 
initiation. Next-generation sequencing was performed using a targeted hybrid 
capture panel detecting alterations within exons and key introns of ≥ 300 
cancer-associated genes. Disease assessments were obtained every 8 weeks using 
standard radiographic modalities and evaluated by Response Evaluation Criteria 
in Solid Tumors criteria.
RESULTS: Objective response was seen in 1 (4.2%) of 24 patients. Two patients 
(8.3%) had stable disease lasting > 6 months. Median (90% confidence interval) 
overall and progression-free survival were 20.1 (8.6, NA) and 3.8 (2.4, 5.4) 
months, respectively. Next-generation sequencing was successful on 18 
pretreatment specimens and 3 on-treatment specimens. Alterations in the 
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-protein kinase B-mammalian target of rapamycin 
(PI3K-AKT-mTOR) pathway were identified in 8 (44%) of 18 pretreatment samples. 
An mTOR E2419D mutation was identified in the patient who experienced partial 
response. Alterations in VHL, PBRM1, SETD2, KDM5C, and ATM were common in the 
RCC metastases before initiation of everolimus.
CONCLUSION: Nearly half of heavily pretreated RCC metastases may harbor 
mutations in components of the PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathway. Commonly mutated genes in 
primary RCC were also altered at a high frequency in RCC metastases.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clgc.2018.04.001
PMCID: PMC6175670
PMID: 29754934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures Xin Gao, MD: No 
relationship to disclose. Opeyemi Jegede, MPH: No relationship to disclose. 
Connor Gray, BS: No relationship to disclose. Paul J. Catalano, ScD: No 
relationship to disclose. Jesse Novak, BS: No relationship to disclose. David J. 
Kwiatkowski, MD, PhD: No relationship to disclose. Rana R. McKay, MD: Research 
funding from Bayer and Pfizer. Advisory board for Janssen and Novartis. Daniel 
J. George, MD: No relationship to disclose. Toni K. Choueiri, MD: No 
relationship to disclose. David F. McDermott, MD: Consulting for Novartis. 
Sabina Signoretti, MD: No relationship to disclose. Rupal S. Bhatt, MD, PhD: No 
relationship to disclose.