1. J Pathol. 2018 Aug;245(4):491-501. doi: 10.1002/path.5101. Epub 2018 Jul 4.

Functional molecules in mesothelial-to-mesenchymal transition revealed by 
transcriptome analyses.

Namvar S(1)(2), Woolf AS(1)(2)(3), Zeef LA(4), Wilm T(5), Wilm B(5), Herrick 
SE(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cell Matrix Biology and Regenerative Medicine, School of 
Biological Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, University of 
Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(2)Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester, UK.
(3)Royal Manchester Children's Hospital, Manchester University NHS Foundation 
Trust, Manchester, UK.
(4)The Bioinformatics Core Facility, The University of Manchester, Manchester, 
UK.
(5)Institute of Translational Medicine, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK.

Peritoneal fibrosis is a common complication of abdominal and pelvic surgery, 
and can also be triggered by peritoneal dialysis, resulting in treatment 
failure. In these settings, fibrosis is driven by activated myofibroblasts that 
are considered to be partly derived by mesothelial-to-mesenchymal transition 
(MMT). We hypothesized that, if the molecular signature of MMT could be better 
defined, these insights could be exploited to block this pathological cellular 
transition. Rat peritoneal mesothelial cells were purified by the use of an 
antibody against HBME1, a protein present on mesothelial cell microvilli, and 
streptavidin nanobead technology. After exposure of sorted cells to a well-known 
mediator of MMT, transforming growth factor (TGF)-β1, RNA sequencing was 
undertaken to define the transcriptomes of mesothelial cells before and during 
early-phase MMT. MMT was associated with dysregulation of transcripts encoding 
molecules involved in insulin-like growth factor (IGF) and bone morphogenetic 
protein (BMP) signalling. The application of either recombinant BMP4 or 
IGF-binding protein 4 (IGFBP4) ameliorated TGF-β1-induced MMT in culture, as 
judged from the retention of epithelial morphological and molecular phenotypes, 
and reduced migration. Furthermore, peritoneal tissue from peritoneal dialysis 
patients showed less prominent immunostaining than control tissue for IGFBP4 and 
BMP4 on the peritoneal surface. In a mouse model of TGF-β1-induced peritoneal 
thickening, BMP4 immunostaining on the peritoneal surface was attenuated as 
compared with healthy controls. Finally, genetic lineage tracing of mesothelial 
cells was used in mice with peritoneal injury. In this model, administration of 
BMP4 ameliorated the injury-induced shape change and migration of mesothelial 
cells. Our findings demonstrate a distinctive MMT signature, and highlight the 
therapeutic potential for BMP4, and possibly IGFBP4, to reduce MMT. © 2018 The 
Authors. The Journal of Pathology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf 
of Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland.

© 2018 The Authors. The Journal of Pathology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 
on behalf of Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland.

DOI: 10.1002/path.5101
PMCID: PMC6055603
PMID: 29774544 [Indexed for MEDLINE]