1. Kidney Int. 2018 Aug;94(2):396-407. doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2018.02.025. Epub 2018
 May 18.

A mutation in transcription factor MAFB causes Focal Segmental 
Glomerulosclerosis with Duane Retraction Syndrome.

Sato Y(1), Tsukaguchi H(2), Morita H(3), Higasa K(4), Tran MTN(5), Hamada M(5), 
Usui T(6), Morito N(7), Horita S(8), Hayashi T(9), Takagi J(3), Yamaguchi I(4), 
Nguyen HT(10), Harada M(11), Inui K(1), Maruta Y(1), Inoue Y(1), Koiwa F(1), 
Sato H(12), Matsuda F(4), Ayabe S(13), Mizuno S(14), Sugiyama F(14), Takahashi 
S(15), Yoshimura A(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Showa University Fujigaoka 
Hospital, Fujigaoka, Japan.
(2)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Kansai Medical University, Hirakata, 
Japan. Electronic address: tsukaguh@hirakata.kmu.ac.jp.
(3)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal Medicine, 
Aichi Medical University School of Medicine, Nagakute, Japan.
(4)Center for Genomic Medicine, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Kyoto, Japan.
(5)Department of Anatomy and Embryology, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan.
(6)Department of Anatomy and Embryology, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan; Department of Nephrology, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan.
(7)Department of Nephrology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tsukuba, 
Tsukuba, Japan.
(8)Department of Cell Biology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University, 
Kyoto, Japan.
(9)Department of Ophthalmology, School of Medicine, Teikyo University, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(10)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Kansai Medical University, Hirakata, 
Japan.
(11)Department of Clinical Anatomy, Graduate School of Medical and Dental 
Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.
(12)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tohoku University, Sendai, 
Japan.
(13)Experimental Animal Division, RIKEN BioResource Center, Tsukuba, Japan.
(14)Laboratory Animal Resource Center, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan.
(15)Department of Anatomy and Embryology, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan; Laboratory Animal Resource Center, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan; International Institute for Integrative 
Sleep Medicine (WPI-IIIS), University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan; Life Science 
Center of Tsukuba Advanced Research Alliance, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, 
Japan.

Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) is a leading cause of end-stage renal 
disease in children and adults. Genetic factors significantly contribute to 
early-onset FSGS, but the etiologies of most adult cases remain unknown. Genetic 
studies of monogenic syndromic FSGS exhibiting extra-renal manifestations have 
uncovered an unexpected biological role for genes in the development of both 
podocytes and other cellular lineages. To help define these roles, we studied 
two unrelated families with FSGS associated with Duane Retraction Syndrome, 
characterized by impaired horizontal eye movement due to cranial nerve 
malformation. All four affected individuals developed FSGS and Duane Retraction 
Syndrome in their first to second decade of life, manifested as restricted 
abduction together with globe retraction and narrowed palpebral fissure on 
attempted adduction. Hypoplasia of the abducens nerves and hearing impairment 
occurred in severely affected individuals. Genetic analyses revealed that 
affected individuals harbor a rare heterozygous substitution (p.Leu239Pro) in 
MAFB, a leucine zipper transcription factor. Luciferase assays with cultured 
monocytes indicated that the substitution significantly reduced transactivation 
of the F4/80 promoter, the known MAFB recognition element. Additionally, 
immunohistochemistry indicated reduced MAFB expression in the podocytes of 
patients. Structural modeling suggested that the p.Leu239Pro substitution in the 
DNA-binding domain possibly interferes with the stability of the adjacent zinc 
finger. Lastly, podocytes in neonatal mice with p.Leu239Pro displayed impaired 
differentiation. Thus, MAFB mutations impair development and/or maintenance of 
podocytes, abducens neurons and the inner ear. The interactions between MAFB and 
regulatory elements in these developing organs are likely highly specific based 
on spatiotemporal requirements.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.kint.2018.02.025
PMID: 29779709 [Indexed for MEDLINE]