1. mBio. 2018 May 22;9(3):e00809-18. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00809-18.

A Single-Domain Response Regulator Functions as an Integrating Hub To Coordinate 
General Stress Response and Development in Alphaproteobacteria.

Lori C(1), Kaczmarczyk A(#)(1), de Jong I(#)(1), Jenal U(2).

Author information:
(1)Focal Area of Infection Biology, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Basel, 
Switzerland.
(2)Focal Area of Infection Biology, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Basel, 
Switzerland urs.jenal@unibas.ch.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    mBio. 2018 Sep 4;9(5):e01534-18. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01534-18.

The alphaproteobacterial general stress response is governed by a conserved 
partner-switching mechanism that is triggered by phosphorylation of the response 
regulator PhyR. In the model organism Caulobacter crescentus, PhyR was proposed 
to be phosphorylated by the histidine kinase PhyK, but biochemical evidence in 
support of such a role of PhyK is missing. Here, we identify a single-domain 
response regulator, MrrA, that is essential for general stress response 
activation in C. crescentus We demonstrate that PhyK does not function as a 
kinase but accepts phosphoryl groups from MrrA and passes them on to PhyR, 
adopting the role of a histidine phosphotransferase. MrrA is phosphorylated by 
at least six histidine kinases that likely serve as stress sensors. MrrA also 
transfers phosphate to LovK, a histidine kinase involved in C. crescentus 
holdfast production and attachment, which also negatively regulates the general 
stress response. We show that LovK together with the response regulator LovR 
acts as a phosphate sink to redirect phosphate flux away from the PhyKR branch. 
In agreement with the biochemical data, an mrrA mutant is unable to activate the 
general stress response and shows a hyperattachment phenotype, which is linked 
to decreased expression of the major holdfast inhibitory protein HfiA. We 
propose that MrrA serves as a central phosphorylation hub that coordinates the 
general stress response with C. crescentus development and other adaptive 
behaviors. The characteristic bow-tie architecture of this phosphorylation 
network with MrrA as the central knot may expedite the evolvability and 
species-specific niche adaptation of this group of bacteria.IMPORTANCE 
Two-component systems (TCSs) consisting of a histidine kinase and a cognate 
response regulator are predominant signal transduction systems in bacteria. To 
avoid cross talk, TCSs are generally thought to be highly insulated from each 
other. However, this notion is based largely on studies of the HisKA subfamily 
of histidine kinases, while little information is available for the HWE and 
HisKA2 subfamilies. The latter have been implicated in the alphaproteobacterial 
general stress response. Here, we show that in the model organism Caulobacter 
crescentus an atypical FATGUY-type single-domain response regulator, MrrA, is 
highly promiscuous in accepting and transferring phosphoryl groups from and to 
multiple up- and downstream kinases, challenging the current view of strictly 
insulated TCSs. Instead, we propose that FATGUY response regulators have evolved 
in alphaproteobacteria as central phosphorylation hubs to broadly sample 
information and distribute phosphoryl groups between the general stress response 
pathway and other TCSs, thereby coordinating multiple cellular behaviors.

Copyright © 2018 Lori et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.00809-18
PMCID: PMC5964349
PMID: 29789370 [Indexed for MEDLINE]