1. J Diabetes Investig. 2019 Jan;10(1):51-61. doi: 10.1111/jdi.12867. Epub 2018
Jun  26.

Elevated histone H3 acetylation is associated with genes involved in T 
lymphocyte activation and glutamate decarboxylase antibody production in 
patients with type 1 diabetes.

Wang Y(1)(2), Hou C(3), Wisler J(4), Singh K(5), Wu C(1)(2), Xie Z(1)(2), Lu 
Q(6), Zhou Z(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Metabolism & Endocrinology, The Second Xiangya Hospital, 
Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Diabetes Immunology (Central South University), Ministry of 
Education, National Clinical Research Center for Metabolic Diseases, Changsha, 
Hunan, China.
(3)Department of Intensive Care Unit, The Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South 
University, Changsha, Hunan, China.
(4)Department of Surgery, Division of Trauma, Critical Care and Burn Surgery, 
The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, Ohio, USA.
(5)Department of Surgery, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, 
Columbus, Ohio, USA.
(6)Department of Dermatology, The Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South 
University, Changsha, Hunan, China.

AIMS/INTRODUCTION: Genetic and epigenetic mechanisms have been implicated in the 
pathogenesis of type 1 diabetes, and histone acetylation is an epigenetic 
modification pattern that activates gene transcription. However, the genome-wide 
histone H3 acetylation in new-onset type 1 diabetes patients has not been well 
described. Accordingly, we aimed to unveil the genome-wide promoter acetylation 
profile in CD4+ T lymphocytes from type 1 diabetes patients, especially for 
those who are glutamate decarboxylase antibody-positive.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 12 patients with new-onset type 1 diabetes who 
were glutamate decarboxylase antibody-positive were enrolled, and 12 healthy 
individuals were recruited as controls. The global histone H3 acetylation level 
of CD4+ T lymphocytes from peripheral blood was detected by western blot, with 
chromatin immunoprecipitation linked to microarrays to characterize the promoter 
acetylation profile. Furthermore, we validated the results of particular genes 
from chromatin immunoprecipitation linked to microarrays by using chromatin 
immunoprecipitation quantitative polymerase chain reaction, and analyzed the 
transcription level by real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: Elevated global histone H3 acetylation level was observed in type 1 
diabetes patients, with 607 differentially acetylated genes identified between 
type 1 diabetes patients and controls by chromatin immunoprecipitation linked to 
microarrays. The hyperacetylated genes were enriched in biological processes 
involved in immune cell activation and inflammatory response. Gene-specific 
assessments showed that increased transcription of inducible T-cell costimulator 
was in concordance with the elevated acetylation in its gene promoter, along 
with positive correlation with glutamate decarboxylase antibody titer in type 1 
diabetes patients.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study generates a genome-wide histone acetylation 
profile specific to CD4+ T lymphocytes in type 1 diabetes patients who are 
glutamic acid decarboxylase antibody-positive, which is instrumental in 
improving our understanding of the epigenetic involvement in autoimmune 
diabetes.

© 2018 The Authors. Journal of Diabetes Investigation published by Asian 
Association for the Study of Diabetes (AASD) and John Wiley & Sons Australia, 
Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jdi.12867
PMCID: PMC6319479
PMID: 29791073 [Indexed for MEDLINE]