1. Cell Commun Signal. 2018 May 24;16(1):23. doi: 10.1186/s12964-018-0236-z.

Casein kinase 1α: biological mechanisms and theranostic potential.

Jiang S(1), Zhang M(2), Sun J(1), Yang X(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, School of Medicine, 
Zhejiang University, Zhejiang, 310016, Hangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Orthopaedics, Second Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, 
Zhejiang University, Zhejiang, 310009, Hangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Radiology, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, School of Medicine, 
Zhejiang University, Zhejiang, 310016, Hangzhou, China. xmyang@zju.edu.cn.
(4)Image-Guided Bio-Molecular Intervention Research, Department of Radiology, 
University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA, 98109, USA. 
xmyang@zju.edu.cn.

Casein kinase 1α (CK1α) is a multifunctional protein belonging to the CK1 
protein family that is conserved in eukaryotes from yeast to humans. It 
regulates signaling pathways related to membrane trafficking, cell cycle 
progression, chromosome segregation, apoptosis, autophagy, cell metabolism, and 
differentiation in development, circadian rhythm, and the immune response as 
well as neurodegeneration and cancer. Given its involvement in diverse cellular, 
physiological, and pathological processes, CK1α is a promising therapeutic 
target. In this review, we summarize what is known of the biological functions 
of CK1α, and provide an overview of existing challenges and potential 
opportunities for advancing theranostics.

DOI: 10.1186/s12964-018-0236-z
PMCID: PMC5968562
PMID: 29793495 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: AUTHORS’ INFORMATION: Corresponding author: 
Xiaoming Yang, MD, PhD. A principal investigator and an attending physician of 
radiology of Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital (an affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang 
University, School of Medicine), also a professor and director of image-guided 
bio-molecular interventions research in the Department of Radiology at the 
University of Washington School of Medicine, and holds an appointment as a 
senior lecturer of radiology at Kuopio University in Finland and as an attending 
physician of radiology qualified in interventional radiology at UW Medical 
Center and European community countries. First author: Shaojie Jiang, MD, PhD. 
candidate. An MD/PhD candidate student of professor Xiaoming Yang in Zhejiang 
University. Co-first author: Miaofeng Zhang, MD. A surgeon of Second Affiliated 
Hospital (an affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang University, School of Medicine). 
Co-author: Jihong Sun, MD, PhD. An attending physician of radiology of Sir Run 
Run Shaw Hospital (an affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang University, School of 
Medicine). ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not applicable. COMPETING 
INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no competing interests. 
PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.