1. Avicenna J Med Biotechnol. 2018 Apr-Jun;10(2):98-104.

Clinically Significant Dysregulation of hsa-miR-30d-5p and hsa-let-7b Expression 
in Patients with Surgically Resected Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.

Hosseini SM(1), Soltani BM(1), Tavallaei M(2), Mowla SJ(1), Tafsiri E(3), 
Bagheri A(4), Khorshid HRK(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Tarbiat Modares 
University, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Human Genetic Research Center, Baqiyatallah University of Medical Sciences, 
Tehran, Iran.
(3)Department of Molecular Medicine, Biotechnology Research Center, Pasteur 
Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Department of Clinical Biochemistry and Genetics, Molecular and Cell Biology 
Research Center, Faculty of Medicine, Mazandaran University of Medical Sciences, 
Sari, Iran.
(5)Genetic Research Centre, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

BACKGROUND: The cyclin E2 (CYCE2) is an important regulator in the progression 
and development of NSCLC, and its ectopic expression promoted the proliferation, 
invasion, and migration in several tumors, including Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer 
(NSCLC). However, the upregulation of CYCE2 in NSCLC cells suggested that it has 
a key role in tumorigenicity. In addition, the RAS family proteins as 
oncoproteins were activated in many major tumor types and its suitability as the 
therapeutic target in NSCLC was proposed. Considering the crucial role of 
microRNAs, it was hypothesized that altered expression of hsa-miR-30d-5p and 
hsa-let-7b might provide a reliable diagnostic tumor marker for diagnosis of 
NSCLC.
METHOD: Real-time RT-PCR approach could evaluate the expression alteration of 
hsa-miR-30d-5p and hsa-let-7b and it was related to the surgically resected 
tissue of 24 lung cancer patients and 10 non-cancerous patients. The miRNAs 
expression was associated with clinicopathological features of the patients.
RESULTS: Hsa-miR-30d showed a significant downregulation (p=0.0382) in resected 
tissue of NSCLC patients compared with control group. Its expression level could 
differentiate different stages of malignancies from each other. The ROC curve 
analysis gave it an AUC=0.73 (p=0.037) which was a good score as a reliable 
biomarker. In contrast, hsa-let-7b was significantly overexpressed in tumor 
samples (p=0.03). Interestingly, our findings revealed a significant association 
of hsa-let-7b in adenocarcinoma tumors, compared to Squamous Cell Carcinomas 
(SCC) (p<0.05). Also, analysis of ROC curve of hsa-let-7b (AUC=0.74, 
p-value=0.042) suggests that it could be as a suitable biomarker for NSCLC.
CONCLUSION: Together, these results suggest a possible tumor suppressor role for 
hsa-miR-30d in lung tumor progression and initiation. Moreover, upregulation of 
hsa-let-7b was associated with the tumor type.

PMCID: PMC5960066
PMID: 29849986

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors declare that 
they have no competing interests.