1. Front Microbiol. 2018 May 15;9:951. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.00951. eCollection
 2018.

Distinct Microbial Signatures Associated With Different Breast Cancer Types.

Banerjee S(1), Tian T(2), Wei Z(2), Shih N(3), Feldman MD(3), Peck KN(1), 
DeMichele AM(4), Alwine JC(5), Robertson ES(1).

Author information:
(1)Tumor Virology Program, Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck 
Surgery and Microbiology, Abramson Cancer Center, Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States.
(2)Department of Computer Science, New Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, 
NJ, United States.
(3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States.
(4)Division of Hematology Oncology, Department of Medicine, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States.
(5)Department of Cancer Biology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States.

A dysbiotic microbiome can potentially contribute to the pathogenesis of many 
different diseases including cancer. Breast cancer is the second leading cause 
of cancer death in women. Thus, we investigated the diversity of the microbiome 
in the four major types of breast cancer: endocrine receptor (ER) positive, 
triple positive, Her2 positive and triple negative breast cancers. Using a whole 
genome and transcriptome amplification and a pan-pathogen microarray (PathoChip) 
strategy, we detected unique and common viral, bacterial, fungal and parasitic 
signatures for each of the breast cancer types. These were validated by PCR and 
Sanger sequencing. Hierarchical cluster analysis of the breast cancer samples, 
based on their detected microbial signatures, showed distinct patterns for the 
triple negative and triple positive samples, while the ER positive and Her2 
positive samples shared similar microbial signatures. These signatures, unique 
or common to the different breast cancer types, provide a new line of 
investigation to gain further insights into prognosis, treatment strategies and 
clinical outcome, as well as better understanding of the role of the 
micro-organisms in the development and progression of breast cancer.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.00951
PMCID: PMC5962706
PMID: 29867857