1. J Hepatol. 2018 Oct;69(4):851-860. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2018.05.028. Epub 2018 
Jun 5.

hiPSC hepatocyte model demonstrates the role of unfolded protein response and 
inflammatory networks in α(1)-antitrypsin deficiency.

Segeritz CP(1), Rashid ST(2), de Brito MC(3), Serra MP(4), Ordonez A(5), Morell 
CM(3), Kaserman JE(6), Madrigal P(3), Hannan NRF(3), Gatto L(7), Tan L(5), 
Wilson AA(6), Lilley K(7), Marciniak SJ(5), Gooptu B(8), Lomas DA(9), Vallier 
L(10).

Author information:
(1)Wellcome Trust and MRC Cambridge Stem Cell Institute, Department of Surgery, 
University of Cambridge, UK; Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, 
University of Cambridge, UK.
(2)Wellcome Trust and MRC Cambridge Stem Cell Institute, Department of Surgery, 
University of Cambridge, UK; Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, 
University of Cambridge, UK; Centre for Stem Cells and Regenerative Medicine & 
Institute for Liver Studies, King's College London, UK. Electronic address: 
tamir.rashid@kcl.ac.uk.
(3)Wellcome Trust and MRC Cambridge Stem Cell Institute, Department of Surgery, 
University of Cambridge, UK.
(4)Centre for Stem Cells and Regenerative Medicine & Institute for Liver 
Studies, King's College London, UK.
(5)Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, UK.
(6)Center for Regenerative Medicine (CReM) of Boston University and Boston 
Medical Center, Boston, MA 02118, USA.
(7)Cambridge Centre for Proteomics, Department of Biochemistry, University of 
Cambridge, Building O, Downing Site, Cambridge CB2 1QW, UK.
(8)NIHR Leicester BRC-Respiratory and Leicester Institute of Structural & 
Chemical Biology, University of Leicester, UK; ISMB/Birkbeck & UCL, University 
of London, UK; Division of Asthma, Allergy and Lung Biology, King's College 
London, UK.
(9)UCL Respiratory, University College London, UK. Electronic address: 
d.lomas@ucl.ac.uk.
(10)Wellcome Trust and MRC Cambridge Stem Cell Institute, Department of Surgery, 
University of Cambridge, UK; Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Genome Campus 
Hinxton, UK. Electronic address: lv225@cam.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: α1-Antitrypsin deficiency (A1ATD) is an autosomal recessive 
disorder caused by mutations in the SERPINA1 gene. Individuals with the Z 
variant (Gly342Lys) retain polymerised protein in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) 
of their hepatocytes, predisposing them to liver disease. The concomitant lack 
of circulating A1AT also causes lung emphysema. Greater insight into the 
mechanisms that link protein misfolding to liver injury will facilitate the 
design of novel therapies.
METHODS: Human-induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC)-derived hepatocytes provide 
a novel approach to interrogate the molecular mechanisms of A1ATD because of 
their patient-specific genetic architecture and reflection of human physiology. 
To that end, we utilised patient-specific hiPSC hepatocyte-like cells (ZZ-HLCs) 
derived from an A1ATD (ZZ) patient, which faithfully recapitulated key aspects 
of the disease at the molecular and cellular level. Subsequent functional and 
"omics" comparisons of these cells with their genetically corrected 
isogenic-line (RR-HLCs) and primary hepatocytes/human tissue enabled 
identification of new molecular markers and disease signatures.
RESULTS: Our studies showed that abnormal A1AT polymer processing (immobilised 
ER components, reduced luminal protein mobility and disrupted ER cisternae) 
occurred heterogeneously within hepatocyte populations and was associated with 
disrupted mitochondrial structure, presence of the oncogenic protein AKR1B10 and 
two upregulated molecular clusters centred on members of inflammatory (IL-18 and 
Caspase-4) and unfolded protein response (Calnexin and Calreticulin) pathways. 
These results were validated in a second patient-specific hiPSC line.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data identified novel pathways that potentially link the 
expression of Z A1AT polymers to liver disease. These findings could help pave 
the way towards identification of new therapeutic targets for the treatment of 
A1ATD.
LAY SUMMARY: This study compared the gene expression and protein profiles of 
healthy liver cells and those affected by the inherited disease α1-antitrypsin 
deficiency. This approach identified specific factors primarily present in 
diseased samples which could provide new targets for drug development. This 
study also demonstrates the interest of using hepatic cells generated from 
human-induced pluripotent stem cells to model liver disease in vitro for 
uncovering new mechanisms with clinical relevance.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhep.2018.05.028
PMCID: PMC6562205
PMID: 29879455 [Indexed for MEDLINE]