1. Front Chem. 2018 May 25;6:181. doi: 10.3389/fchem.2018.00181. eCollection
2018.

Exploring the Structural Diversity in Inhibitors of α-Synuclein Amyloidogenic 
Folding, Aggregation, and Neurotoxicity.

Das S(1), Pukala TL(2), Smid SD(1).

Author information:
(1)Discipline of Pharmacology, Adelaide Medical School, Faculty of Health 
Sciences and Medicine, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, Australia.
(2)Discipline of Chemistry, School of Physical Sciences, Faculty of Sciences, 
University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, Australia.

Aggregation of α-Synuclein (αS) protein to amyloid fibrils is a 
neuropathological hallmark of Parkinson's disease (PD). Growing evidence 
suggests that extracellular αS aggregation plays a pivotal role in 
neurodegeneration found in PD in addition to the intracellular αS aggregates in 
Lewy bodies (LB). Here, we identified and compared a diverse set of molecules 
capable of mitigating protein aggregation and exogenous toxicity of αSA53T, a 
more aggregation-prone αS mutant found in familial PD. For the first time, we 
investigated the αS anti-amyloid activity of semi-synthetic flavonoid 2', 3', 4' 
trihydroxyflavone or 2-D08, which was compared with natural flavones myricetin 
and transilitin, as well as such structurally diverse polyphenols as honokiol 
and punicalagin. Additionally, two novel synthetic compounds with a dibenzyl 
imidazolidine scaffold, Compound 1 and Compound 2, were also investigated as 
they exhibited favorable binding with αSA53T. All seven compounds inhibited 
αSA53T aggregation as demonstrated by Thioflavin T fluorescence assays, with 
modified fibril morphology observed by transmission electron microscopy. Ion 
mobility-mass spectrometry (IM-MS) was used to monitor the structural conversion 
of native αSA53T into amyloidogenic conformations and all seven compounds 
preserved the native unfolded conformations of αSA53T following 48 h incubation. 
The presence of each test compound in a 1:2 molar ratio was also shown to 
inhibit the neurotoxicity of preincubated αSA53T using phaeochromocytoma (PC12) 
cell viability assays. Among the seven tested compounds 2-D08, honokiol, and the 
synthetic Compound 2 demonstrated the highest inhibition of aggregation, coupled 
with neuroprotection from preincubated αSA53T in vitro. Molecular docking 
predicted that all compounds bound near the lysine-rich region of the N-terminus 
of αSA53T, where the flavonoids and honokiol predominantly interacted with Lys 
23. Overall, these findings highlight that (i) restricted vicinal 
trihydroxylation in the flavone B-ring is more effective in stabilizing the 
native αS conformations, thus blocking amyloidogenic aggregation, than 
dihydroxylation aggregation in both A and B-ring, and (ii) honokiol, 
punicalagin, and the synthetic imidazolidine Compound 2 also inhibit αS 
amyloidogenic aggregation by stabilizing its native conformations. This diverse 
set of molecules acting on a singular pathological target with predicted binding 
to αSA53T in the folding-prone N-terminal region may contribute toward novel 
drug-design for PD.

DOI: 10.3389/fchem.2018.00181
PMCID: PMC5983024
PMID: 29888220