1. Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Basis Dis. 2019 May 1;1865(5):879-894. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbadis.2018.06.001. Epub 2018 Jun 5.

Genetically modified mouse models to study hepatic neutral lipid mobilization.

Haemmerle G(1), Lass A(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Biosciences, University of Graz, Heinrichstraße 31/II, 
8010 Graz, Austria. Electronic address: guenter.haemmerle@uni-graz.at.
(2)Institute of Molecular Biosciences, University of Graz, Heinrichstraße 31/II, 
8010 Graz, Austria; BioTechMed-Graz, Austria. Electronic address: 
achim.lass@uni-graz.at.

Excessive accumulation of triacylglycerol is the common denominator of a wide 
range of clinical pathologies of liver diseases, termed non-alcoholic fatty 
liver disease. Such excessive triacylglycerol deposition in the liver is also 
referred to as hepatic steatosis. Although liver steatosis often resolves over 
time, it eventually progresses to steatohepatitis, liver fibrosis and cirrhosis, 
with associated complications, including liver failure, hepatocellular carcinoma 
and ultimately death of affected individuals. From the disease etiology it is 
obvious that a tight regulation between lipid uptake, triacylglycerol synthesis, 
hydrolysis, secretion and fatty acid oxidation is required to prevent 
triacylglycerol deposition in the liver. In addition to triacylglycerol, also a 
tight control of other neutral lipid ester classes, i.e. cholesteryl esters and 
retinyl esters, is crucial for the maintenance of a healthy liver. Excessive 
cholesteryl ester accumulation is a hallmark of cholesteryl ester storage 
disease or Wolman disease, which is associated with premature death. The loss of 
hepatic vitamin A stores (retinyl ester stores of hepatic stellate cells) is 
incidental to the onset of liver fibrosis. Importantly, this more advanced stage 
of liver disease usually does not resolve but progresses to life threatening 
stages, i.e. liver cirrhosis and cancer. Therefore, understanding the enzymes 
and pathways that mobilize hepatic neutral lipid esters is crucial for the 
development of strategies and therapies to ameliorate pathophysiological 
conditions associated with derangements of hepatic neutral lipid ester stores, 
including liver steatosis, steatohepatitis, and fibrosis. This review highlights 
the physiological roles of enzymes governing the mobilization of neutral lipid 
esters at different sites in liver cells, including cytosolic lipid droplets, 
endoplasmic reticulum, and lysosomes. This article is part of a Special Issue 
entitled Molecular Basis of Disease: Animal models in liver disease.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2018.06.001
PMCID: PMC6887554
PMID: 29883718 [Indexed for MEDLINE]