1. Epilepsia Open. 2018 Mar 23;3(2):213-223. doi: 10.1002/epi4.12107. eCollection
 2018 Jun.

Myocardial remodeling and susceptibility to ventricular tachycardia in a model 
of chronic epilepsy.

Lai YC(1), Li N(2), Lawrence W(2), Wang S(3), Levine A(4), Burchhardt DM(1), 
Pautler RG(2), Valderrábano M(3), Wehrens XH(2), Anderson AE(1)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics Baylor College of Medicine Houston Texas U.S.A.
(2)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics Baylor College of Medicine 
Houston Texas U.S.A.
(3)DeBakey Heart and Vascular Center Methodist Hospital Research Institute 
Houston Texas U.S.A.
(4)Department of Neuroscience Baylor College of Medicine Houston Texas U.S.A.
(5)Department of Neurology Baylor College of Medicine Houston Texas U.S.A.

OBJECTIVE: Sympathetic predominance and ventricular repolarization abnormalities 
represent epilepsy-associated cardiac alterations and may underlie 
seizure-induced ventricular arrhythmias. Myocardial ion channel and electrical 
remodeling have been described early in epilepsy development and may contribute 
to ventricular repolarization abnormalities and excitability. Using the 
pilocarpine-induced acquired epilepsy model we sought to examine whether altered 
myocardial ion channel levels and electrophysiological changes also occur in 
animals with long-standing epilepsy.
METHODS: We examined myocardial adrenergic receptor and ion channel protein 
levels of epileptic and age-matched sham rats (9-20 months old) using western 
blotting. Cardiac electrical properties were examined using optical mapping ex 
vivo and electrophysiology in vivo. We investigated the propensity for 
ventricular tachycardia (VT) and the effects of β-adrenergic blockade on 
ventricular electrical properties and excitability in vivo.
RESULTS: In animals with long-standing epilepsy, we observed decreased 
myocardial voltage-gated K+ channels Kv4.2 and Kv4.3, which are known to 
underlie early ventricular repolarization in rodents. Decreased β1 and increased 
α1A adrenergic receptor protein levels occurred in the myocardium of chronically 
epileptic animals consistent with elevated sympathetic tone. These animals 
exhibited many cardiac electrophysiological abnormalities, represented by longer 
QRS and corrected QT (QTc) intervals in vivo, slower conduction velocity ex 
vivo, and stimulation-induced VT. Administration of a β-adrenergic antagonist 
late in epilepsy was beneficial, as the therapy shortened the QTc interval and 
decreased stimulation-induced VT.
SIGNIFICANCE: Our findings demonstrate that myocardial ion channel remodeling 
and sympathetic predominance, risk factors for increased ventricular 
excitability and arrhythmias, persist in chronic epilepsy. The beneficial 
effects of β-adrenergic antagonist treatment late in the course of epilepsy 
suggest that attenuating elevated sympathetic tone may represent a therapeutic 
target for ameliorating epilepsy-associated cardiac morbidity.

DOI: 10.1002/epi4.12107
PMCID: PMC5983128
PMID: 29881800