1. Ann Transl Med. 2018 May;6(9):159. doi: 10.21037/atm.2018.03.27.

Colorectal cancer genomics and designing rational trials.

Mondaca S(1), Yaeger R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, 
USA.

The widespread use of next generation sequencing (NGS) has led to a refined 
understanding of the genomics of colorectal cancer (CRC). However, progress in 
the use of molecular biomarkers in standard practice has been slow, and there is 
no approved targeted therapy for CRC based on a positive predictive marker yet. 
In this review, we will first summarize biomarkers with clinical utility in 
standard practice or targeted therapy trials and then consider how to rationally 
design clinical trials to more effectively target CRC. Specifically, we will 
discuss current clinical applications of genomic information consisting of the 
use of the MAPK (mitogen-activated protein kinase) pathway genes KRAS, NRAS, and 
BRAF as prognostic and predictive biomarkers for standard treatment, risk 
stratification by primary tumor site and consideration of tumor laterality in 
patient selection for epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) antibody 
treatment, and the evaluation for genomic biomarkers, including BRAF V600E, HER2 
amplification, and gene rearrangements, for targeted therapies in clinical 
trials. Applying lessons from targeted therapy trials in CRC, we now appreciate 
that both tumor genomics and tissue of origin affect targeted therapy response 
and that the development of resistance to targeted therapies is dynamic and 
often subclonal. Based on these understandings, we propose the design of 
adaptive clinical trials that evaluate real-time pharmacodynamic markers and 
monitor tumor subpopulations during the course of treatment to overcome 
challenges targeting genetic drivers in CRC.

DOI: 10.21037/atm.2018.03.27
PMCID: PMC5985274
PMID: 29911107

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: R Yaeger has served on an 
advisory board for GlaxoSmithKline. S Mondaca has no conflicts of interest to 
declare.