1. PLoS Genet. 2018 Jun 25;14(6):e1007493. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1007493. 
eCollection 2018 Jun.

Inositol polyphosphates regulate and predict yeast pseudohyphal growth 
phenotypes.

Norman KL(1), Shively CA(2), De La Rocha AJ(1), Mutlu N(1), Basu S(3), Cullen 
PJ(3), Kumar A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States of America.
(2)Program in Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan, United States of America.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York, 
United States of America.

Pseudohyphal growth is a nutrient-regulated program in which budding yeast form 
multicellular filaments of elongated and connected cells. Filamentous growth is 
required for virulence in pathogenic fungi and provides an informative model of 
stress-responsive signaling. The genetics and regulatory networks modulating 
pseudohyphal growth have been studied extensively, but little is known regarding 
the changes in metabolites that enable pseudohyphal filament formation. Inositol 
signaling molecules are an important class of metabolite messengers encompassing 
highly phosphorylated and diffusible inositol polyphosphates (InsPs). We report 
here that the InsP biosynthesis pathway is required for wild-type pseudohyphal 
growth. Under nitrogen-limiting conditions that can induce filamentation, InsPs 
exhibit characteristic profiles, distinguishing the InsP7 pyrophosphate isoforms 
1PP-InsP5 and 5PP-InsP5. Deletion and overexpression analyses of InsP kinases 
identify elevated levels of 5PP-InsP5 relative to 1PP-InsP5 in mutants 
exhibiting hyper-filamentous growth. Overexpression of KCS1, which promotes 
formation of inositol pyrophosphates, is sufficient to drive pseudohyphal 
filamentation on medium with normal nitrogen levels. We find that the kinases 
Snf1p (AMPK), Kss1p, and Fus3p (MAPKs), required for wild-type pseudohyphal 
growth, are also required for wild-type InsP levels. Deletion analyses of the 
corresponding kinase genes indicate elevated InsP3 levels and an absence of 
exaggerated 5PP-InsP5 peaks in trace profiles from snf1Δ/Δ and kss1Δ/Δ mutants 
exhibiting decreased pseudohyphal filamentation. Elevated 5PP-InsP5:1PP-InsP5 
ratios are present in the hyperfilamentous fus3 deletion mutant. Collectively, 
the data identify the presence of elevated 5PP-InsP5 levels relative to other 
inositol pyrophosphates as an in vivo marker of hyper-filamentous growth, while 
providing initial evidence for the regulation of InsP signaling by pseudohyphal 
growth kinases.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1007493
PMCID: PMC6034902
PMID: 29939992 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.