1. Sci Rep. 2018 Jun 21;8(1):9465. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-27780-9.

Guanosine tetraphosphate relieves the negative regulation of Salmonella 
pathogenicity island-2 gene transcription exerted by the AT-rich ssrA 
discriminator region.

Tapscott T(1), Kim JS(2), Crawford MA(2), Fitzsimmons L(2), Liu L(2), 
Jones-Carson J(2)(3), Vázquez-Torres A(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Biology Program, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, 
CO, USA.
(2)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, University of Colorado School of 
Medicine, Aurora, CO, USA.
(3)Division of Infectious Diseases, University of Colorado School of Medicine, 
Aurora, CO, USA.
(4)Molecular Biology Program, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, 
CO, USA. andres.vazquez-torres@ucdenver.edu.
(5)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, University of Colorado School of 
Medicine, Aurora, CO, USA. andres.vazquez-torres@ucdenver.edu.
(6)Veterans Affairs Eastern Colorado Health Care System, Denver, CO, USA. 
andres.vazquez-torres@ucdenver.edu.

The repressive activity of ancestral histone-like proteins helps integrate 
transcription of foreign genes with discrepant AT content into existing 
regulatory networks. Our investigations indicate that the AT-rich discriminator 
region located between the -10 promoter element and the transcription start site 
of the regulatory gene ssrA plays a distinct role in the balanced expression of 
the Salmonella pathogenicity island-2 (SPI2) type III secretion system. The RNA 
polymerase-binding protein DksA activates the ssrAB regulon 
post-transcriptionally, whereas the alarmone guanosine tetraphosphate (ppGpp) 
relieves the negative regulation imposed by the AT-rich ssrA discriminator 
region. An increase in the GC-content of the ssrA discriminator region enhances 
ssrAB transcription and SsrB translation, thus activating the expression of 
downstream SPI2 genes. A Salmonella strain expressing a GC-rich ssrA 
discriminator region is attenuated in mice and grows poorly intracellularly. The 
combined actions of ppGpp and DksA on SPI2 expression enable Salmonella to grow 
intracellularly, and cause disease in a murine model of infection. Collectively, 
these findings indicate that (p)ppGpp relieves the negative regulation 
associated with the AT-rich discriminator region in the promoter of the 
horizontally-acquired ssrA gene, whereas DksA activates ssrB gene expression 
post-transcriptionally. The combined effects of (p)ppGpp and DksA on the ssrAB 
locus facilitate a balanced SPI2 virulence gene transcription that is essential 
for Salmonella pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-27780-9
PMCID: PMC6013443
PMID: 29930310 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.