1. Biol Pharm Bull. 2018;41(7):1107-1111. doi: 10.1248/bpb.b18-00151.

Development of a Screening System for Targeting Carriers Using Peptide-Modified 
Liposomes and Tissue Sections.

Negishi Y(1), Hamano N(1), Sato H(1), Katagiri F(2), Takatori K(1), 
Endo-Takahashi Y(1), Kikkawa Y(2), Nomizu M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Drug Delivery and Molecular Biopharmaceutics, School of 
Pharmacy, Tokyo University of Pharmacy and Life Sciences.
(2)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, School of Pharmacy, Tokyo University of 
Pharmacy and Life Sciences.

Liposomes have been used as targeting carriers for drug delivery systems (DDSs), 
and the carriers are able to be modified with targeting ligands, such as 
antibodies and peptides. To evaluate the targetability of DDS carriers modified 
with a targeting ligand, culture cells expressing the targeting molecules as 
well as small animals are used. Furthermore, in vitro and in vivo screening 
analyses must be repeatedly performed. Therefore, it is important to establish 
an easy and high-precision screening system for targeting carriers. With this 
aim, we focused that whether this ex vivo system could easily support assessment 
of interaction between targeting ligand and its receptor under physiological 
environment and further screen the DDS carrier-modified with targeting moiety. 
We examined targeting ability via in vitro, ex vivo, and in vivo analyses using 
integrin αvβ3-targeting C16Y-L. For the in vitro analysis, the cellular uptake 
of C16Y-L was higher than that of control liposomes in colon26 cells. For the ex 
vivo analysis, we performed an immunohistochemical analysis using colon26 tumor 
sections. C16Y-L was specifically attached to the tumor sections, as found in 
the in vitro analysis. Moreover, to evaluate the ex vivo-in vivo correlation, we 
examined the intratumoral localization of C16Y-L. This result showed that C16Y-L 
was accumulated not only in the tumor tissue but also in the tumor vasculature 
after the intravenous injection of C16Y-L, suggesting that the ex vivo 
peptide-modified liposomal analysis was correlated with the in vivo analysis. 
Thus, the ex vivo peptide-modified liposomal analysis may be an easy and rapid 
screening system with high-precision and for consideration in in vivo 
conditions.

DOI: 10.1248/bpb.b18-00151
PMID: 29962407 [Indexed for MEDLINE]