1. J Med Case Rep. 2018 Jul 6;12(1):194. doi: 10.1186/s13256-018-1726-8.

Symptomatic bilateral pulmonary embolism without deep venous thrombosis in an 
adolescent following arthroscopic anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction: a 
case report and review of the literature.

Bourget-Murray J(1)(2), Clarke MA(3), Gorzitza S(4), Phillips LA(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada.
(2)Department of Surgery, Section of Orthopedic Surgery, University of Calgary, 
Calgary, AB, Canada.
(3)College of Medicine, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada.
(4)Department of Surgery, Division of Pediatric Orthopedic Surgery, Alberta 
Children's Hospital, 2888 Shaganappi Trail NW, Calgary, AB, T3B 6A8, Canada.
(5)Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada. 
phillila@ucalgary.ca.
(6)Department of Surgery, Section of Orthopedic Surgery, University of Calgary, 
Calgary, AB, Canada. phillila@ucalgary.ca.
(7)Department of Surgery, Division of Pediatric Orthopedic Surgery, Alberta 
Children's Hospital, 2888 Shaganappi Trail NW, Calgary, AB, T3B 6A8, Canada. 
phillila@ucalgary.ca.

BACKGROUND: Venous thromboembolism, specifically pulmonary embolism, is a rare 
complication following elective pediatric orthopedic surgery. Bilateral 
pulmonary embolism with associated pulmonary hemorrhage/infarct without 
concomitant deep vein thrombosis has never been reported following routine 
anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction in an adolescent.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 16-year-old white girl presented with acute onset shortness 
of breath and pleuritic chest pain 6 days following elective anterior cruciate 
ligament reconstruction. After performing a thorough work-up, she was diagnosed 
as having provoked bilateral pulmonary embolism with associated pulmonary 
hemorrhage without concomitant deep vein thrombosis. She was treated 
successfully with 3 months of anticoagulation therapy with daily Lovenox 
(enoxaparin) injections.
CONCLUSIONS: Symptomatic bilateral pulmonary embolism may have a good prognosis 
if it is diagnosed early and treated appropriately. It is important to 
appreciate the risk of provoked thromboembolic events in healthy adolescents 
undergoing arthroscopic knee surgery.

DOI: 10.1186/s13256-018-1726-8
PMCID: PMC6034342
PMID: 29976241 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: 
Ethics approval was waived for this submission. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Written 
informed consent was obtained from the patient’s legal guardian(s) for 
publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the 
written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. 
COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no competing interests. 
PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.