1. Cardiovasc Res. 2018 Sep 1;114(11):1445-1461. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvy145.

Immunomodulatory interventions in myocardial infarction and heart failure: a 
systematic review of clinical trials and meta-analysis of IL-1 inhibition.

Panahi M(1), Papanikolaou A(1), Torabi A(2), Zhang JG(3), Khan H(2), Vazir A(2), 
Hasham MG(3), Cleland JGF(1)(2), Rosenthal NA(1)(3), Harding SE(1), Sattler 
S(1).

Author information:
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, Du Cane Road, 
London, UK.
(2)Royal Brompton Hospital, Royal Brompton and Harefield NHS Foundation Trust, 
Sydney Street, London, UK.
(3)The Jackson Laboratory, 600 Main Street, Bar Harbor, USA.

Following a myocardial infarction (MI), the immune system helps to repair 
ischaemic damage and restore tissue integrity, but excessive inflammation has 
been implicated in adverse cardiac remodelling and development towards heart 
failure (HF). Pre-clinical studies suggest that timely resolution of 
inflammation may help prevent HF development and progression. Therapeutic 
attempts to prevent excessive post-MI inflammation in patients have included 
pharmacological interventions ranging from broad immunosuppression to 
immunomodulatory approaches targeting specific cell types or factors with the 
aim to maintain beneficial aspects of the early post-MI immune response. These 
include the blockade of early initiators of inflammation including reactive 
oxygen species and complement, inhibition of mast cell degranulation and 
leucocyte infiltration, blockade of inflammatory cytokines, and inhibition of 
adaptive B and T-lymphocytes. Herein, we provide a systematic review on post-MI 
immunomodulation trials and a meta-analysis of studies targeting the 
inflammatory cytokine Interleukin-1. Despite an enormous effort into a 
significant number of clinical trials on a variety of targets, a striking 
heterogeneity in study population, timing and type of treatment, and highly 
variable endpoints limits the possibility for meaningful meta-analyses. To 
conclude, we highlight critical considerations for future studies including (i) 
the therapeutic window of opportunity, (ii) immunological effects of routine 
post-MI medication, (iii) stratification of the highly diverse post-MI patient 
population, (iv) the potential benefits of combining immunomodulatory with 
regenerative therapies, and at last (v) the potential side effects of 
immunotherapies.

DOI: 10.1093/cvr/cvy145
PMCID: PMC6106100
PMID: 30010800 [Indexed for MEDLINE]