1. Oncotarget. 2018 Jun 26;9(49):29238-29258. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.25579. 
eCollection 2018 Jun 26.

Pharmacogenetic studies with oral anticoagulants. Genome-wide association 
studies in vitamin K antagonist and direct oral anticoagulants.

Cullell N(1), Carrera C(1)(2), Muiño E(1), Torres N(1), Krupinski J(3)(4), 
Fernandez-Cadenas I(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Stroke Pharmacogenomics and Genetics, Fundació Docència i Recerca Mútua 
Terrassa, Hospital Universitari Mútua de Terrassa, Terrassa, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Neurovascular Research Laboratory, Institut de Recerca, Universitat Autònoma 
de Barcelona, Hospital Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Servicio de Neurología, Hospital Universitari Mútua Terrassa, Terrassa, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(4)School of Healthcare Science, Manchester Metropolitan University, Manchester, 
United Kingdom.
(5)Stroke Pharmacogenomics and Genetics, Institut de Recer ca Hospital de la 
Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain.

Oral anticoagulants (OAs) are the recommended drugs to prevent cardiovascular 
events and recurrence in patients with atrial fibrillation (AF) and 
cardioembolic stroke. We conducted a literature search to review the current 
state of OAs pharmacogenomics, focusing on Genome Wide Association Studies 
(GWAs) in patients treated with vitamin K antagonists (VKAs) and direct oral 
anticoagulants (DOACs). VKAs: Warfarin, acenocoumarol, fluindione and 
phenprocoumon have long been used, but their interindividual variability and 
narrow therapeutic/safety ratio makes their dosage difficult. GWAs have been 
useful in finding genetic variants associated with VKAs response. The main genes 
involved in VKAs pharmacogenetics are: VKORC1, CYP2C19 and CYP4F2. Variants in 
these genes have been included in pharmacogenetic algorithms to predict the VKAs 
dose individually in each patient depending on their genotype and clinical 
variables. DOACs: Dabigatran, apixaban, rivaroxaban and edoxaban have been 
approved for patients with AF. They have stable pharmacokinetics and do not 
require routine blood checks, thus avoiding most of the drawbacks of VKAs. 
Except for a GWAs performed in patients treated with dabigatran, there is no 
Genome Wide pharmacogenomics data for DOACs. Pharmacogenomics could be useful to 
predict the better clinical response and avoid adverse events in patients 
treated with anticoagulants, identifying the most appropriate anticoagulant drug 
for each patient. Current pharmacogenomics data show that the polymorphisms 
affecting VKAs or DOACs are different, concluding that personalized medicine 
based on pharmacogenomics could be possible. However, more studies are required 
to implement personalized medicine in clinical practice with OA and based on 
pharmacogenetics of DOACs.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.25579
PMCID: PMC6044386
PMID: 30018749

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST Nothing to disclose.