1. Cancer Res Treat. 2019 Apr;51(2):576-592. doi: 10.4143/crt.2018.100. Epub 2018
 Jul 18.

Upregulation of PITX2 Promotes Letrozole Resistance Via Transcriptional 
Activation of IFITM1 Signaling in Breast Cancer Cells.

Xu YY(1), Yu HR(2), Sun JY(2), Zhao Z(3), Li S(3), Zhang XF(3), Liao ZX(3), Cui 
MK(3), Li J(3), Li C(3), Zhang Q(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Breast Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of China Medical 
University, Shenyang, China.
(2)Department of Medical Imaging, Cancer Hospital of China Medical University, 
Liaoning Cancer Hospital & Institute, Shenyang, China.
(3)Department of Breast Surgery, Cancer Hospital of China Medical University, 
Liaoning Cancer Hospital & Institute, Shenyang, China.

PURPOSE: Although the interferon α (IFNα) signaling and the paired-like 
homeodomain transcription factor 2 (PITX2) have both been implicated in the 
progression of breast cancer (BCa), it remains obscure whether these two 
pathways act in a coordinated manner. We therefore aimed to elucidate the 
expression and function of PITX2 during the pathogenesis of endocrine resistance 
in BCa.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: PITX2 expression was assessed in BCa tissues using 
quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) and 
immunohistochemistry and in experimentally induced letrozole-resistant BCa cells 
using RT-qPCR and immunoblotting. Effects of PITX2 deregulation on BCa 
progression was determined by assessing MTT, apoptosis and xenograft model. 
Finally, using multiple assays, the transcriptional regulation of 
interferon-inducible transmembrane protein 1 (IFITM1) by PITX2 was studied at 
both molecular and functional levels.
RESULTS: PITX2 expression was induced in letrozole-resistant BCa tissues and 
cells, and PITX2 induction by IFNα signaling powerfully protected BCa cells 
against letrozole insult and potentiated letrozole-resistance. Mechanistically, 
PITX2 enhanced IFNα-induced AKT activation by transactivating the transcription 
of IFITM1, thus rendering BCa cells unresponsive to letrozoleelicited cell 
death. Additionally, ablation of IFITM1 expression using siRNA substantially 
abolished IFNα-elicited AKT phosphorylation, even in the presence of PITX2 
overexpression, thus sensitizing BCa cells to letrozole treatment.
CONCLUSION: These results demonstrate that constitutive upregulation of 
PITX2/IFITM1 cascade is an intrinsic adaptive mechanism during the pathogenesis 
of letrozole-resistance, and modulation of PITX2/IFITM1 level using different 
genetic and pharmacological means would thus have a novel therapeutic potential 
against letrozole resistance in BCa.

DOI: 10.4143/crt.2018.100
PMCID: PMC6473270
PMID: 30025446 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: This study was sponsored by Sanofi-Aventis Korea 
Co., Ltd.