1. Immunohorizons. 2018 Apr 1;2(4):107-118. doi: 10.4049/immunohorizons.1700055.

Diacylglycerol kinase ζ (DGKζ) and Casitas b-lineage proto-oncogene b-deficient 
mice have similar functional outcomes in T cells but DGKζ-deficient mice have 
increased T cell activation and tumor clearance.

Wesley EM(1), Xin G(2), McAllister D(1), Malarkannan S(1)(2)(3)(4), Newman 
DK(2)(5), Dwinell MB(1), Cui W(1)(2), Johnson BD(1)(4), Riese MJ(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Medical College of Wisconsin, 
Milwaukee, WI.
(2)Blood Research Institute, Blood Center of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI.
(3)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Medical College of 
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI.
(4)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Medical College of 
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI.
(5)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Medical College of Wisconsin, 
Milwaukee, WI.

Targeting negative regulators downstream of the T cell receptor (TCR) represents 
a novel strategy to improve cancer immunotherapy. Two proteins that serve as 
critical inhibitory regulators downstream of the TCR are diacylglycerol kinase ζ 
(DGKζ), a regulator of Ras and PKC-θ signaling, and Casitas b-lineage 
proto-oncogene b (Cbl-b), an E3 ubiquitin ligase that predominantly regulates 
PI(3)K signaling. We sought to compare the signaling and functional effects that 
result from deletion of DGKζ, Cbl-b, or both (double knockout, DKO) in T cells, 
and to evaluate tumor responses generated in a clinically relevant orthotopic 
pancreatic tumor model. We found that whereas deletion of Cbl-b primarily served 
to enhance NF-κB signaling, deletion of DGKζ enhanced TCR-mediated signal 
transduction downstream of Ras/Erk and NF-κB. Deletion of DGKζ or Cbl-b 
comparably enhanced CD8+ T cell functional responses, such as proliferation, 
production of IFNγ, and generation of granzyme B when compared with WT T cells. 
DKO T cells demonstrated enhanced function above that observed with single 
knockout T cells after weak, but not strong, stimulation. Deletion of DGKζ, but 
not Cbl-b, however, resulted in significant increases in numbers of activated 
(CD44hi) CD8+ T cells in both non-treated and tumor-bearing mice. DGKζ-deficient 
mice also had enhanced control of pancreatic tumor cell growth compared to 
Cbl-b-deficient mice. This represents the first direct comparison between mice 
of these genotypes and suggests that T cell immunotherapies may be better 
improved by targeting TCR signaling molecules that are regulated by DGKζ as 
opposed to molecules regulated by Cbl-b.

DOI: 10.4049/immunohorizons.1700055
PMCID: PMC6048965
PMID: 30027154

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: The authors report no 
conflict of interest with the data presented in this manuscript.