1. Front Plant Sci. 2018 Jul 6;9:942. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2018.00942. eCollection 
2018.

Terpene Moiety Enhancement by Overexpression of Geranyl(geranyl) Diphosphate 
Synthase and Geraniol Synthase Elevates Monomeric and Dimeric Monoterpene Indole 
Alkaloids in Transgenic Catharanthus roseus.

Kumar SR(1), Shilpashree HB(1), Nagegowda DA(1).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Plant Biology and Biotechnology Lab, Research Centre, CSIR-Central 
Institute of Medicinal and Aromatic Plants, Bengaluru, India.

Catharanthus roseus is the sole source of two of the most important anticancer 
monoterpene indole alkaloids (MIAs), vinblastine and vincristine and their 
precursors, vindoline and catharanthine. The MIAs are produced from the 
condensation of precursors derived from indole and terpene secoiridoid pathways. 
It has been previously reported that the terpene moiety limits MIA biosynthesis 
in C. roseus. Here, to overcome this limitation and enhance MIAs levels in C. 
roseus, bifunctional geranyl(geranyl) diphosphate synthase [G(G)PPS] and 
geraniol synthase (GES) that provide precursors for early steps of terpene 
moiety (secologanin) formation, were overexpressed transiently by 
agroinfiltration and stably by Agrobacterium-mediated transformation. Both 
transient and stable overexpression of G(G)PPS and co-expression of G(G)PPS+GES 
significantly enhanced the accumulation of secologanin, which in turn elevated 
the levels of monomeric MIAs. In addition, transgenic C. roseus plants exhibited 
increased levels of root alkaloid ajmalicine. The dimeric alkaloid vinblastine 
was enhanced only in G(G)PPS but not in G(G)PPS+GES transgenic lines that 
correlated with transcript levels of peroxidase-1 (PRX1) involved in coupling of 
vindoline and catharanthine into 3',4'-anhydrovinblastine, the immediate 
precursor of vinblastine. Moreover, first generation (T1) lines exhibited 
comparable transcript and metabolite levels to that of T0 lines. In addition, 
transgenic lines displayed normal growth similar to wild-type plants indicating 
that the bifunctional G(G)PPS enhanced flux toward both primary and secondary 
metabolism. These results revealed that improved availability of early 
precursors for terpene moiety biosynthesis enhanced production of MIAs in C. 
roseus at the whole plant level. This is the first report demonstrating enhanced 
accumulation of monomeric and dimeric MIAs including root MIA ajmalicine in C. 
roseus through transgenic approaches.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2018.00942
PMCID: PMC6043680
PMID: 30034406