1. Front Immunol. 2018 Jul 13;9:1599. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.01599. eCollection 
2018.

Mutations of Recombinant Aquaporin-4 Antibody in the Fc Domain Can Impair 
Complement-Dependent Cellular Cytotoxicity and Transplacental Transport.

Mader S(1), Brimberg L(1), Soltys JN(2), Bennett JL(3)(4), Diamond B(1).

Author information:
(1)The Feinstein Institute for Medical Research, The Center for Autoimmune, 
Musculoskeletal and Hematopoietic Diseases, Northwell Health System, Manhasset, 
NY, United States.
(2)Medical Scientist Training and Neuroscience Graduate Training Programs, 
University of Colorado Denver School of Medicine, Aurora, IL, United States.
(3)Department of Neurology, Program in Neuroscience, University of Colorado 
Denver School of Medicine, Aurora, IL, United States.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology, Program in Neuroscience, University of Colorado 
Denver School of Medicine, Aurora, IL, United States.

Maternal antibodies provide protection for the developing fetus. Transplacental 
transport of pathogenic autoantibodies might pose a risk for the developing 
fetus. The transport of antibodies across the placenta to the fetal circulation 
occurs through the neonatal Fc salvage receptor (FcRn). During gestation, 
maternal autoantibodies are able to penetrate the embryonic brain before a 
functional intact blood-brain barrier is established. Brain-reactive antibodies 
to the water channel protein aquaporin-4 (AQP4) are a hallmark finding in 
neuromyelitis optica (NMO), a neurological disease that predominantly affects 
women, many of whom are of childbearing age. AQP4-IgG mediate astrocytic injury 
in a complement-dependent fashion. Recent studies suggest these antibodies 
contribute to impaired pregnancy outcome. The aim of the study was to 
investigate the transplacental transport as well as FcRn binding of a monoclonal 
AQP4-IgG cloned from an NMO patient (wild-type antibody) compared to five 
different mutated Fc domain of this antibody containing single amino acid 
substitutions in the Fc region. All of the Fc-mutated antibodies lack 
complement-dependent cytotoxicity. Four of the five Fc-mutated antibodies showed 
limited transplacental transport in vivo. Three mutated Fc with impaired 
transplacental transport showed persistent binding to rodent FcRn at pH 6 but 
also at pH 7.2, suggesting that limited transplacental transport could be due to 
diminished release from FcRn. One mutated Fc with modestly limited 
transplacental transport showed diminished binding to FcRn at pH 6. This study 
suggests that mutated Fc with intact transplacental transport may be used to 
study antibody effector functions and Fc with limited transport may be used as a 
carrier to deliver therapies to pregnant woman, while sparing the developing 
fetus.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.01599
PMCID: PMC6053506
PMID: 30057582