1. Clin Chim Acta. 2018 Nov;486:151-155. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2018.07.040. Epub
2018  Jul 24.

First case of genetically confirmed CLN3 disease in Chinese with cDNA sequencing 
revealing pathogenicity of a novel splice site variant.

Lau NKC(1), Ching CK(2), Lee HHC(3), Chak WKM(4), Kwan Shing N(5), Hanchard 
NA(6), Mak CM(7).

Author information:
(1)Kowloon West Cluster Laboratory Genetic Service, Chemical Pathology 
Laboratory, Department of Pathology, Princess Margaret Hospital, Hong Kong. 
Electronic address: lkc416@ha.org.hk.
(2)Kowloon West Cluster Laboratory Genetic Service, Chemical Pathology 
Laboratory, Department of Pathology, Princess Margaret Hospital, Hong Kong. 
Electronic address: chingck2@ha.org.hk.
(3)Kowloon West Cluster Laboratory Genetic Service, Chemical Pathology 
Laboratory, Department of Pathology, Princess Margaret Hospital, Hong Kong. 
Electronic address: leehch@ha.org.hk.
(4)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Tuen Mun Hospital, Hong 
Kong. Electronic address: chakwk@ha.org.hk.
(5)Department of Pathology, Tuen Mun Hospital, Hong Kong. Electronic address: 
nks422@ha.org.hk.
(6)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX, USA. Electronic address: hanchard@bcm.edu.
(7)Kowloon West Cluster Laboratory Genetic Service, Chemical Pathology 
Laboratory, Department of Pathology, Princess Margaret Hospital, Hong Kong. 
Electronic address: makm@ha.org.hk.

BACKGROUND: Juvenile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (CLN3 disease) is a 
hereditary progressive neurodegenerative disease well documented among 
Caucasians, but such clinical data and genetic characterization is lacking among 
Asian populations.
PATIENT AND METHODS: A 13-year-old Chinese girl presented for diagnostic 
evaluation with retinitis pigmentosa, generalised tonic-clonic seizure and 
cerebellar ataxia. Electron microscopy of whole blood and skin biopsy, and 
mutation analysis of CLN3 gene with genomic DNA and cDNA, were performed.
RESULTS: Electron microscopy showed vacuolated lymphocytes, and characteristic 
patterns in eccrine glands suggestive of neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis. 
Sequencing of genomic DNA showed homozygous splice site variant 
NM_000086.2(CLN3):c.906+6T>G, and the pathogenicity of which was confirmed by 
cDNA sequencing to demonstrate the deletion of a transmembrane domain of the 
CLN3 protein. The mutant protein was predicted to adversely affect ligand 
binding of CLN3 as a lysosomal membrane protein.
CONCLUSIONS: Here we report the first genetically confirmed CLN3 disease in 
Chinese, with a novel splice site variant with proposed pathogenetic mechanism 
relating gene and protein, and highlights the potential ethnic differences in 
the mutation spectrum. We wish to establish the importance of clinical awareness 
and laboratory diagnosis of CLN3 disease, especially in the promising age of 
gene therapy.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cca.2018.07.040
PMID: 30053402 [Indexed for MEDLINE]