1. Front Neurosci. 2018 Jul 12;12:473. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2018.00473. eCollection
 2018.

Pathogenesis of Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration: Insights From Loss of 
Function Theory and Early Involvement of the Caudate Nucleus.

Sobue G(1), Ishigaki S(1), Watanabe H(1).

Author information:
(1)Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, Brain and Mind Center, Nagoya 
University, Nagoya, Japan.

Frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) is a group of clinically, 
pathologically and genetically heterogeneous neurodegenerative disorders that 
involve the frontal and temporal lobes. Behavioral variant frontotemporal 
dementia (bvFTD), semantic dementia (SD), and progressive non-fluent aphasia 
(PNFA) are three major clinical syndromes. TDP-43, FUS, and tau are three major 
pathogenetic proteins. In this review, we first discuss the loss-of-function 
mechanism of FTLD. We focus on FUS-associated pathogenesis in which FUS is 
linked to tau by regulating its alternative splicing machinery. Moreover, FUS is 
associated with abnormalities in post-synaptic formation, which can be an early 
disease marker of FTLD. Second, we discuss clinical and pathological aspects of 
FTLD. Recently, FTLD and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) have been 
recognized as the same disease entity; indeed, nearly all sporadic ALS cases 
show TDP-43 pathology irrespective of FTD phenotype. Thus, investigating early 
structural and network changes in the FTLD/ALS continuum can be useful for 
developing early diagnostic markers of FTLD. MRI studies have revealed the 
involvement of the caudate nucleus and its anatomical networks in association 
with the early phase of behavioral/cognitive decline in FTLD/ALS. In particular, 
even ALS patients with normal cognition have shown a significant decrease in 
structural connectivity between the caudate head networks. In pathological 
studies, FTLD/ALS has shown striatal involvement of both efferent system 
components and glutamatergic inputs from the cerebral cortices even in ALS 
patients. Thus, the caudate nucleus may be primarily associated with behavioral 
abnormality and cognitive involvement in FTLD/ALS. Although several clinical 
trials have been conducted, there is still no therapy that can change the 
disease course in patients with FTLD. Therefore, there is an urgent need to 
establish a strategy for predominant sporadic FTLD cases.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2018.00473
PMCID: PMC6052086
PMID: 30050404