1. J Comp Neurol. 2018 Dec 15;526(18):2921-2936. doi: 10.1002/cne.24484. Epub
2018  Nov 16.

Microglia changes associated to Alzheimer's disease pathology in aged 
chimpanzees.

Edler MK(1)(2), Sherwood CC(3), Meindl RS(4), Munger EL(1), Hopkins WD(5)(6), 
Ely JJ(7), Erwin JM(3), Perl DP(8), Mufson EJ(9), Hof PR(10)(11), Raghanti 
MA(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences, Kent State University, Kent, Ohio.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Northeast Ohio Medical University, 
Rootstown, Ohio.
(3)Department of Anthropology and Center for the Advanced Study of Human 
Paleobiology, The George Washington University, Washington, DC.
(4)Department of Anthropology, Kent State University, Kent, Ohio.
(5)Division of Developmental and Cognitive Neuroscience, Yerkes National Primate 
Research Center, Atlanta, Georgia.
(6)Neuroscience Institute, Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia.
(7)MAEBIOS, Alamogordo, New Mexico.
(8)Department of Pathology, Uniformed Services University of the Health 
Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland.
(9)Departments of Neurobiology and Neurology, Barrow Neurological Institute, 
Phoenix, Arizona.
(10)Fishberg Department of Neuroscience, Ronald M. Loeb Center for Alzheimer's 
Disease, and Friedman Brain Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, 
New York, New York.
(11)New York Consortium for Evolutionary Primatology, New York, New York.

In Alzheimer's disease (AD), the brain's primary immune cells, microglia, become 
activated and are found in close apposition to amyloid beta (Aβ) protein plaques 
and neurofibrillary tangles (NFT). The present study evaluated microglia density 
and morphology in a large group of aged chimpanzees (n = 20, ages 37-62 years) 
with varying degrees of AD-like pathology. Using immunohistochemical and 
stereological techniques, we quantified the density of activated microglia and 
morphological variants (ramified, intermediate, and amoeboid) in postmortem 
chimpanzee brain samples from prefrontal cortex, middle temporal gyrus, and 
hippocampus, areas that show a high degree of AD pathology in humans. Microglia 
measurements were compared to pathological markers of AD in these cases. 
Activated microglia were consistently present across brain areas. In the 
hippocampus, CA3 displayed a higher density than CA1. Aβ42 plaque volume was 
positively correlated with higher microglial activation and with an intermediate 
morphology in the hippocampus. Aβ42-positive vessel volume was associated with 
increased hippocampal microglial activation. Activated microglia density and 
morphology were not associated with age, sex, pretangle density, NFT density, or 
tau neuritic cluster density. Aged chimpanzees displayed comparable patterns of 
activated microglia phenotypes as well as an association of increased microglial 
activation and morphological changes with Aβ deposition similar to AD patients. 
In contrast to human AD brains, activated microglia density was not 
significantly correlated with tau lesions. This evidence suggests that the 
chimpanzee brain may be relatively preserved during normal aging processes but 
not entirely protected from neurodegeneration as previously assumed.

© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/cne.24484
PMCID: PMC6283685
PMID: 30069930 [Indexed for MEDLINE]