1. Osteoporos Int. 2018 Dec;29(12):2585-2596. doi: 10.1007/s00198-018-4650-2.
Epub  2018 Jul 31.

Diagnosis and management of bone fragility in diabetes: an emerging challenge.

Ferrari SL(1), Abrahamsen B(2)(3), Napoli N(4)(5), Akesson K(6), Chandran M(7), 
Eastell R(8), El-Hajj Fuleihan G(9), Josse R(10)(11), Kendler DL(12), Kraenzlin 
M(13), Suzuki A(14), Pierroz DD(15), Schwartz AV(16), Leslie WD(17); Bone and 
Diabetes Working Group of IOF.

Collaborators: Ferrari SL, Abrahamsen B, Akesson K, Ardawi MSM, Chandran M, 
Cooper C, Eastell R, El-Hajj Fuleihan G, Josse R, Kendler DL, Kraenzlin M, 
Leslie WD, Mithal A, Napoli N, Suzuki A, Schwartz AV.

Author information:
(1)Division of Bone Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine Specialties, 
Geneva University Hospital & Faculty of Medicine, 1205, Geneva, Switzerland. 
serge.ferrari@unige.ch.
(2)Department of Medicine, Holbaek Hospital, Holbaek, Denmark.
(3)OPEN, Institute of Clinical Research, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, 
Denmark.
(4)Unit of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Department of Medicine, Università Campus 
Bio-Medico di Roma, Rome, Italy.
(5)Division of Bone and Mineral Diseases, Washington University in St Louis, St 
Louis, MO, USA.
(6)Department of Clinical Sciences, Clinical and Molecular Osteoporosis Unit, 
Lund University, Malmö, Sweden.
(7)Osteoporosis and Bone Metabolism Unit, Department of Endocrinology, Singapore 
General Hospital, Singapore, Singapore.
(8)Academic Unit of Bone Metabolism, Mellanby Centre for Bone Research, 
University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK.
(9)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Calcium 
Metabolism and Osteoporosis Program, WHO Collaborating Center for Metabolic Bone 
Disorders, American University of Beirut Medical Center, Riad El Solh, Beirut, 
Lebanon.
(10)Department of Medicine and Department of Nutritional Sciences, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(11)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, St. Michael's Hospital, Toronto, 
ON, Canada.
(12)Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(13)Endonet, Endocrine Clinic and Laboratory, Basel, Switzerland.
(14)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Fujita Health University, Toyoake, 
Aichi, Japan.
(15)International Osteoporosis Foundation, Nyon, Switzerland.
(16)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of California, San 
Francisco, CA, USA.
(17)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 
Canada.

Fragility fractures are increasingly recognized as a complication of both type 1 
and type 2 diabetes, with fracture risk that increases with disease duration and 
poor glycemic control. Yet the identification and management of fracture risk in 
these patients remains challenging. This review explores the clinical 
characteristics of bone fragility in adults with diabetes and highlights recent 
studies that have evaluated bone mineral density (BMD), bone microstructure and 
material properties, biochemical markers, and fracture prediction algorithms 
(i.e., FRAX) in these patients. It further reviews the impact of diabetes drugs 
on bone as well as the efficacy of osteoporosis treatments in this population. 
We finally propose an algorithm for the identification and management of 
diabetic patients at increased fracture risk.

DOI: 10.1007/s00198-018-4650-2
PMCID: PMC6267152
PMID: 30066131 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: S Ferrari has received research grants, 
honoraria, and/or consultancies from Amgen, UCB, MSD, Labatec, Agnovos. B 
Abrahamsen has received research contracts with Novartis and UCB with funds paid 
to the institution. D Kendler has received research grants, honoraria, and/or 
consultancies from Amgen, Eli Lilly, AstraZeneca, Pfizer. R Eastell has received 
research grants from Alexion, Amgen Inc., and Ultragenyx, and consulting fees 
from Immunodiagnostic Systems, GlaxoSmithKline, and Amgen Inc. A Suzuki has 
received research grants and/or honoraria from Astellas, Chugai, Daiichi-Sankyo, 
Kyowa-Hakko Kirin, MSD, Novo Nordisk, Ono, Pfizer, Taisho Toyama, 
Tanabe-Mitsubishi and Takeda. R Josse has received consultancy fees and speaker 
honoraria from Amgen, Lilly, Merck. K Akesson has received lecture fees or 
consultancies from MSD, UCB, Amgen, Eli Lilly and Sandoz. A Schwartz has 
received a research grant from Hologic and consulting fees from Amgen. N Napoli 
has received consulting fees from Lilly and Amgen. G El-Hajj Fulehain, M 
Chandran, DD Pierroz, M Kraenzlin have no disclosure.