1. Pediatr Neurol. 2018 Aug;85:67-70. doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2018.05.010. 
Epub 2018 Jun 5.

Use of Flow Cytometry for Diagnosis of Epilepsy Associated With Homozygous PIGW 
Variants.

Foskett GK(1), Engleman E(2), Klotz J(3), Choi O(2), Tolentino L(2), Kochhar 
A(4), Yang QZ(3), Stevenson DA(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, California.
(2)Stanford Blood Center, Stanford University, Stanford, California.
(3)Department of Neurology, Stanford University, Stanford, California.
(4)Division of Medical Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, California; 
Valley Children's Healthcare, Madera, California.
(5)Division of Medical Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, California. 
Electronic address: dasteven@stanford.edu.

BACKGROUND: Biallelic variants in PIGW have been suggested to cause infantile 
spasms and hyperphosphatasia. PIGW encodes for a protein involved in the third 
step of glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) synthesis. GPI anchored proteins are 
increasingly recognized as important structures for cellular interactions and 
neuronal development.
METHODS: Molecular testing of PIGW was performed followed by fluorescence 
activating cell sorting analysis of granulocytes, lymphocytes, and monocytes, 
and compared to controls.
FINDINGS: An infant was homozygous for variants in PIGW (c.199C>G; p.Pro67Ala) 
with an associated phenotype of infantile spasms, myoclonic seizures, cortical 
visual impairment, developmental delay, and minor dysmorphic features. Alkaline 
phosphatase levels ranged from normal to mildly elevated. Flow cytometric 
studies showed significantly decreased expression of important GPIs, providing 
functional evidence of pathogenicity.
CONCLUSION: Our data provide further evidence of a novel autosomal recessive 
PIGW-related epilepsy disorder. Flow cytometry provided functional evidence of 
the pathogenicity of homozygous variants of uncertain significance in PIGW, and 
supports the use of flow cytometry as a functional tool to demonstrate decreased 
surface expression of GPI anchored proteins in individuals with variants of 
unknown significance.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2018.05.010
PMID: 30078644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]