1. Ocul Surf. 2018 Oct;16(4):478-486. doi: 10.1016/j.jtos.2018.08.001. Epub 2018 
Aug 2.

Clusterin from human clinical tear samples: Positive correlation between tear 
concentration and Schirmer strip test results.

Yu V(1), Bhattacharya D(2), Webster A(3), Bauskar A(4), Flowers C(5), Heur M(5), 
Chintala SK(3), Itakura T(3), Wilson MR(6), Barr JT(7), Jeong S(8), Wang M(2), 
Fini ME(9).

Author information:
(1)MD Program, Keck School of Medicine of USC, University of Southern 
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology & Vision Science, University of Arizona College 
of Medicine, Tucson, AZ, USA.
(3)USC Institute for Genetic Medicine, Keck School of Medicine of USC, 
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(4)PhD Program in Medical Biology, Keck School of Medicine of USC, University of 
Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(5)USC Roski Eye Institute and Department of Ophthalmology, Keck School of 
Medicine of USC, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(6)Illawarra Health and Medical Research Institute, School of Biological 
Sciences, University of Wollongong, Wollongong, New South Wales, Australia.
(7)The Ohio State University College of Optometry, Columbus, OH, USA.
(8)USC Institute for Genetic Medicine, USC Roski Eye Institute and Department of 
Ophthalmology, Keck School of Medicine of USC, University of Southern 
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(9)USC Institute for Genetic Medicine, Keck School of Medicine of USC, 
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. Electronic address: 
mefini@tuftsmedicalcenter.org.

PURPOSE: To investigate the relationship between tear concentration of the 
homeostatic protein clusterin (CLU) and dry eye signs and symptoms, and to 
characterize tear CLU protein.
METHODS: Two independent studies were conducted, one in Tucson (44 subjects), 
the other in Los Angeles (52 subjects). A cohort study design was employed to 
enroll patients without regard to dry eye diagnosis. Dry eye signs and symptoms 
were assessed using clinical tests. Tear samples were collected by Schirmer 
strip, and also by micropipette at slit lamp when possible. CLU from both sample 
types was quantified by immunoassay. The relationship between CLU concentration 
and clinical test scores was determined by Pearson's correlation coefficient 
(for individual eyes) and multiple linear regression analysis (including both 
eyes). CLU was also evaluated biochemically by western blotting.
RESULTS: In the Tucson cohort, a positive correlation was observed between tear 
CLU concentration and results of the Schirmer strip test, a measure of tear flow 
(p = 0.021 includes both eyes). This result was corroborated in the Los Angeles 
cohort (p = 0.013). The mean tear CLU concentration was 31 ± 14 μg/mL (n = 18 
subjects, 33 eyes; range = 7-48 μg/mL). CLU from clinical tear samples appeared 
biochemically similar to CLU from a non-clinical tear sample and from blood 
plasma.
CONCLUSIONS: Results support the hypothesis that an optimal concentration of 
tear CLU is important for ocular surface health, and that this drops below the 
effective threshold in dry eye. Tear CLU measurement might identify patients 
that could benefit from supplementation. Information about concentration will 
aid development of therapeutic dosage parameters.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jtos.2018.08.001
PMCID: PMC6175631
PMID: 30077709 [Indexed for MEDLINE]