1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2018 Aug;97(31):e11552. doi:
10.1097/MD.0000000000011552.

Oxycodone versus sufentanil in adult patient-controlled intravenous analgesia 
after abdominal surgery: A prospective, randomized, double-blinded, 
multiple-center clinical trial.

Han L(1), Su Y, Xiong H, Niu X, Dang S, Du K, Li Q, Liu J, Zhang P, Li S.

Author information:
(1)The Key Laboratory of Biomedical Information Engineering of the Ministry of 
Education, School of Life Science and Technology, Xi'an Jiaotong University 
Department of Anesthesia, Shaanxi Province Tumor Hospital Department of 
Anesthesia, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Medical College Department 
of anesthesia, the Second Affiliated hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University, 
Xi'an, Shaanxi, China.

BACKGROUND: A randomized controlled trial was performed to compare analgesic 
effects and adverse effects of oxycodone and sufentanil in patient-controlled 
intravenous analgesia (PCIA) after abdominal surgery under general anesthesia.
METHODS: Adult patients undergoing elective abdominal surgery were randomly 
allocated into oxycodone and sufentanil groups according to the randomization 
sequence. Study personnel, health-care team members, and patients were masked to 
the group assignment throughout the study period. Oxycodone (0.1 mg/kg for 
endoscopy; 0.15 mg/kg for laparotomy) or sufentanil (0.1 μg/kg for endoscopy; 
0.15 μg/kg for laparotomy) was administrated at the end of surgeries. 
Postoperative pain was controlled using PCIA. Bolus dose was 2 mg and 2 μg for 
oxycodone and sufentanil group, respectively. The lockout time was 5 minutes for 
all patients, and there was no background infusion for oxycodone group, whereas 
0.02 μg/kg/h background infusion was administrated in sufentanil group. The 
primary outcomes were the total analgesic doses in PCIA, effective bolus times, 
the length of first bolus since patients returning to ward from postanesthesia 
care unit (PACU), rescue analgesic rate in PACU, numeric rating scales, 
functional activity scores, and patients' satisfaction scores.
RESULTS: A total of 200 patients were screened, and 175 patients were enrolled. 
Patients were randomly assigned to oxycodone (n = 87) and sufentanil (n = 88) 
groups. Both oxycodone and sufentanil PCIA provided adequate postoperative pain 
relief. Patients in oxycodone group showed a shorter consciousness recovery time 
after surgery. The major adverse effect in patients from oxycodone group was 
nausea/vomiting, whereas multiple adverse complications including 
nausea/vomiting, pruritus, and respiratory depression were observed in patients 
from sufentanil group. Patients from oxycodone group showed significantly 
reduced analgesic drug consumption (calculated as equivalent dose of morphine), 
functional activity scores, and patient satisfaction scores.
DISCUSSION: Compared with sufentanil PCIA, oxycodone PCIA showed better 
analgesic effects, lower incidence of adverse complications, and less analgesic 
drug consumption during postoperative pain management.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000011552
PMCID: PMC6081156
PMID: 30075523 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.