1. Medicines (Basel). 2018 Aug 6;5(3):85. doi: 10.3390/medicines5030085.

Individual Differences in Responsiveness to Acupuncture: An Exploratory Survey 
of Practitioner Opinion.

Mayor DF(1), McClure LS(2), Clayton McClure JH(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Allied Health Professions and Midwifery, School of Health and 
Social Work, University of Hertfordshire, Hatfield AL10 9AB, UK. 
davidmayor@welwynacupuncture.co.uk.
(2)Northern College of Acupuncture, York YO1 6LJ, UK. 
LaraMcClure@chinese-medicine.co.uk.
(3)Northern College of Acupuncture, York YO1 6LJ, UK. 
helgi.claytonmcclure@oxon.org.

Background: Previous research has considered the impact of personal and 
situational factors on treatment responses. This article documents the first 
phase of a four-stage project on patient characteristics that may influence 
responsiveness to acupuncture treatment, reporting results from an exploratory 
practitioner survey. Methods: Acupuncture practitioners from various medical 
professions were recruited through professional organisations to complete an 
online survey about their demographics and attitudes as well as 60 questions on 
specific factors that might influence treatment. They gave categorical ("Yes", 
"No", and "Don't know") and free-text responses. Quantitative and qualitative 
(thematic) analyses were then conducted. Results: There were more affirmative 
than negative or uncertain responses overall. Certain characteristics, including 
ability to relax, exercise and diet, were most often considered relevant. 
Younger and male practitioners were more likely to respond negatively. Limited 
support was found for groupings between characteristics. Qualitative data 
provide explanatory depth. Response fatigue was evident over the course of the 
survey. Conclusions: Targeting and reminders may benefit uptake when conducting 
survey research. Practitioner characteristics influence their appreciation of 
patient characteristics. Factors consistently viewed as important included 
ability to relax, exercise and diet. Acupuncture practitioners may benefit from 
additional training in certain areas. Surveys may produce more informative 
results if reduced in length and complexity.

DOI: 10.3390/medicines5030085
PMCID: PMC6163768
PMID: 30082630

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.