1. Genet Med. 2019 Mar;21(3):631-640. doi: 10.1038/s41436-018-0129-y. Epub 2018
Aug  10.

The New York pilot newborn screening program for lysosomal storage diseases: 
Report of the First 65,000 Infants.

Wasserstein MP(1), Caggana M(2), Bailey SM(3), Desnick RJ(4), Edelmann L(4), 
Estrella L(4), Holzman I(4), Kelly NR(5), Kornreich R(4), Kupchik SG(6), Martin 
M(2), Nafday SM(5), Wasserman R(7), Yang A(4), Yu C(4), Orsini JJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Albert Einstein College of Medicine and the Children's Hospital at 
Montefiore, Bronx, New York, USA. mwassers@montefiore.org.
(2)Division of Genetics, Wadsworth Center, New York State Department of Health, 
Albany, New York, USA.
(3)New York University School of Medicine and NYU Langone Health, New York, New 
York, USA.
(4)Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai and the Mount Sinai Medical Center, 
New York, New York, USA.
(5)Albert Einstein College of Medicine and the Children's Hospital at 
Montefiore, Bronx, New York, USA.
(6)Maimonides Medical Center, Brooklyn, New York, USA.
(7)New York City Health and Hospitals/Elmhurst, Queens, New York, USA.

Comment in
    Genet Med. 2019 Mar;21(3):534-535. doi: 10.1038/s41436-018-0130-5.

PURPOSE: We conducted a consented pilot newborn screening (NBS) for Pompe, 
Gaucher, Niemann-Pick A/B, Fabry, and MPS 1 to assess the suitability of these 
lysosomal storage disorders (LSDs) for public health mandated screening.
METHODS: At five participating high-birth rate, ethnically diverse New York City 
hospitals, recruiters discussed the study with postpartum parents and documented 
verbal consent. Screening on consented samples was performed using multiplexed 
tandem mass spectrometry. Screen-positive infants underwent confirmatory 
enzymology, DNA testing, and biomarker quantitation when available. Affected 
infants are being followed for clinical management and long-term outcome.
RESULTS: Over 4 years, 65,605 infants participated, representing an overall 
consent rate of 73%. Sixty-nine infants were screen-positive. Twenty-three were 
confirmed true positives, all of whom were predicted to have late-onset 
phenotypes. Six of the 69 currently have undetermined disease status.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that NBS for LSDs is much more likely to detect 
individuals at risk for late-onset disease, similar to results from other NBS 
programs. This work has demonstrated the feasibility of using a novel consented 
pilot NBS study design that can be modified to include other disorders under 
consideration for public health implementation as a means to gather critical 
evidence for evidence-based NBS practices.

DOI: 10.1038/s41436-018-0129-y
PMCID: PMC6369014
PMID: 30093709 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Notification Page Dr. 
Melissa Wasserstein has served as a consultant for, and has received travel 
reimbursement from Sanofi Genzyme. Dr. Michele Caggana has no commercial 
association conflicts of interest with the information in the manuscript. Dr. 
Sean Bailey has no commercial association conflicts of interest with the 
information in the manuscript. Dr. Desnick is a consultant for Amicus 
therapeutics, Sanofi Genzyme and Sangamo Therapeutics. He has received research 
grants from Sanofi Genzyme and Sangamo Therapeutics. He own founders shares for 
Amicus Therapeutics and options for Sangamo Therapeutics. He has patents for 
Fabry and Neiman-Pick treatments and receives royalties from Sanofi Genzyme. Dr. 
Lisa Edelmann is an employee of Sema4, a for profit genetic testing laboratory. 
Ms. Lissette Estrella has no commercial association conflicts of interest with 
the information in the manuscript. Dr. Ian Holzman has no commercial association 
conflicts of interest with the information in the manuscript. Ms. Nicole Kelly 
has no commercial association conflicts of interest with the information in the 
manuscript. Dr. Ruth Kornreich is an employee of Sema4, a for profit genetic 
testing laboratory. Dr. Gabriel Kupchik has no commercial association conflicts 
of interest with the information in the manuscript. Ms. Monica Martin has no 
commercial association conflicts of interest with the information in the 
manuscript. Dr. Suhas Nafday has no commercial association conflicts of interest 
with the information in the manuscript. Dr. Randi Wasserman has no commercial 
association conflicts of interest with the information in the manuscript. Dr. 
Amy Yang has served as a consultant for Shire Therapeutics. Dr. Chunli Yu is an 
employee of Sema4, a for profit genetic testing laboratory. Dr. Joseph Orsini 
has no commercial association conflicts of interest with the information in the 
manuscript.