1. Front Pharmacol. 2018 Aug 6;9:841. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2018.00841. eCollection 
2018.

System Pharmacology-Based Strategy to Decode the Synergistic Mechanism of 
Zhi-zhu Wan for Functional Dyspepsia.

Wang C(1)(2), Ren Q(2), Chen XT(2)(3), Song ZQ(1), Ning ZC(1)(2), Gan JH(1), Ma 
XL(1), Liang DR(1), Guan DG(2), Liu ZL(1), Lu AP(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Basic Theory for Chinese Medicine, China Academy of Chinese 
Medical Sciences, Beijing, China.
(2)Institute of Integrated Bioinformedicine and Translational Science, School of 
Chinese Medicine, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
(3)Center of Bioinformatics, College of Life Science, Northwest A & F 
University, Yangling, China.

Functional dyspepsia (FD) is a widely prevalent gastrointestinal disorder 
throughout the world, whereas the efficacy of current treatment in the Western 
countries is limited. As the symptom is equivalent to the traditional Chinese 
medicine (TCM) term "stuffiness and fullness," FD can be treated with Zhi-zhu 
Wan (ZZW) which is a kind of Chinese patent medicine. However, the 
"multi-component" and "multi-target" feature of Chinese patent medicine makes it 
challenge to elucidate the potential therapeutic mechanisms of ZZW on FD. 
Presently, a novel system pharmacology model including pharmacokinetic 
parameters, pharmacological data, and component contribution score (CS) is 
constructed to decipher the potential therapeutic mechanism of ZZW on FD. 
Finally, 61 components with favorable pharmacokinetic profiles and biological 
activities were obtained through ADME (absorption, distribution, metabolism, and 
excretion) screening in silico. The related targets of these components are 
identified by component targeting process followed by GO analysis and pathway 
enrichment analysis. And systematic analysis found that through acting on the 
target related to inflammation, gastrointestinal peristalsis, and mental 
disorder, ZZW plays a synergistic and complementary effect on FD at the pathway 
level. Furthermore, the component CS showed that 29 components contributed 
90.18% of the total CS values of ZZW for the FD treatment, which suggested that 
the effective therapeutic effects of ZZW for FD are derived from all active 
components, not a few components. This study proposes the system pharmacology 
method and discovers the potent combination therapeutic mechanisms of ZZW for 
FD. This strategy will provide a reference method for other TCM mechanism 
research.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2018.00841
PMCID: PMC6087764
PMID: 30127739