1. Ann Rheum Dis. 2018 Dec;77(12):1825-1833. doi:
10.1136/annrheumdis-2018-213746.  Epub 2018 Aug 21.

Dysregulated neutrophil responses and neutrophil extracellular trap formation 
and degradation in PAPA syndrome.

Mistry P(1), Carmona-Rivera C(1), Ombrello AK(2), Hoffmann P(2), Seto NL(1), 
Jones A(2), Stone DL(2), Naz F(3), Carlucci P(1), Dell'Orso S(3), Gutierrez-Cruz 
G(3), Sun HW(4), Kastner DL(2), Aksentijevich I(2), Kaplan MJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Systemic Autoimmunity Branch, National Institute of Arthritis and 
Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases (NIAMS), National Institutes of Health (NIH), 
Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(2)Inflammatory Disease Section, National Human Genome Research Institute, NIH, 
Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(3)Laboratory of Muscle Stem Cells and Gene Regulation, NIAMS, NIH, Bethesda, 
Maryland, USA.
(4)Biodata Mining and Discovery Section, NIAMS, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

OBJECTIVES: Pyogenic arthritis, pyoderma gangrenosum and acne (PAPA) syndrome is 
characterised by flares of sterile arthritis with neutrophil infiltrate and the 
overproduction of interleukin (IL)-1β. The purpose of this study was to 
elucidate the potential role of neutrophil subsets and neutrophil extracellular 
traps (NET) in the pathogenesis of PAPA.
METHODS: Neutrophils and low-density granulocytes (LDG) were quantified by flow 
cytometry. Circulating NETs were measured by ELISA and PAPA serum was tested for 
the ability to degrade NETs. The capacity of NETs from PAPA neutrophils to 
activate macrophages was assessed. Skin biopsies were analysed for NETs and 
neutrophil gene signatures.
RESULTS: Circulating LDGs are elevated in PAPA subjects. PAPA neutrophils and 
LDGs display enhanced NET formation compared with control neutrophils. PAPA sera 
exhibit impaired NET degradation and this is corrected with exogenous DNase1. 
Recombinant human IL-1β induces NET formation in PAPA neutrophils but not 
healthy control neutrophils. NET formation in healthy control neutrophils is 
induced by PAPA serum and this effect is inhibited by the IL-1 receptor 
antagonist, anakinra. NETs from PAPA neutrophils and LDGs stimulate IL-6 release 
in healthy control macrophages. NETs are detected in skin biopsies of patients 
with PAPA syndrome in association with increased tissue IL-1β, IL-8 and IL-17. 
Furthermore, LDG gene signatures are detected in PAPA skin.
CONCLUSIONS: PAPA syndrome is characterised by an imbalance of NET formation and 
degradation that may enhance the half-life of these structures in vivo, 
promoting inflammation. Anakinra ameliorates NET formation in PAPA and this 
finding supports a role for IL-1 signalling in exacerbated neutrophil responses 
in this disease. The study also highlights other inflammatory pathways 
potentially pathogenic in PAPA, including IL-17 and IL-6, and these results may 
help guide new therapeutic approaches in this severe and often 
treatment-refractory condition.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2018. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2018-213746
PMCID: PMC6728908
PMID: 30131320 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.