1. Int J Surg Case Rep. 2018;51:90-94. doi: 10.1016/j.ijscr.2018.07.034. Epub
2018  Aug 17.

Acute adrenal insufficiency due to adrenal hemorrhage complicating colorectal 
surgery: Report of two cases and correlation with the antiphospholipid antibody 
syndrome.

Kolinioti A(1), Tsimaras M(2), Stravodimos G(2), Komporozos V(2).

Author information:
(1)3d Surgical Department, Evaggelismos General Hospital, Athens, Greece. 
Electronic address: akolinioti@gmail.com.
(2)4th Surgical Department, Evaggelismos General Hospital, Athens, Greece.

INTRODUCTION: Spontaneous bilateral adrenal hemorrhage or hemorrhagic necrosis 
due to adrenal vein thrombosis is an uncommon condition that may lead to acute 
adrenal insufficiency and death. The objective of this report is to enhance 
recognition of this potentially fatal disorder in surgical patients.
PRESENTATION OF CASES: We present two cases of acute adrenal insufficiency due 
to bilateral adrenal hemorrhage associated with primary antiphospholipid 
antibody syndrome (APS). Both cases occurred in the early postoperative period 
after major colorectal surgery. Major vein thrombosis, abdominal pain, anorexia, 
asthenia, lethargy and an unexplained drop in patient's hemoglobin without 
evidence of sepsis were the principal symptoms and signs that, with a high index 
of suspicion, led to the correct diagnosis.
DISCUSSION: Antiphospholipid syndrome is an acquired thrombophilia caused by 
circulating antibodies against a heterologous group of phospholipids. Recent 
literature has identified a causative relation between APS and primary adrenal 
insufficiency (AI), identifying it as its most common endocrine manifestation. 
Surgeries along with inflammation or hormones have been identified as 
precipitating factors. Spontaneous haemorrhagic infarction of the adrenal glands 
has been observed in patients with APS in the postoperative period during 
anticoagulant treatment. Signs and symptoms are non-specific and are easily 
confused with those of the underlying condition.
CONCLUSIONS: Early recognition and prompt treatment of adrenal insufficiency due 
to APS in surgical patient is of vital importance. Patients correctly diagnosed 
and treated that survive the critical phase have a better prognosis regarding 
restoration of adrenal function.

Copyright © 2018 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijscr.2018.07.034
PMCID: PMC6111066
PMID: 30145500