1. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2018 Oct;92:149-163. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2018.08.004. Epub 
2018 Aug 23.

Neural progenitors derived from Tuberous Sclerosis Complex patients exhibit 
attenuated PI3K/AKT signaling and delayed neuronal differentiation.

Zucco AJ(1), Pozzo VD(1), Afinogenova A(2), Hart RP(3), Devinsky O(4), 
D'Arcangelo G(5).

Author information:
(1)Graduate Program in Neuroscience, Rutgers Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, 
Piscataway, NJ, United States of America; Department of Cell Biology and 
Neuroscience, Rutgers, the State University of New Jersey, Piscataway, NJ, 
United States of America.
(2)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, Rutgers, the State University of 
New Jersey, Piscataway, NJ, United States of America.
(3)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, Rutgers, the State University of 
New Jersey, Piscataway, NJ, United States of America; Human Genetics Institute 
of New Jersey, Piscataway, NJ, United States of America.
(4)NYU Comprehensive Epilepsy Center, NYU Langone School of Medicine, New York, 
NY, United States of America.
(5)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, Rutgers, the State University of 
New Jersey, Piscataway, NJ, United States of America; Human Genetics Institute 
of New Jersey, Piscataway, NJ, United States of America. Electronic address: 
darcangelo@dls.rutgers.edu.

Tuberous Sclerosis Complex (TSC) is a disease caused by autosomal dominant 
mutations in the TSC1 or TSC2 genes, and is characterized by tumor 
susceptibility, brain lesions, seizures and behavioral impairments. The TSC1 and 
TSC2 genes encode proteins forming a complex (TSC), which is a major regulator 
and suppressor of mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1), a signaling 
complex that promotes cell growth and proliferation. TSC1/2 loss of 
heterozygosity (LOH) and the subsequent complete loss of TSC regulatory activity 
in null cells causes mTORC1 dysregulation and TSC-associated brain lesions or 
other tissue tumors. However, it is not clear whether TSC1/2 heterozygous brain 
cells are abnormal and contribute to TSC neuropathology. To investigate this 
issue, we generated induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) from TSC patients and 
unaffected controls, and utilized these to obtain neural progenitor cells (NPCs) 
and differentiated neurons in vitro. These patient-derived TSC2 heterozygous 
NPCs were delayed in their ability to differentiate into neurons. 
Patient-derived progenitor cells also exhibited a modest activation of mTORC1 
signaling downstream of TSC, and a marked attenuation of upstream PI3K/AKT 
signaling. We further show that pharmacologic PI3K or AKT inhibition, but not 
mTORC1 inhibition, causes a neuronal differentiation delay, mimicking the 
patient phenotype. Together these data suggest that heterozygous TSC2 mutations 
disrupt neuronal development, potentially contributing to the disease 
neuropathology, and that this defect may result from dysregulated PI3K/AKT 
signaling in neural progenitor cells.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mcn.2018.08.004
PMCID: PMC6250058
PMID: 30144504 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing financial interests.