1. J Neurochem. 2018 Dec;147(5):678-691. doi: 10.1111/jnc.14575. Epub 2018 Nov
13.

Fingolimod (FTY720) is not protective in the subacute MPTP mouse model of 
Parkinson's disease and does not lead to a sustainable increase of brain-derived 
neurotrophic factor.

Komnig D(1), Dagli TC(1), Habib P(1), Zeyen T(1), Schulz JB(1)(2), Falkenburger 
BH(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany.
(2)JARA-BRAIN Institute Molecular Neuroscience and Neuroimaging, 
Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH and RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany.

Parkinson's disease (PD) is characterized by the loss of midbrain dopaminergic 
neurons and aggregates of α-synuclein termed Lewy bodies. Fingolimod (FTY720) is 
an agonist of sphingosine-1 phosphate receptors and an approved oral treatment 
for multiple sclerosis. Fingolimod elevates brain-derived neurotrophic factor 
(BDNF), an important neurotrophic factor for dopaminergic neurons. BDNF and 
fingolimod are beneficial in several animal models of PD. In order to validate 
the therapeutic potential of fingolimod for the treatment of PD, we tested its 
effect in the subacute MPTP mouse model of PD. MPTP or vehicle was applied i.p. 
in doses of 30 mg/kg MPTP on five consecutive days. In order to recapitulate the 
combination of dopamine loss and α-synuclein aggregates found in PD, MPTP was 
first administered in Thy1-A30P-α-synuclein transgenic mice. Fingolimod was 
administered i.p. at a dose of 0.1 mg/kg every second day. Nigrostriatal 
degeneration was assayed by stereologically counting the number of dopaminergic 
neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta, by analysing the concentration of 
catecholamines and the density of dopaminergic fibres in the striatum. MPTP 
administration produced a robust nigrostriatal degeneration, comparable to 
previous studies. Unexpectedly, we found no difference between mice with and 
without fingolimod treatment, neither at baseline, nor at 14 or 90 days after 
MPTP. Also, we found no effect of fingolimod in the subacute MPTP mouse model 
when we used wildtype mice instead of α-synuclein transgenic mice, and no effect 
with an increased dose of 1 mg/kg fingolimod administered every day. In order to 
explain these findings, we analysed BDNF regulation by fingolimod. We did find 
an increase of BDNF protein after a single injection of fingolimod 0.1 or 
1.0 mg/kg, but not after multiple injections, indicating that the BDNF response 
to fingolimod is unsustainable over time. Taken together we did not observe a 
neuroprotective effect of fingolimod in the subacute MPTP mouse model of PD. We 
discuss possible explanations for this discrepancy with previous findings and 
conclude fingolimod might be beneficial for the nonmotor symptoms of PD. OPEN 
SCIENCE BADGES: This article has received a badge for *Open Materials* and *Open 
Data* because it provided all relevant information to reproduce the study in the 
manuscript and because it made the data publicly available. The data can be 
accessed at https://osf.io/6xgfn/. The complete Open Science Disclosure form for 
this article can be found at the end of the article. More information about the 
Open Practices badges can be found at 
https://cos.io/our-services/open-science-badges/.

© 2018 International Society for Neurochemistry.

DOI: 10.1111/jnc.14575
PMID: 30152864 [Indexed for MEDLINE]