1. Mod Pathol. 2019 Jan;32(1):88-99. doi: 10.1038/s41379-018-0127-2. Epub 2018
Aug  31.

Well-differentiated papillary mesothelioma of the peritoneum is genetically 
defined by mutually exclusive mutations in TRAF7 and CDC42.

Stevers M(1), Rabban JT(1), Garg K(1), Van Ziffle J(1)(2), Onodera C(2), Grenert 
JP(1)(2), Yeh I(1)(2), Bastian BC(1)(2), Zaloudek C(1), Solomon DA(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(2)Clinical Cancer Genomics Laboratory, University of California, San Francisco, 
CA, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA. 
david.solomon@ucsf.edu.
(4)Clinical Cancer Genomics Laboratory, University of California, San Francisco, 
CA, USA. david.solomon@ucsf.edu.

Well-differentiated papillary mesothelioma is an uncommon mesothelial neoplasm 
that most frequently arises in the peritoneal cavity of women of reproductive 
age. Whereas malignant mesothelioma is an aggressive tumor associated with poor 
outcome, well-differentiated papillary mesothelioma typically exhibits indolent 
behavior. However, histologically differentiating between these two entities can 
be challenging, necessitating the development of distinguishing biomarkers. 
While the genetic alterations that drive malignant mesothelioma have recently 
been determined, the molecular pathogenesis of well-differentiated papillary 
mesothelioma is unknown. Here we performed genomic profiling on a cohort of ten 
well-differentiated papillary mesothelioma of the peritoneum. We identified that 
all tumors harbored somatic missense mutations in either the TRAF7 or CDC42 
genes, and lacked alterations involving BAP1, NF2, CDKN2A, DDX3X, SETD2, and ALK 
that are frequent in malignant mesothelioma. We recently identified that another 
mesothelial neoplasm, adenomatoid tumor of the genital tract, is genetically 
defined by somatic missense mutations in the TRAF7 gene, indicating a shared 
molecular pathogenesis between well-differentiated papillary mesothelioma and 
adenomatoid tumors. To the best of our knowledge, well-differentiated papillary 
mesothelioma is the first human tumor type found to harbor recurrent mutations 
in the CDC42 gene, which encodes a Rho family GTPase. Immunohistochemistry 
demonstrated intact BAP1 expression in all cases of well-differentiated 
papillary mesothelioma, indicating that this is a reliable marker for 
distinguishing well-differentiated papillary mesothelioma from malignant 
mesotheliomas that frequently display loss of expression. Additionally, all 
well-differentiated papillary mesothelioma demonstrated robust expression of L1 
cell adhesion molecule (L1CAM), a marker of NF-kB pathway activation, similar to 
that observed in adenomatoid tumors. In contrast, we have previously shown that 
L1CAM staining is not observed in normal mesothelial cells and malignant 
mesotheliomas of the peritoneum. Together, these studies demonstrate that 
well-differentiated papillary mesothelioma is genetically defined by mutually 
exclusive mutations in TRAF7 and CDC42 that molecularly distinguish this entity 
from malignant mesothelioma.

DOI: 10.1038/s41379-018-0127-2
PMCID: PMC6309365
PMID: 30171198 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DISCLOSURES The authors declare no competing 
financial interests related to this study.