1. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2018 Dec;82(6):913-922. doi: 
10.1007/s00280-018-3669-6. Epub 2018 Sep 4.

Autophagy modulation: a prudent approach in cancer treatment?

Bishop E(1), Bradshaw TD(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmacy, Centre for Biomolecular Sciences, University of 
Nottingham, University Park, Nottingham, NG7 2RD, UK.
(2)School of Pharmacy, Centre for Biomolecular Sciences, University of 
Nottingham, University Park, Nottingham, NG7 2RD, UK. 
tracey.bradshaw@nottingham.ac.uk.

Autophagy is a tightly controlled process comprising lysosomal degradation and 
recycling of cellular proteins and organelles. In cancer, its paradoxical dual 
role of cytoprotection and cytotoxicity is context-dependent and controversial. 
Autophagy primarily acts as a mechanism of tumour suppression, by maintenance of 
genomic integrity and prevention of proliferation and inflammation. This, 
combined with immune-surveillance capabilities and autophagy's implicated role 
in cell death, acts to prevent tumour initiation. However, established tumours 
exploit autophagy to survive cellular stresses in the hostile tumour 
microenvironment. This can lead to therapy resistance, one of the biggest 
challenges facing current anti-cancer approaches. Autophagy modulation is an 
exciting area of clinical development, attempting to harness this fundamental 
process as an anti-cancer strategy. Autophagy induction could potentially 
prevent tumour formation and enhance anti-cancer immune responses. In addition, 
drug-induced autophagy could be used to kill cancer cells, particularly those in 
which the apoptotic machinery is defective. Conversely, autophagy inhibition may 
help to sensitise resistant cancer cells to conventional chemotherapies and 
specifically target autophagy-addicted tumours. Currently, hydroxychloroquine is 
in phase I and II clinical trials in combination with several standard 
chemotherapies, whereas direct, deliberate autophagy induction remains to be 
tested clinically. More comprehensive understanding of the roles of autophagy 
throughout different stages of carcinogenesis has potential to guide development 
of novel therapeutic strategies to eradicate cancer cells.

DOI: 10.1007/s00280-018-3669-6
PMCID: PMC6267659
PMID: 30182146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST: Authors have no conflicts 
of interest to declare. HUMAN AND ANIMAL PARTICIPANT STATEMENT: Studies with 
human participants or animals were not performed by either author in preparation 
of this review.