1. Ment Health Clin. 2018 Aug 30;8(5):235-241. doi: 10.9740/mhc.2018.09.235. 
eCollection 2018 Sep.

Overview of pharmacogenomic testing in clinical practice.

Gross T(1), Daniel J(2).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Psychiatric Pharmacist, Avera Behavioral Health Center, Sioux Falls, 
South Dakota.
(2)(Corresponding author) Clinical Psychiatric Pharmacist, Avera Behavioral 
Health Center, Assistant Professor, South Dakota State University College of 
Pharmacy and Allied Health Professions, Sioux Falls, South Dakota, 
Jeremy.Daniel@avera.org.

INTRODUCTION: Pharmacogenomic tests relevant to neuropsychiatric medications 
have been clinically available for more than a decade, but the utility of 
regular testing is still unknown. Tests available include both pharmacokinetic 
and pharmacodynamic targets. The potential practice benefits vary with each 
target.
METHODS: A 10-year literature review was completed utilizing the PubMed database 
to identify articles relating to the specific pharmacogenomic targets discussed. 
Further article selection was based on author review for clinical utility.
RESULTS: The clinical dosing guidance available for neuropsychiatric medications 
such as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and tricyclic antidepressants 
with varying genotypes is useful and has strong evidence to support testing, but 
it is limited to mainly pharmacokinetic application. Pharmacodynamic targets are 
gaining additional evidence with increased research, and although the mechanisms 
behind the potential interactions are scientifically sound, the bridge to 
clinical practice application is still lacking.
DISCUSSION: Although the benefits of decreasing adverse reactions and improving 
response time are appealing, clinicians may not utilize pharmacogenomic testing 
in routine practice due to several barriers. Further clinical guidance and 
studies are needed to support testing for other neuropsychiatric medications and 
targets.

DOI: 10.9740/mhc.2018.09.235
PMCID: PMC6125117
PMID: 30206507

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures: T.G. and J. D. have no disclosures 
or conflicts of interest relative to the publication of this manuscript.