1. World J Mens Health. 2019 Sep;37(3):288-295. doi: 10.5534/wjmh.180040. Epub
2018  Sep 10.

Role of Androgen Receptor in Prostate Cancer: A Review.

Fujita K(1), Nonomura N(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Suita, 
Japan. kazufujita2@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Urology, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Suita, 
Japan.

Androgen receptor (AR) is a steroid receptor transcriptional factor for 
testosterone and dihydrotestosterone consisting of four main domains, the 
N-terminal domain, DNA-binding domain, hinge region, and ligand-binding domain. 
AR plays pivotal roles in prostate cancer, especially castration-resistant 
prostate cancer (CRPC). Androgen deprivation therapy can suppress hormone-naïve 
prostate cancer, but prostate cancer changes AR and adapts to survive under 
castration levels of androgen. These mechanisms include AR point mutations, AR 
overexpression, changes of androgen biosynthesis, constitutively active AR 
splice variants without ligand binding, and changes of androgen cofactors. 
Studies of AR in CRPC revealed that AR was still active in CRPC, and it remains 
as a potential target to treat CRPC. Enzalutamide is a second-generation 
antiandrogen effective in patients with CRPC before and after taxane-based 
chemotherapy. However, CRPC is still incurable and can develop drug resistance. 
Understanding the mechanisms of this resistance can enable new-generation 
therapies for CRPC. Several promising new AR-targeted therapies have been 
developed. Apalutamide is a new Food and Drug Administration-approved androgen 
agonist binding to the ligand-binding domain, and clinical trials of other new 
AR-targeted agents binding to the ligand-binding domain or N-terminal domain are 
underway. This review focuses on the functions of AR in prostate cancer and the 
development of CRPC and promising new agents against CRPC.

Copyright © 2019 Korean Society for Sexual Medicine and Andrology.

DOI: 10.5534/wjmh.180040
PMCID: PMC6704300
PMID: 30209899

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no potential conflicts of 
interest to disclose.