1. PLoS One. 2018 Sep 17;13(9):e0202574. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0202574. 
eCollection 2018.

Satellite cells delivered in their niche efficiently generate functional 
myotubes in three-dimensional cell culture.

Prüller J(1), Mannhardt I(2)(3), Eschenhagen T(2)(3), Zammit PS(1), Figeac N(1).

Author information:
(1)King's College London, Randall Centre for Cell and Molecular Biophysics, New 
Hunt's House, Guy's Campus, London, England.
(2)Department of Experimental Pharmacology and Toxicology, University Medical 
Center Hamburg Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(3)DZHK (German Centre for Cardiovascular Research), Hamburg, Germany.

Biophysical/biochemical cues from the environment contribute to regulation of 
the regenerative capacity of resident skeletal muscle stem cells called 
satellites cells. This can be observed in vitro, where muscle cell behaviour is 
influenced by the particular culture substrates and whether culture is performed 
in a 2D or 3D environment, with changes including morphology, nuclear shape and 
cytoskeletal organization. To create a 3D skeletal muscle model we compared 
collagen I, Fibrin or PEG-Fibrinogen with different sources of murine and human 
myogenic cells. To generate tension in the 3D scaffold, biomaterials were 
polymerised between two flexible silicone posts to mimic tendons. This 3D 
culture system has multiple advantages including being simple, fast to set up 
and inexpensive, so providing an accessible tool to investigate myogenesis in a 
3D environment. Immortalised human and murine myoblast lines, and primary murine 
satellite cells showed varying degrees of myogenic differentiation when cultured 
in these biomaterials, with C2 myoblasts in particular forming large 
multinucleated myotubes in collagen I or Fibrin. However, murine satellite cells 
retained in their niche on a muscle fibre and embedded in 3D collagen I or 
Fibrin gels generated aligned, multinucleated and contractile myotubes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0202574
PMCID: PMC6141091
PMID: 30222770 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: IM and TE are co-founders of EHT Technologies 
GmbH, Hamburg, a UKE spin-off commercializing the materials for the making and 
analysis of engineered heart tissue. This does not alter our adherence to PLOS 
ONE policies on sharing data and materials. JP, PSZ and NF declare no competing 
interests.