1. Genet Test Mol Biomarkers. 2018 Sep;22(9):541-545. doi:
10.1089/gtmb.2018.0123.

Genetic Testing of a Large Consanguineous Pakistani Family Affected with 
Mucolipidosis III Gamma Through Next-Generation Sequencing.

Khan MA(1)(2), Hussain A(1), Sher G(1), Zubaida B(1), Naeem M(1).

Author information:
(1)1 Medical Genetics Research Laboratory, Department of Biotechnology, 
Quaid-i-Azam University , Islamabad, Pakistan .
(2)2 Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Lady Reading Hospital , 
Peshawar, Pakistan .

BACKGROUND: Mucolipidosis III gamma (MLIIIγ) is a rare autosomal recessive 
disorder characterized by radiographic evidence of mild-to-moderate dysostosis 
multiplex, progressive joint stiffness and pain, scoliosis, and normal to mildly 
impaired cognitive development. Cardiac valve involvement and respiratory 
complications can be significant. MLIIIγ is caused by mutations in the GNPTG, 
which encodes the γ subunit of the enzyme 
N-acetylglucosamine-1-phosphotransferase.
OBJECTIVE: Clinical and genetic study of seven individuals of a consanguineous 
Pakistani family affected with mucolipidosis phenotype who never pursued medical 
care.
METHODS: Genome-wide homozygosity mapping was performed using Affymetrix Human 
SNP Array 6.0 followed by whole exome and Sanger sequencing.
RESULTS: The affected individuals showed characteristic clinical features of 
MLIIIγ. Whole-genome single nucleotide polymorphism genotyping identified a 
region of homozygosity shared by affected individuals of the family on 
chromosome 16p13.3. Whole exome sequencing identified a novel 4-bp deletion in 
the GNPTG segregating in the family in agreement with autosomal recessive 
pattern.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified a novel mutation in the GNPTG gene as the underlying 
cause of MLIIIγ in a Pakistani family. This study supports the role of 
next-generation sequencing technologies for the molecular diagnosis of rare 
inherited disorders.

DOI: 10.1089/gtmb.2018.0123
PMID: 30235039 [Indexed for MEDLINE]