1. PLoS One. 2018 Sep 20;13(9):e0204172. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0204172. 
eCollection 2018.

Exogenous C-type natriuretic peptide restores normal growth and prevents early 
growth plate closure in its deficient rats.

Hirota K(1), Furuya M(2)(3), Morozumi N(2), Yoshikiyo K(2), Yotsumoto T(2), 
Jindo T(2), Nakamura R(2), Murakami K(1), Ueda Y(1), Hanada T(2), Sade H(2), 
Yoshida S(2), Enomoto K(2), Kanai Y(1), Yamauchi I(1), Yamashita T(1), 
Ueda-Sakane Y(1), Fujii T(1), Yasoda A(1), Inagaki N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Diabetes, Endocrinology and Nutrition, Kyoto University 
Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.
(2)Asubio Pharma Co. Ltd. Kobe, Japan.
(3)Medical Innovation Center, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Kyoto, Japan.

Signaling by C-type natriuretic peptide (CNP) and its receptor, natriuretic 
peptide receptor-B, is a pivotal stimulator of endochondral bone growth. We 
recently developed CNP knockout (KO) rats that exhibit impaired skeletal growth 
with early growth plate closure. In the current study, we further characterized 
the phenotype and growth plate morphology in CNP-KO rats, and the effects of 
exogenous CNP in rats. We used CNP-53, an endogenous form of CNP consisting of 
53 amino acids, and administered it for four weeks by continuous subcutaneous 
infusion at 0.15 or 0.5 mg/kg/day to four-week old CNP-KO and littermate wild 
type (WT) rats. We demonstrated that CNP-KO rats were useful as a reproducible 
animal model for skeletal dysplasia, due to their impairment in endochondral 
bone growth. There was no significant difference in plasma bone-turnover markers 
between the CNP-KO and WT rats. At eight weeks of age, growth plate closure was 
observed in the distal end of the tibia and the calcaneus of CNP-KO rats. 
Continuous subcutaneous infusion of CNP-53 significantly, and in a 
dose-dependent manner, stimulated skeletal growth in CNP-KO and WT rats, with 
CNP-KO rats being more sensitive to the treatment. CNP-53 also normalized the 
length of long bones and the growth plate thickness, and prevented growth plate 
closure in the CNP-KO rats. Using organ culture experiment of fetal rat tibia, 
gene set enrichment analysis indicated that CNP might have a negative influence 
on mitogen activated protein kinase signaling cascades in chondrocyte. Our 
results indicated that CNP-KO rats might be a valuable animal model for 
investigating growth plate physiology and the mechanism of growth plate closure, 
and that CNP-53, or its analog, may have the potential to promote growth and to 
prevent early growth plate closure in the short stature.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0204172
PMCID: PMC6147488
PMID: 30235256 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: KH, KM, YU, YK, IY, T Yamashita, YU-S, TF, AY 
and NI have nothing to disclose. MF, NM, KY, T Yotsumoto, TJ, RN, TH, HS, SY and 
KE were employed by Asubio Pharma Co., Ltd. There are no patents, products in 
development or marketed products to declare. This does not alter our adherence 
to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.