1. Front Microbiol. 2018 Sep 7;9:2111. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.02111. eCollection
 2018.

Comparative Genomic Analysis and Characterization of Two Salmonella enterica 
Serovar Enteritidis Isolates From Poultry With Notably Different Survival 
Abilities in Egg Whites.

Wang Y(1), Jia B(2), Xu X(3), Zhang L(1), Wei C(2), Ou H(2), Cui Y(1), Shi C(1), 
Shi X(1).

Author information:
(1)MOST-USDA Joint Research Center for Food Safety, School of Agriculture and 
Biology and State Key Laboratory of Microbial Metabolism, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University, Shanghai, China.
(2)School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 
Shanghai, China.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Shanghai Center for Disease Control and 
Prevention, Shanghai, China.

Salmonellaenterica serovar Enteritidis (Salmonella Enteritidis) is a globally 
important foodborne pathogen, and the contaminated chicken eggs are the major 
source of salmonellosis in humans. Salmonella Enteritidis strains are 
differentially susceptible to the hostile environment of egg whites. Strains 
with superior survival ability in egg whites are more likely to contaminate eggs 
and consequently infect humans. However, the genetic basis for this phenotype is 
unclear. We characterized two Salmonella Enteritidis strains isolated from 
chicken meat that had similar genetic backgrounds but large differences in 
survival ability in egg whites. Although genome comparisons indicated that the 
gene content and genomic synteny were highly conserved, variations including six 
insertions or deletions (INDELs) and 70 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
were observed between the two genomes. Of these, 38 variations including four 
INDELs and 34 non-synonymous SNPs (nsSNP) were annotated to result in amino acid 
substitutions or INDELs in coding proteins. These variations were located in 38 
genes involved in lysozyme inhibition, vitamin biosynthesis, cell division and 
DNA damage response, osmotic and oxidative protection, iron-related functions, 
cell envelope maintenance, amino acid and carbohydrate metabolism, antimicrobial 
resistance, and type III secretion system. We carried out allelic replacements 
for two nsSNPs in bioC (biotin synthesis) and pliC (lysozyme inhibition), and 
two INDELs in ftsK and yqiJ (DNA damage response) by homologous recombination, 
and these replacements did not alter the bacterial survival ability in egg 
whites. However, the bacterial survival ability in egg whites was reduced when 
deletion mutation of the genes bioC and pliC occurred. This study provides 
initial correlations between observed genotypes and phenotypes and serves as an 
important caveat for further functional studies.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.02111
PMCID: PMC6137255
PMID: 30245675