1. Respir Res. 2018 Oct 1;19(1):192. doi: 10.1186/s12931-018-0900-2.

Good response to PAH-targeted drugs in a PVOD patient carrying Biallelic EIF2AK4 
mutation.

Liang L(1), Su H(1), Ma X(1), Zhang R(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory medicine, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, Medical School 
of Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Respiratory medicine, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, Medical School 
of Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China. zhangruifeng@zju.edu.cn.

Pulmonary veno-occlusive disease (PVOD) is a rare and fatal cause of pulmonary 
arterial hypertension (PAH). Different from other types of PAH, PVOD patients 
have a dismal prognosis because of the progressive nature of pulmonary vascular 
involvement and fatal pulmonary edema induced by PAH-targeted drugs. Lung 
transplantation is the only choice for these patients. In a recent article 
published in the journal, Yang and his colleagues found pulmonary edema was not 
demonstrated in 2 of the 6 PVOD patients injected with prostacyclin analogues (a 
kind of PAH-targeted drug). Regretfully, none of these 6 patients underwent 
microscopic examination of lung tissues. Here, we reported a sporadic PVOD 
patient evidenced by pathology and EIF2AK4 biallelic mutation. The patient was 
followed over the course of 3 years in our center. During the 3 years, he was 
admitted into our hospital for many times for the acute exacerbation of 
pulmonary hypertension. However, after treatment with many kinds of PAH-targeted 
drugs, the pulmonary hypertension was in control and he feel better every time. 
The present patient displayed different treatment response comparing with 
previous reports. It suggests that PVOD is a heterogeneity population and 
different patients have different characteristics including clinical 
manifestation, genomics, treatment response et al. How to pick off this portion 
of patients timely is the core issue. Lots of important works are necessary to 
answer this question. However, we can see a glimmer of hope form this patient at 
least.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-018-0900-2
PMCID: PMC6167821
PMID: 30285736 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: This 
study was approved by the Ethics Committee of Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital. CONSENT 
FOR PUBLICATION: Written informed consent for publication was obtained from the 
patient. COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.