1. PLoS One. 2018 Oct 5;13(10):e0204850. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0204850. 
eCollection 2018.

Identification of the novel deletion-type PML-RARA mutation associated with the 
retinoic acid resistance in acute promyelocytic leukemia.

Hattori H(1)(2), Ishikawa Y(1), Kawashima N(1), Akashi A(1), Yamaguchi Y(1), 
Harada Y(1), Hirano D(1), Adachi Y(1), Miyao K(1), Ushijima Y(1), Terakura S(1), 
Nishida T(1), Matsushita T(3), Kiyoi H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Nagoya University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Nagoya, Japan.
(2)Department of Medical Technique, Nagoya University Hospital, Nagoya, Japan.
(3)Department of Transfusion Medicine, Nagoya University Hospital, Nagoya, 
Japan.

All-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) and arsenic trioxide (ATO) are essential for 
acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) treatment. It has been reported that 
mutations in PML-RARA confer resistance to ATRA and ATO, and are associated with 
poor prognosis. Although most PML-RARA mutations were point mutations, we 
identified a novel seven amino acid deletion mutation (p.K227_T233del) in the 
RARA region of PML-RARA in a refractory APL patient. Here, we analyzed the 
evolution of the mutated clone and demonstrated the resistance of the mutated 
clone to retinoic acid (RA). Mutation analysis of PML-RARA was performed using 
samples from a chemotherapy- and ATRA-resistant APL patient, and the frequencies 
of mutated PML-RARA transcript were analyzed by targeted deep sequencing. To 
clarify the biological significance of the identified PML-RARA mutations, we 
analyzed the ATRA-induced differentiation and PML nuclear body formation in 
mutant PML-RARA-transduced HL-60 cells. At molecular relapse, the p.K227_T233del 
deletion and the p.R217S point-mutation in the RARA region of PML-RARA were 
identified, and their frequencies increased after re-induction therapy with 
another type of retinoiec acid (RA), tamibarotene. In deletion 
PML-RARA-transduced cells, the CD11b expression levels and NBT reducing ability 
were significantly decreased compared with control cells and the formation of 
PML nuclear bodies was rarely observed after RA treatment. These results 
indicate that this deletion mutation was closely associated with the disease 
progression during RA treatment.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0204850
PMCID: PMC6173414
PMID: 30289902 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: We have the following interests: Hitoshi Kiyoi 
received research funding, which is unrelated to this study, from Chugai 
Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd., Bristol-Myers Squibb, Kyowa Hakko Kirin Co. Ltd., 
Zenyaku Kogyo Co. Ltd., FUJIFILM Corporation, Nippon Boehringer Ingelheim Co. 
Ltd., Astellas Pharma Inc. and Celgene Corporation, consulting fees from 
Astellas Pharma Inc. and Daiichi Sankyo Co. Ltd., and honoraria from 
Bristol-Myers Squibb and Pfizer Japan Inc. The other authors have declared that 
no competing interests exist. This does not alter our adherence to PLOS ONE 
policies on sharing data and materials.