1. Proc Biol Sci. 2018 Oct 10;285(1888):20181513. doi: 10.1098/rspb.2018.1513.

Staggered Hox expression is more widespread among molluscs than previously 
appreciated.

Wollesen T(1), Rodríguez Monje SV(2), Luiz de Oliveira A(2), Wanninger A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Integrative Zoology, Faculty of Life Sciences, University of 
Vienna, Althanstraße 14, 1090 Vienna, Austria tim.wollesen@embl.de.
(2)Department of Integrative Zoology, Faculty of Life Sciences, University of 
Vienna, Althanstraße 14, 1090 Vienna, Austria.

Hox genes are expressed along the anterior-posterior body axis in a colinear 
fashion in the majority of bilaterians. Contrary to polyplacophorans, a group of 
aculiferan molluscs with conserved ancestral molluscan features, gastropods and 
cephalopods deviate from this pattern by expressing Hox genes in distinct 
morphological structures and not in a staggered fashion. Among conchiferans, 
scaphopods exhibit many similarities with gastropods, cephalopods and bivalves, 
however, the molecular developmental underpinnings of these similar traits 
remain unknown. We investigated Hox gene expression in developmental stages of 
the scaphopod Antalis entalis to elucidate whether these genes are involved in 
patterning morphological traits shared by their kin conchiferans. Scaphopod Hox 
genes are predominantly expressed in the foot and mantle but also in the central 
nervous system. Surprisingly, the scaphopod mid-stage trochophore exhibits a 
near-to staggered expression of all nine Hox genes identified. Temporal 
colinearity was not found and early-stage and late-stage trochophores, as well 
as postmetamorphic individuals, do not show any apparent traces of staggered 
expression. In these stages, Hox genes are expressed in distinct morphological 
structures such as the cerebral and pedal ganglia and in the shell field of 
early-stage trochophores. Interestingly, a re-evaluation of previously published 
data on early-stage cephalopod embryos and of the gastropod pre-torsional 
veliger shows that these developmental stages exhibit traces of staggered Hox 
expression. Considering our results and all gene expression and genomic data 
available for molluscs as well as other bilaterians, we suggest a last common 
molluscan ancestor with colinear Hox expression in predominantly ectodermal 
tissues along the anterior-posterior axis. Subsequently, certain Hox genes have 
been co-opted into the patterning process of distinct structures (apical organ 
or prototroch) in conchiferans.

© 2018 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1098/rspb.2018.1513
PMCID: PMC6191704
PMID: 30305436 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: We declare we have no competing interests.