1. Prog Neurobiol. 2018 Dec;171:32-49. doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2018.10.001. Epub
 2018 Oct 11.

Role of glutamatergic system and mesocorticolimbic circuits in alcohol 
dependence.

Alasmari F(1), Goodwani S(2), McCullumsmith RE(3), Sari Y(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, University of 
Toledo, College of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Toledo, OH, USA.
(2)The Neurodegeneration Consortium, Institute for Applied Cancer Science, The 
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(4)Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, University of 
Toledo, College of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Toledo, OH, USA. 
Electronic address: youssef.sari@utoledo.edu.

Emerging evidence demonstrates that alcohol dependence is associated with 
dysregulation of several neurotransmitters. Alterations in dopamine, glutamate 
and gamma-aminobutyric acid release are linked to chronic alcohol exposure. The 
effects of alcohol on the glutamatergic system in the mesocorticolimbic areas 
have been investigated extensively. Several studies have demonstrated 
dysregulation in the glutamatergic systems in animal models exposed to alcohol. 
Alcohol exposure can lead to an increase in extracellular glutamate 
concentrations in mesocorticolimbic brain regions. In addition, alcohol exposure 
affects the expression and functions of several glutamate receptors and 
glutamate transporters in these brain regions. In this review, we discussed the 
effects of alcohol exposure on glutamate receptors, glutamate transporters and 
glutamate homeostasis in each area of the mesocorticolimbic system. In addition, 
we discussed the genetic aspect of alcohol associated with glutamate and reward 
circuitry. We also discussed the potential therapeutic role of glutamate 
receptors and glutamate transporters in each brain region for the treatment of 
alcohol dependence. Finally, we provided some limitations on targeting the 
glutamatergic system for potential therapeutic options for the treatment alcohol 
use disorders.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2018.10.001
PMCID: PMC6261463
PMID: 30316901 [Indexed for MEDLINE]