1. Trials. 2018 Oct 16;19(1):558. doi: 10.1186/s13063-018-2931-x.

Cluster-randomized trial of monthly malaria prophylaxis versus focused screening 
and treatment: a study protocol to define malaria elimination strategies in 
Cambodia.

Manning J(1), Lon C(2), Spring M(2), Wojnarski M(2), Somethy S(3), Chann S(2), 
Gosi P(2), Soveasna K(3), Sriwichai S(2), Kuntawunginn W(2), Fukuda MM(2), Smith 
PL(2), Rekol H(4), Sinoun M(4), So M(3), Lin J(5), Satharath P(3), Saunders 
D(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, Division of Intramural Research, 
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of 
Health, Phnom Penh, Cambodia. jessica.manning@nih.gov.
(2)US Armed Forces Research Institute of Medical Sciences, Bangkok, Thailand.
(3)Ministry of National Defense, Department of Health, Phnom Penh, Cambodia.
(4)National Center for Parasitology, Entomology and Malaria Control, Phnom Penh, 
Cambodia.
(5)University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.

BACKGROUND: Malaria remains a critical public health problem in Southeast Asia 
despite intensive containment efforts. The continued spread of 
multi-drug-resistant Plasmodium falciparum has led to calls for malaria 
elimination on the Thai-Cambodian border. However, the optimal approach to 
elimination in difficult-to-reach border populations, such as the Military, 
remains unclear.
METHODS/DESIGN: A two-arm, cluster-randomized controlled, open-label pilot study 
is being conducted in military personnel and their families at focal endemic 
areas on the Thai-Cambodian border. The primary objective is to compare the 
effectiveness of monthly malaria prophylaxis (MMP) with 
dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine and weekly primaquine for 12 weeks compared with 
focused screening and treating (FSAT) following current Cambodian national 
treatment guidelines. Eight separate military encampments, making up 
approximately 1000 military personnel and their families, undergo randomization 
to the MMP or FSAT intervention for 3 months, with an additional 3 months' 
follow-up. In addition, each treatment cluster of military personnel and 
civilians is also randomly assigned to receive either permethrin- or sham 
(water)-treated clothing in single-blind fashion. The primary endpoint is risk 
reduction for malaria infection in geographically distinct military encampments 
based on their treatment strategy. Monthly malaria screening in both arms is 
done via microscopy, PCR, and rapid diagnostic testing to compare both the 
accuracy and cost-effectiveness of diagnostic modalities to detect asymptomatic 
infection. Universal glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency 
screening is done at entry, comparing the results from a commercially available 
rapid diagnostic test, the fluorescence spot test, and quantitative testing for 
accuracy and cost-effectiveness. The comparative safety of the interventions 
chosen is also being evaluated.
DISCUSSION: Despite the apparent urgency, the key operational elements of 
proposed malaria elimination strategies in Southeast Asian mobile and migrant 
populations, including the Military, have yet to be rigorously tested in a 
well-controlled clinical study. Here, we present a protocol for the primary 
evaluation of two treatment paradigms - monthly malaria prophylaxis and focused 
screening and treatment - to achieve malaria elimination in a Cambodian military 
population. We will also assess the feasibility and incremental benefit of 
outdoor-biting vector intervention - permethrin-treated clothing. In the 
process, we aim to define the cost-effectiveness of the inputs required for 
success including a responsive information system, skilled human resource and 
laboratory infrastructure requirements, and quality management. Despite being a 
relatively low transmission area, the complexities of multi-drug-resistant 
malaria and the movement of vulnerable populations require an approach that is 
not only technically sound, but simple enough to be achievable.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov, ID: NCT02653898 . Registered on 13 
January 2016.

DOI: 10.1186/s13063-018-2931-x
PMCID: PMC6192281
PMID: 30326952 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: AUTHORS’ INFORMATION: JM was formerly with 
AFRIMS, but she is now supported by the Intramural Research Program of the NIH, 
NIAID. ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: This study was approved by 
the Institutional Review Board at the Walter Reed Army Institute of Research and 
the Cambodian National Ethics Committee on Human Research. All study 
participants will undergo written study consent to participate. CONSENT FOR 
PUBLICATION: All authors consent for publication. COMPETING INTERESTS: The 
authors declare that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: 
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.