1. mBio. 2018 Oct 16;9(5):e01914-18. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01914-18.

NadA3 Structures Reveal Undecad Coiled Coils and LOX1 Binding Regions Competed 
by Meningococcus B Vaccine-Elicited Human Antibodies.

Liguori A(#)(1), Dello Iacono L(#)(1), Maruggi G(1), Benucci B(1), Merola 
M(1)(2), Lo Surdo P(1), López-Sagaseta J(1), Pizza M(1), Malito E(1), Bottomley 
MJ(3).

Author information:
(1)GSK, Siena, Italy.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy.
(3)GSK, Siena, Italy matthew.j.bottomley@gsk.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Neisseria meningitidis serogroup B (MenB) is a major cause of sepsis and 
invasive meningococcal disease. A multicomponent vaccine, 4CMenB, is approved 
for protection against MenB. Neisserial adhesin A (NadA) is one of the main 
vaccine antigens, acts in host cell adhesion, and may influence colonization and 
invasion. Six major genetic variants of NadA exist and can be classified into 
immunologically distinct groups I and II. Knowledge of the crystal structure of 
the 4CMenB vaccine component NadA3 (group I) would improve understanding of its 
immunogenicity, folding, and functional properties and might aid antigen design. 
Here, X-ray crystallography, biochemical, and cellular studies were used to 
deeply characterize NadA3. The NadA3 crystal structure is reported; it revealed 
two unexpected regions of undecad coiled-coil motifs and other conformational 
differences from NadA5 (group II) not predicted by previous analyses. 
Structure-guided engineering was performed to increase NadA3 thermostability, 
and a second crystal structure confirmed the improved packing. Functional NadA3 
residues mediating interactions with human receptor LOX-1 were identified. Also, 
for two protective vaccine-elicited human monoclonal antibodies (5D11, 12H11), 
we mapped key NadA3 epitopes. These vaccine-elicited human MAbs competed binding 
of NadA3 to LOX-1, suggesting their potential to inhibit host-pathogen 
colonizing interactions. The data presented provide a significant advance in the 
understanding of the structure, immunogenicity and function of NadA, one of the 
main antigens of the multicomponent meningococcus B vaccine.IMPORTANCE The 
bacterial microbe Neisseria meningitidis serogroup B (MenB) is a major cause of 
devastating meningococcal disease. An approved multicomponent vaccine, 4CMenB, 
protects against MenB. Neisserial adhesin A (NadA) is a key vaccine antigen and 
acts in host cell-pathogen interactions. We investigated the 4CMenB vaccine 
component NadA3 in order to improve the understanding of its immunogenicity, 
structure, and function and to aid antigen design. We report crystal structures 
of NadA3, revealing unexpected structural motifs, and other conformational 
differences from the NadA5 orthologue studied previously. We performed 
structure-based antigen design to engineer increased NadA3 thermostability. 
Functional NadA3 residues mediating interactions with the human receptor LOX-1 
and vaccine-elicited human antibodies were identified. These antibodies competed 
binding of NadA3 to LOX-1, suggesting their potential to inhibit host-pathogen 
colonizing interactions. Our data provide a significant advance in the overall 
understanding of the 4CMenB vaccine antigen NadA.

Copyright © 2018 Liguori et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01914-18
PMCID: PMC6191539
PMID: 30327444 [Indexed for MEDLINE]