1. PLoS One. 2018 Oct 19;13(10):e0205994. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0205994. 
eCollection 2018.

Small intestinal development in suckling rats after enteral obestatin 
administration.

Słupecka-Ziemilska M(1), Grzesiak P(1), Jank M(2), Majewska A(3), Rak A(4), 
Kowalczyk P(5), Kato I(6), Kuwahara A(7), Woliński J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal Physiology, The Kielanowski Institute of Animal 
Physiology and Nutrition, Polish Academy of Sciences, Jabłonna, Poland.
(2)Division of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Department of Pre-Clinical Sciences, 
Faculty of Veterinary Sciences, Warsaw University of Life Sciences SGGW-WULS, 
Warsaw, Poland.
(3)Department of Physiological Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Sciences, Warsaw 
University of Life Sciences SGGW-WULS, Warsaw, Poland.
(4)Department of Physiology and Toxicology of Reproduction, Institute of Zoology 
and Biomedical Research, Jagiellonian University in Krakow, Krakow, Poland.
(5)Department of Animal Nutrition, The Kielanowski Institute of Animal 
Physiology and Nutrition, Polish Academy of Sciences, Jabłonna, Poland.
(6)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Kobe Pharmaceutical University, Kobe, 
Japan.
(7)Laboratory of Physiology, Institute for Environmental Sciences and Graduate 
School of Nutritional and Environmental Science, University of Shizuoka, 
Shizuoka, Japan.

This study investigated the effect of enteral administration of obestatin on the 
development of small intestine, as well as oxidative stress markers and 
trancriptomic profile of gastrointestinal genes. Suckling rats were assigned to 
3 groups treated with: C-saline solution; OL-obestatin (125 nmol/kg BW); 
OH-obestatin (250 nmol/kg BW) administered twice daily, from the 14th to the 
21st day of life. Enteral administration of obestatin in both studied doses had 
no effect neither on the body weight of animals nor the BMI calculated in the 
day of euthanasia. Compared to the control group (C), treatment with obestatin 
resulted in significant changes in the histometry of the small intestinal wall 
as well as intestinal epithelial cell remodeling. The observed changes and their 
possible implications for intestinal development were dependent on the dosage of 
peptide. The enteral administration of high dose (OH) of obestatin significantly 
decreased its expression in the stomach and increased markers of oxidative 
stress. The gene profile revealed MAPK3 (mitogen-activated protein kinase-3) as 
the key regulator gene for obestatin action in the gastrointestinal track. In 
conclusion, we have showed that enteral administration of obestatin influences 
the gut mucosa remodeling. It is also suggested that the administration of high 
dose (OH) has inhibitory effect on the intestinal maturation of suckling rats.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0205994
PMCID: PMC6195281
PMID: 30339696 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.