1. Pharmacol Ther. 2019 Mar;195:132-161. doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2018.10.006. 
Epub 2018 Oct 19.

The neuropsychopharmacology of cannabis: A review of human imaging studies.

Bloomfield MAP(1), Hindocha C(2), Green SF(3), Wall MB(4), Lees R(5), Petrilli 
K(5), Costello H(3), Ogunbiyi MO(3), Bossong MG(6), Freeman TP(7).

Author information:
(1)Translational Psychiatry Research Group, Research Department of Mental Health 
Neuroscience, Division of Psychiatry, Faculty of Brain Sciences, University 
College London, United Kingdom; Clinical Psychopharmacology Unit, Research 
Department of Clinical, Educational and Health Psychology, Faculty of Brain 
Sciences, University College London, United Kingdom; Psychiatric Imaging Group, 
MRC London Institute of Medical Sciences, Hammersmith Hospital, London, United 
Kingdom; NIHR University College London Hospitals Biomedical Research Centre, 
University College Hospital, London, United Kingdom; Institute of Clinical 
Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, United Kingdom. 
Electronic address: m.bloomfield@ucl.ac.uk.
(2)Translational Psychiatry Research Group, Research Department of Mental Health 
Neuroscience, Division of Psychiatry, Faculty of Brain Sciences, University 
College London, United Kingdom; Clinical Psychopharmacology Unit, Research 
Department of Clinical, Educational and Health Psychology, Faculty of Brain 
Sciences, University College London, United Kingdom; NIHR University College 
London Hospitals Biomedical Research Centre, University College Hospital, 
London, United Kingdom.
(3)Translational Psychiatry Research Group, Research Department of Mental Health 
Neuroscience, Division of Psychiatry, Faculty of Brain Sciences, University 
College London, United Kingdom.
(4)Clinical Psychopharmacology Unit, Research Department of Clinical, 
Educational and Health Psychology, Faculty of Brain Sciences, University College 
London, United Kingdom; Centre for Neuropsychopharmacology, Division of Brain 
Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, United Kingdom; Invicro 
UK, Hammersmith Hospital, London, United Kingdom.
(5)Translational Psychiatry Research Group, Research Department of Mental Health 
Neuroscience, Division of Psychiatry, Faculty of Brain Sciences, University 
College London, United Kingdom; Clinical Psychopharmacology Unit, Research 
Department of Clinical, Educational and Health Psychology, Faculty of Brain 
Sciences, University College London, United Kingdom; Institute of Cognitive 
Neuroscience, Faculty of Brain Sciences, University College London, United 
Kingdom.
(6)Department of Psychiatry, Brain Center Rudolf Magnus, University Medical 
Center Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(7)Translational Psychiatry Research Group, Research Department of Mental Health 
Neuroscience, Division of Psychiatry, Faculty of Brain Sciences, University 
College London, United Kingdom; Clinical Psychopharmacology Unit, Research 
Department of Clinical, Educational and Health Psychology, Faculty of Brain 
Sciences, University College London, United Kingdom; Department of Psychology, 
University of Bath, United Kingdom; National Addiction Centre, Institute of 
Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King's College London, United Kingdom.

The laws governing cannabis are evolving worldwide and associated with changing 
patterns of use. The main psychoactive drug in cannabis is 
Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), a partial agonist at the endocannabinoid CB1 
receptor. Acutely, cannabis and THC produce a range of effects on several 
neurocognitive and pharmacological systems. These include effects on executive, 
emotional, reward and memory processing via direct interactions with the 
endocannabinoid system and indirect effects on the glutamatergic, GABAergic and 
dopaminergic systems. Cannabidiol, a non-intoxicating cannabinoid found in some 
forms of cannabis, may offset some of these acute effects. Heavy repeated 
cannabis use, particularly during adolescence, has been associated with adverse 
effects on these systems, which increase the risk of mental illnesses including 
addiction and psychosis. Here, we provide a comprehensive state of the art 
review on the acute and chronic neuropsychopharmacology of cannabis by 
synthesizing the available neuroimaging research in humans. We describe the 
effects of drug exposure during development, implications for understanding 
psychosis and cannabis use disorder, and methodological considerations. Greater 
understanding of the precise mechanisms underlying the effects of cannabis may 
also give rise to new treatment targets.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2018.10.006
PMCID: PMC6416743
PMID: 30347211 [Indexed for MEDLINE]