1. J Mol Med (Berl). 2018 Dec;96(12):1375-1385. doi: 10.1007/s00109-018-1708-8. 
Epub 2018 Oct 23.

Genomics and response to long-term oxygen therapy in chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease.

Seo M(1)(2), Qiu W(1)(2), Bailey W(3), Criner GJ(4), Dransfield MT(3), 
Fuhlbrigge AL(5), Reilly JJ(5), Scholand MB(6), Castaldi P(1)(2), Chase R(1), 
Parker M(1)(2), Saferali A(1)(2), Yun JH(1)(2), Crapo JD(7), Cho MH(1)(2), Beaty 
TH(8), Silverman EK(1)(2), Hersh CP(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Channing Division of Network Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 181 
Longwood Ave, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
(2)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Lung Health Center, Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care 
Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA.
(4)Department of Thoracic Medicine and Surgery, Temple University, Philadelphia, 
PA, USA.
(5)University of Colorado School of Medicine, Denver, CO, USA.
(6)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(7)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, National Jewish 
Health, Denver, CO, USA.
(8)Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(9)Channing Division of Network Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 181 
Longwood Ave, Boston, MA, 02115, USA. craig.hersh@channing.harvard.edu.
(10)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. craig.hersh@channing.harvard.edu.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a leading cause of death 
worldwide, and long-term oxygen therapy has been shown to reduce mortality in 
COPD patients with severe hypoxemia. However, the Long-term Oxygen Treatment 
Trial (LOTT), a large randomized trial, found no benefit of oxygen therapy in 
COPD patients with moderate hypoxemia. We hypothesized that there may be 
differences in response to oxygen which depend on genotype or gene expression. 
In a genome-wide time-to-event analysis of the primary outcome of death or 
hospitalization in 331 subjects, 97 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
showed evidence of interaction with oxygen therapy at P < 1e-5, including 7 SNPs 
near arylsulfatase B (ARSB; P = 6e-6). In microarray expression profiling on 51 
whole blood samples from 37 individuals, at screening and/or at 12-month 
follow-up, ARSB expression was associated with the primary outcome depending on 
oxygen treatment. The significant SNPs were conditional expression quantitative 
trait loci for ARSB expression. In a network analysis of genes affected by 
long-term oxygen, two observed clusters including 26 co-expressed genes were 
enriched in mitochondrial function. Using data from the observational COPDGene 
Study, we validated the expression of 25 of these 26 genes, plus ARSB. The 
effect of long-term oxygen therapy in COPD varied based on ARSB expression and 
genotype. ARSB has previously been shown to be associated with hypoxemia in 
human bronchial and colonic epithelial cells and in a mouse model. In peripheral 
blood, long-term oxygen treatment affected expression of mitochondrial-related 
genes, a biologically relevant pathway in COPD. SNPs and expression of ARSB are 
associated with response to long-term oxygen in COPD. The ARSB SNPs were 
expression quantitative trait loci depending on oxygen therapy. Genes 
differentially expressed by long-term oxygen were enriched in mitochondrial 
functions. This suggests a potential biomarker to personalize use of long-term 
oxygen in COPD.

DOI: 10.1007/s00109-018-1708-8
PMCID: PMC6240374
PMID: 30353303 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest Dr. Criner reports grants 
from Boehringer- Ingelheim, grants from Novartis, grants from Astra Zeneca, 
grants from Respironics, grants from MedImmune, grants from Actelion, grants 
from Forest, grants from Pearl, grants from Ikaria, grants from Aeris, grants 
from PneumRx, grants from Pulmonx, other from HGE Health Care Solutions, Inc, 
other from Amirall, other from Boehringer- Ingelheim, other from Holaira, 
outside the submitted work. Dr. Dransfield reports grants from NHLBI, during the 
conduct of the study; grants from Department of Defense, personal fees and other 
from Boehringer Ingeheim, personal fees and other from GlaxoSmithKline, other 
from Novartis, personal fees and other from AstraZeneca, other from Yungjin, 
other from PneumRx/BTG, other from Pulmonx, personal fees from Genentech, 
personal fees and other from Boston Scientific, outside the submitted work. Dr. 
Fuhlbrigge has received grant support from the NHBLI, AHRQ and PCORI related to 
asthma and COPD studies. She also has received personal fees from GSK, 
AstraZeneca and Icon Medical Imaging for consulting on investigations in asthma 
and COPD. Dr. Scholand reports other from Boehringer Ingelheim, other from 
Genentech, other from Fibrogen, other from Global Blood Therapeutics, outside 
the submitted work. In addition, Dr. Scholand has a patent Apparatus, 
Compositions and Methods for Assessment of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease 
Progression among Rapid and Slow Decline Conditions issued. Dr. Castaldi reports 
grants from GSK, personal fees from GSK, outside the submitted work. Dr. Cho 
reports grants from NHLBI, grants from GSK, during the conduct of the study; 
grants from Alpha-1 Foundation, outside the submitted work. Dr. Silverman 
reports grants from NIH, during the conduct of the study; personal fees from 
Novartis; and grant and travel support from GlaxoSmithKline, outside the 
submitted work. Dr. Hersh reports grants from National Institutes of Health, 
during the conduct of the study; personal fees from Mylan, personal fees from 
AstraZeneca, personal fees from Concert Pharmaceuticals, personal fees from 
23andMe, grants from Novartis, grants from Boehringer-Ingelheim, outside the 
submitted work. Drs. Seo, Qiu, Bailey, Reilly, Parker, Saferali, Yun, Crapo, 
Beaty and Mr. Chase report no competing interests.