1. Elife. 2018 Oct 29;7:e37549. doi: 10.7554/eLife.37549.

Engineering induction of singular neural rosette emergence within hPSC-derived 
tissues.

Knight GT(#)(1)(2), Lundin BF(1)(2), Iyer N(2), Ashton LM(3), Sethares WA(4), 
Willett RM(2)(4), Ashton RS(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 
Madison, United States.
(2)Wisconsin Institute for Discovery, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, 
United States.
(3)Department of Consumer Science, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, 
United States.
(4)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of 
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, United States.
(#)Contributed equally

Human pluripotent stem cell (hPSC)-derived neural organoids display 
unprecedented emergent properties. Yet in contrast to the singular 
neuroepithelial tube from which the entire central nervous system (CNS) develops 
in vivo, current organoid protocols yield tissues with multiple neuroepithelial 
units, a.k.a. neural rosettes, each acting as independent morphogenesis centers 
and thereby confounding coordinated, reproducible tissue development. Here, we 
discover that controlling initial tissue morphology can effectively (>80%) 
induce single neural rosette emergence within hPSC-derived forebrain and spinal 
tissues. Notably, the optimal tissue morphology for observing singular rosette 
emergence was distinct for forebrain versus spinal tissues due to previously 
unknown differences in ROCK-mediated cell contractility. Following release of 
geometric confinement, the tissues displayed radial outgrowth with maintenance 
of a singular neuroepithelium and peripheral neuronal differentiation. Thus, we 
have identified neural tissue morphology as a critical biophysical parameter for 
controlling in vitro neural tissue morphogenesis furthering advancement towards 
biomanufacture of CNS tissues with biomimetic anatomy and physiology.

© 2018, Knight et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.37549
PMCID: PMC6205811
PMID: 30371350 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: GK, BL, NI, LA, WS, RW, RA No competing 
interests declared