1. Front Pharmacol. 2018 Oct 17;9:1114. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2018.01114.
eCollection  2018.

Regulatory Mechanisms of the Wnt/β-Catenin Pathway in Diabetic Cutaneous Ulcers.

Zhang H(1), Nie X(1)(2), Shi X(1), Zhao J(1), Chen Y(1), Yao Q(1), Sun C(1), 
Yang J(3).

Author information:
(1)College of Pharmacy, Zunyi Medical University, Zunyi, China.
(2)College of Pharmacy, Institute of Materia Medica, Army Medical University, 
Chongqing, China.
(3)Pharmacy Department, Affiliated Hospital of Zunyi Medical University, Zunyi, 
China.

Skin ulcers are a serious complication of diabetes. Diabetic patients suffer 
from vascular lesions and complications such as peripheral neuritis, peripheral 
vascular lesions, and collagen abnormalities, which result in skin wounds that 
are refractory and often develop into chronic ulcers. The healing of skin ulcers 
requires an inflammatory reaction, wound proliferation, remodeling regulation, 
and control of stem cells. Studies investigating diabetic cutaneous ulcers have 
focused on cellular and molecular levels. Diabetes can cause nerve and blood 
vessel damage, and persistent high blood sugar levels can cause systemic 
multisite nerve damage based on peripheral neuropathy. The long-term 
hyperglycemia state enables the polyol glucose metabolism pathway to be 
activated, increasing the accumulation of toxic substances in the vascular 
injured nerve tissue cells. Sustained hyperglycemia leads to dysfunction of 
epithelial cells, leading to a decrease in pro-angiogenic signaling and nitric 
oxide production. In addition, due to impaired leukocyte function in 
hyperglycemia, immune function is impaired and the immune response at relevant 
sites is insufficient, making diabetic foot more difficult to heal. The 
Wnt/β-catenin pathway is a highly conserved signal transduction pathway involved 
in a variety of biological processes, such as cell proliferation, apoptosis, and 
differentiation. It is considered an important pathway involved in the healing 
of skin wounds. This article summarizes the mechanism of action of the 
Wnt/β-catenin pathway involved in the inflammatory responses to diabetic ulcers, 
wound proliferation, wound remodeling, and stem cells. The interactions between 
the Wnt signal pathway and other metabolic pathways are also discussed.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2018.01114
PMCID: PMC6199358
PMID: 30386236