1. PLoS One. 2018 Nov 2;13(11):e0206824. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0206824. 
eCollection 2018.

Carboxypeptidase O is a lipid droplet-associated enzyme able to cleave both 
acidic and polar C-terminal amino acids.

Burke LC(1), Ezeribe HO(1), Kwon AY(1), Dockery D(1), Lyons PJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Andrews University, Berrien Springs, Michigan, United 
States of America.

Carboxypeptidase O (CPO) is a member of the M14 family of 
metallocarboxypeptidases with a preference for the cleavage of C-terminal acidic 
amino acids. CPO is largely expressed in the small intestine, although it has 
been detected in other tissues such as the brain and ovaries. CPO does not 
contain a prodomain, nor is it strongly regulated by pH, and hence appears to 
exist as a constitutively active enzyme. The goal of this study was to 
investigate the intracellular distribution and activity of CPO in order to 
predict physiological substrates and function. The distribution of CPO, when 
expressed in MDCK cells, was analyzed by immunofluorescence microscopy. Soon 
after addition of nutrient-rich media, CPO was found to associate with lipid 
droplets, causing an increase in lipid droplet quantity. As media became 
depleted, CPO moved to a broader ER distribution, no longer impacting lipid 
droplet numbers. Membrane cholesterol levels played a role in the distribution 
and in vitro enzymatic activity of CPO, with cholesterol enrichment leading to 
decreased lipid droplet association and enzymatic activity. The ability of CPO 
to cleave C-terminal amino acids within the early secretory pathway (in vivo) 
was examined using Gaussia luciferase as a substrate, C-terminally tagged with 
variants of an ER retention signal. While no effect of cholesterol was observed, 
these data show that CPO does function as an active enzyme within the ER where 
it removes C-terminal glutamates and aspartates, as well as a number of polar 
amino acids.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0206824
PMCID: PMC6214572
PMID: 30388170 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.