1. Adv Biol Regul. 2019 Jan;71:118-127. doi: 10.1016/j.jbior.2018.10.006. Epub
2018  Oct 27.

Inositol phosphate kinases: Expanding the biological significance of the 
universal core of the protein kinase fold.

Shears SB(1), Wang H(2).

Author information:
(1)Inositol Signaling Group, Signal Transduction Laboratory, National Institute 
of Environmental Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA. Electronic 
address: shears@niehs.nih.gov.
(2)Inositol Signaling Group, Signal Transduction Laboratory, National Institute 
of Environmental Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA. Electronic 
address: Huanchen.wang@nih.gov.

The protein kinase family is characterized by substantial conservation of 
architectural elements that are required for both ATP binding and 
phosphotransferase activity. Many of these structural features have also been 
identified in homologous enzymes that phosphorylate a variety of alternative, 
non-protein substrates. A comparative structural analysis of these different 
kinase sub-classes is a portal to a greater understanding of reaction 
mechanisms, enzyme regulation, inhibitor-development strategies, and 
superfamily-level evolutionary relationships. To serve such advances, we review 
structural elements of the protein kinase fold that are conserved in the 
subfamily of inositol phosphate kinases (InsPKs) that share a PxxxDxKxG 
catalytic signature: inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate kinase (IP3K), inositol 
hexakisphosphate kinase (IP6K), and inositol polyphosphate multikinase (IPMK). 
We describe conservation of the fundamental two-lobe kinase architecture: an 
N-lobe constructed upon an anti-parallel β-strand scaffold, which is coupled to 
a largely helical C-lobe by a single, adenine-binding hinge. This equivalency 
also includes a G-loop that embraces the β/γ-phosphates of ATP, a 
transition-state stabilizing residue (Lys/His), and a Mg-positioning aspartate 
residue within a catalytic triad. Furthermore, we expand this list of conserved 
structural features to include some not previously identified in InsPKs: a 
'gatekeeper' residue in the N-lobe, and an 'αF'-like helix in the C-lobe that 
anchors two structurally-stabilizing, hydrophobic spines, formed from 
non-consecutive residues that span the two lobes. We describe how this 
wide-ranging structural homology can be exploited to develop lead inhibitors of 
IP6K and IPMK, by using strategies similar to those that have generated 
ATP-competing inhibitors of protein-kinases. We provide several examples to 
illustrate how such an approach could benefit human health.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbior.2018.10.006
PMCID: PMC9364425
PMID: 30392847 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Statement The authors declare there is no 
conflict of interest.