1. Nat Rev Cancer. 2018 Dec;18(12):727-743. doi: 10.1038/s41568-018-0070-z.

Tumour-targeting bacteria engineered to fight cancer.

Zhou S(1), Gravekamp C(2), Bermudes D(3), Liu K(4).

Author information:
(1)Ludwig Center for Cancer Genetics and Therapeutics, Sidney Kimmel 
Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, USA. sbzhou@jhmi.edu.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Biology, California State University, Northridge, CA, USA.
(4)Oncology Branch, Division of Clinical Evaluation, Pharmacology and 
Toxicology; Office of Tissues and Advanced Therapies, CBER, FDA, Silver Spring, 
MD, USA.

Recent advances in targeted therapy and immunotherapy have once again raised the 
hope that a cure might be within reach for many cancer types. Yet, most 
late-stage cancers are either insensitive to the therapies to begin with or 
develop resistance later. Therapy with live tumour-targeting bacteria provides a 
unique option to meet these challenges. Compared with most other therapeutics, 
the effectiveness of tumour-targeting bacteria is not directly affected by the 
'genetic makeup' of a tumour. Bacteria initiate their direct antitumour effects 
from deep within the tumour, followed by innate and adaptive antitumour immune 
responses. As microscopic 'robotic factories', bacterial vectors can be 
reprogrammed following simple genetic rules or sophisticated synthetic 
bioengineering principles to produce and deliver anticancer agents on the basis 
of clinical needs. Therapeutic approaches using live tumour-targeting bacteria 
can either be applied as a monotherapy or complement other anticancer therapies 
to achieve better clinical outcomes. In this Review, we summarize the potential 
benefits and challenges of this approach. We discuss how live bacteria 
selectively induce tumour regression and provide examples to illustrate 
different ways to engineer bacteria for improved safety and efficacy. Finally, 
we share our experience and insights on oncology clinical trials with 
tumour-targeting bacteria, including a discussion of the regulatory issues.

DOI: 10.1038/s41568-018-0070-z
PMCID: PMC6902869
PMID: 30405213 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: Under a licensing agreement 
between BioMed Valley Discoveries, Inc. and the Johns Hopkins University, SZ is 
entitled to a share of royalties received by the University on sales of products 
described in this article. SZ is also a Founding Scientific Advisor of Personal 
Genome Diagnostics, Inc. and a Founder of PapGene, Inc., companies focused on 
developing genetics-based cancer diagnostics. The terms of these arrangements 
are under ongoing management by the Johns Hopkins University in accordance with 
its conflict of interest policies. DB has financial interest in 
AviexTechnologies and Magna Therapeutics, and receives royalties from Yale 
University for technologies based on those described in this article.