1. Front Plant Sci. 2018 Oct 30;9:1567. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2018.01567. eCollection
 2018.

Developing Biostimulants From Agro-Food and Industrial By-Products.

Xu L(1), Geelen D(1).

Author information:
(1)Horticell, Department of Plant and Crops, Faculty of Bioscience Engineering, 
Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.

In modern agriculture, seeking eco-friendly ways to promote plant growth and 
enhance crop productivity is of priority. Biostimulants are a group of 
substances from natural origin that contribute to boosting plant yield and 
nutrient uptake, while reducing the dependency on chemical fertilizers. 
Developing biostimulants from by-products paves the path to waste recycling and 
reduction, generating benefits for growers, food industry, registration and 
distribution companies, as well as consumers. The criteria to select designated 
by-products for valorizing as biostimulant are: absence of pesticide residue, 
low cost of collection and storage, sufficient supply and synergy with other 
valorization paths. Over the years, projects on national and international 
levels such as NOSHAN, SUNNIVA, and Bio2Bio have been initiated (i) to explore 
valorization of by-products for food and agriculture industries; (ii) to 
investigate mode of action of biostimulants from organic waste streams. Several 
classes of waste-derived biostimulants or raw organic material with biostimulant 
components were shown to be effective in agriculture and horticulture, including 
vermicompost, composted urban waste, sewage sludge, protein hydrolysate, and 
chitin/chitosan derivatives. As the global market for biostimulants continues to 
rise, it is expected that more research and development will expand the list of 
biostimulants from by-products. Global nutrient imbalance also requires 
biostimulant to be developed for targeted market. Here, we review examples of 
biostimulants derived from agricultural by-products and discuss why agricultural 
biomass is a particularly valuable source for the development of new 
agrochemical products.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2018.01567
PMCID: PMC6218572
PMID: 30425724