1. Theranostics. 2018 Oct 5;8(18):5025-5038. doi: 10.7150/thno.26837. eCollection
 2018.

Novel skin patch combining human fibroblast-derived matrix and ciprofloxacin for 
infected wound healing.

Suhaeri M(1)(2)(3), Noh MH(4), Moon JH(5), Kim IG(1), Oh SJ(1), Ha SS(1)(6), Lee 
JH(1), Park K(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Center for Biomaterials, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Seoul 
02792, Republic of Korea.
(2)Unit of Education, Research, and Training, Universitas Indonesia Hospital, 
Universitas Indonesia, Depok 16424, Indonesia.
(3)Medical Technology Research Cluster, Indonesia Medical Education and Research 
Institute, Faculty of Medicine, Universitas Indonesia, Jakarta Pusat 10430, 
Indonesia.
(4)Department of Biomedical Science, Graduate School, Kyung Hee University, 
Seoul 02447, Republic of Korea.
(5)Department of Maxillofacial Biomedical Engineering, School of 
Dentistry/Department of Life and Nanopharmaceutical Sciences, Kyung Hee 
University, Seoul 02447, Republic of Korea.
(6)Division of Bio-Medical Science and Technology, KIST School, Korea University 
of Science and Technology (UST), Seoul 02792, Republic of Korea.

Skin injuries are frequently encountered in daily life, but deep wounds often 
poorly self-heal and do not recover completely. In this study, we propose a 
novel skin patch that combines antibiotic, cell-derived extracellular matrix 
(ECM) and biocompatible polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) hydrogel. Methods: 
Decellularized human lung fibroblast-derived matrix (hFDM) was prepared on 
tissue culture plate (TCP) and PVA solution was then poured onto it. After a 
freeze-thaw process, PVA was peeled off from TCP along with hFDM tightly 
anchored to PVA. Subsequently, ciprofloxacin (Cipro)-incorporated PVA/hFDM 
(PVA/Cipro/hFDM) was fabricated via diffusion-based drug loading. Results: In 
vitro analyses of PVA/Cipro/hFDM show little cytotoxicity of ciprofloxacin, 
stability of hFDM, rich fibronectin in hFDM, and good cell attachment, 
respectively. In addition, hFDM proved to be beneficial in promoting cell 
migration of dermal fibroblasts and human umbilical vein endothelial cells 
(HUVECs) using transwell inserts. The antibacterial drug Cipro was very 
effective in suppressing colony growth of gram-negative and -positive bacteria 
as identified via an inhibition zone assay. For animal study, infected wound 
models in BALB/c mice were prepared and four test groups (control, PVA, 
PVA/Cipro, PVA/Cipro/hFDM) were administered separately and their effect on 
wound healing was examined for up to 21 days. The results support that Cipro 
successfully reduced bacterial infection and thus encouraged faster wound 
closure. Further analysis using histology and immunofluorescence revealed that 
the most advanced skin regeneration was achieved with PVA/Cipro/hFDM, as 
assessed via re-epithelialization, collagen texture and distribution in the 
epidermis, and skin adnexa (i.e., glands and hair follicles) regeneration in the 
dermis. Conclusion: This work demonstrates that our skin patch successfully 
consolidates the regenerative potential of ECM and the antibacterial activity of 
Cipro for advanced wound healing.

DOI: 10.7150/thno.26837
PMCID: PMC6217057
PMID: 30429884 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interest exists.