1. Cardiovasc Diabetol. 2018 Nov 17;17(1):144. doi: 10.1186/s12933-018-0790-0.

A SGLT2 inhibitor dapagliflozin suppresses prolonged ventricular-repolarization 
through augmentation of mitochondrial function in insulin-resistant metabolic 
syndrome rats.

Durak A(1), Olgar Y(1), Degirmenci S(1), Akkus E(2), Tuncay E(1), Turan B(3).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Biophysics, Faculty of Medicine, Ankara University, Ankara, 
Turkey.
(2)Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Ankara University, Ankara, Turkey.
(3)Departments of Biophysics, Faculty of Medicine, Ankara University, Ankara, 
Turkey. belma.turan@medicine.ankara.edu.tr.

BACKGROUND: Metabolic syndrome (MetS) is a prevalent risk factor for cardiac 
dysfunction. Although SGLT2-inhibitors have important cardioprotective effects 
in hyperglycemia, their underlying mechanisms are complex and not completely 
understood. Therefore, we examined mechanisms of a SGLT2-inhibitor dapagliflozin 
(DAPA)-related cardioprotection in overweight insulin-resistant MetS-rats 
comparison with insulin (INSU), behind its glucose-lowering effect.
METHODS: A 28-week high-carbohydrate diet-induced MetS-rats received DAPA 
(5 mg/kg), INSU (0.15 mg/kg) or vehicle for 2 weeks. To validate MetS-induction, 
we monitored all animals weekly by measuring body weight, blood glucose and 
HOMO-IR index, electrocardiograms, heart rate, systolic and diastolic pressures.
RESULTS: DAPA-treatment of MetS-rats significantly augmented the increased blood 
pressure, prolonged Q-R interval, and low heart rate with depressed left 
ventricular function and relaxation of the aorta. Prolonged-action potentials 
were preserved with DAPA-treatment, more prominently than INSU-treatment, at 
most, through the augmentation in depressed voltage-gated K+-channel currents. 
DAPA, more prominently than INSU-treatment, preserved the depolarized 
mitochondrial membrane potential, and altered mitochondrial protein levels such 
as Mfn-1, Mfn-2, and Fis-1 as well as provided significant augmentation in 
cytosolic Ca2+-homeostasis. Furthermore, DAPA also induced significant 
augmentation in voltage-gated Na+-currents and intracellular pH, and the 
cellular levels of increased oxidative stress, protein-thiol oxidation and 
ADP/ATP ratio in cardiomyocytes from MetS rats. Moreover, DAPA-treatment 
normalized the increases in the mRNA level of SGLT2 in MetS-rat heart.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, our data provided a new insight into DAPA-associated 
cardioprotection in MetS rats, including suppression of prolonged 
ventricular-repolarization through augmentation of mitochondrial function and 
oxidative stress followed by improvement of fusion-fission proteins, out of its 
glucose-lowering effect.

DOI: 10.1186/s12933-018-0790-0
PMCID: PMC6240275
PMID: 30447687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]