1. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2018 Nov 6;5:148. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2018.00148. 
eCollection 2018.

Exploring Coronary Artery Disease GWAs Targets With Functional Links to 
Immunometabolism.

Hughes MF(1)(2)(3)(4), Lenighan YM(1)(4), Godson C(1)(5), Roche HM(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)UCD Diabetes Complications Research Centre, Conway Institute of Biomolecular 
and Biomedical Research, University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.
(2)Nutrigenomics Research Group, UCD Institute of Food and Health, School of 
Public Health Physiotherapy and Sports Science, University College Dublin, 
Dublin, Ireland.
(3)Centre of Excellence for Public Health, Queen's University Belfast, Belfast, 
United Kingdom.
(4)UCD Institute of Food and Health, School of Public Health Physiotherapy and 
Sports Science, University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.
(5)School of Medicine, University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.

Finding genetic variants that cause functional disruption or regulatory change 
among the many implicated GWAs variants remains a key challenge to translating 
the findings from GWAs to therapeutic treatments. Defining the causal mechanisms 
behind the variants require functional screening experiments that can be complex 
and costly. Prioritizing variants for functional characterization using 
techniques that capture important functional and regulatory elements can assist 
this. The genetic architecture of complex traits such as cardiovascular disease 
and type II diabetes comprise an enormously large number of variants of small 
effect contributing to heritability and spread throughout the genome. This makes 
it difficult to distinguish which variants or core genes are most relevant for 
prioritization and how they contribute to the regulatory networks that become 
dysregulated leading to disease. Despite these challenges, recent GWAs for CAD 
prioritized genes associated with lipid metabolism, coagulation and adhesion 
along with novel signals related to innate immunity, adipose tissue and, 
vascular function as important core drivers of risk. We focus on three examples 
of novel signals associated with CAD which affect risk through missense or UTR 
mutations indicating their potential for therapeutic modification. These 
variants play roles in adipose tissue function vascular function and innate 
immunity which form the cornerstones of immuno-metabolism. In addition we have 
explored the putative, but potentially important interactions between the 
environment, specifically food and nutrition, with respect to key processes.

DOI: 10.3389/fcvm.2018.00148
PMCID: PMC6232936
PMID: 30460244