1. Brain. 2018 Dec 1;141(12):3331-3342. doi: 10.1093/brain/awy285.

Spastic paraplegia due to SPAST mutations is modified by the underlying mutation 
and sex.

Parodi L(1), Fenu S(1), Barbier M(1), Banneau G(1), Duyckaerts C(1)(2), Tezenas 
du Montcel S(3)(4), Monin ML(1), Ait Said S(1), Guegan J(1), Tallaksen 
CME(1)(5)(6), Sablonniere B(7)(8), Brice A(1), Stevanin G(1)(9), Depienne 
C(1)(10), Durr A(1); SPATAX network.

Collaborators: Abada M, Anheim M, Bonneau D, Charles P, Clavelou P, Coarelli G, 
Coutinho P, Debs R, Elleuch N, Ewenczyk C, Feki I, Ferrer X, Fontaine B, Goizet 
C, Guyant-Marechal L, Hannequin D, Heide S, Kassar A, Labauge P, Lagueny A, Le 
Ber I, Lenglet T, Maldergem L, Marelli C, Nguyen K, Rodriguez D, Stojkovic T, 
Tataru A, Tchikviladze M, Tranchant C, Vandenberghe N.

Author information:
(1)Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière (ICM), INSERM, CNRS, Assistance 
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), Sorbonne Université, Pitié-Salpêtrière 
University Hospital, Paris, France.
(2)Raymond Escourolle Department of Neuropathology, Pitié-Salpêtrière University 
Hospital, Paris, France.
(3)Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), Pitié-Salpêtrière University 
Hospital, Biostatistics and Medical Informatics Unit and Clinical Research Unit, 
Paris, France.
(4)Sorbonne Universités, UMR S1136, Institut Pierre Louis d'Epidémiologie et de 
Santé Publique, Paris, France.
(5)Department of Neurology, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(6)Institute of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, 
Oslo, Norway.
(7)Lille University, Inserm, CHU Lille, UMR-S 1172 - JPArc - Centre de Recherche 
Jean-Pierre AUBERT Neurosciences et Cancer, Lille, France.
(8)CHU Lille, Institut de Biochimie et Biologie Moléculaire, Centre de Biologie 
Pathologie et Génétique, Lille, France.
(9)Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes (EPHE), Paris Sciences et Lettres (PSL) 
Research Univeristy, Neurogenetics Group, Paris, France.
(10)Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany.

Comment in
    Brain. 2019 Jul 1;142(7):e31. doi: 10.1093/brain/awz140.

Hereditary spastic paraplegias (HSPs) are rare neurological disorders caused by 
progressive distal degeneration of the corticospinal tracts. Among the 79 loci 
and 65 spastic paraplegia genes (SPGs) involved in HSPs, mutations in SPAST, 
which encodes spastin, responsible for SPG4, are the most frequent cause of both 
familial and sporadic HSP. SPG4 is characterized by a clinically pure phenotype 
associated with restricted involvement of the corticospinal tracts and posterior 
columns of the spinal cord. It is rarely associated with additional neurological 
signs. However, both age of onset and severity of the disorder are extremely 
variable. Such variability is both intra- and inter-familial and may suggest 
incomplete penetrance, with some patients carrying mutations remaining 
asymptomatic for their entire life. We analysed a cohort of 842 patients with 
SPG4-HSP to assess genotype-phenotype correlations. Most patients were French 
(89%) and had a family history of SPG4-HSP (75%). Age at onset was characterized 
by a bimodal distribution, with high inter-familial and intra-familial 
variability, especially concerning first-degree relatives. Penetrance of the 
disorder was 0.9, complete after 70 years of age. Penetrance was lower in 
females (0.88 versus 0.94 in males, P = 0.01), despite a more diffuse phenotype 
with more frequent upper limb involvement. Seventy-seven per cent of pathogenic 
mutations (missense, frameshift, splice site, nonsense, and deletions) were 
located in the AAA cassette of spastin, impairing its microtubule-severing 
activity. A comparison of the missense and truncating mutations revealed a 
significantly lower age at onset for patients carrying missense mutations than 
those carrying truncating mutations, explaining the bimodal distribution of the 
age at onset. The age at onset for patients carrying missense mutations was 
often before 10 years, sometimes associated with intellectual deficiency. 
Neuropathological examination of a single case showed degeneration of the 
spinocerebellar and spinocortical tracts, as well as the posterior columns. 
However, there were numerous small-diameter processes among unusually large 
myelinated fibres in the corticospinal tract, suggesting marked regeneration. In 
conclusion, this large cohort of 842 individuals allowed us to identify a 
significantly younger age at onset in missense mutation carriers and lower 
penetrance in females, despite a more severe disorder. Neuropathology in one 
case showed numerous small fibres suggesting regeneration.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awy285
PMID: 30476002 [Indexed for MEDLINE]