1. PLoS Genet. 2018 Nov 26;14(11):e1007817. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1007817. 
eCollection 2018 Nov.

Mutations in Kinesin family member 6 reveal specific role in ependymal cell 
ciliogenesis and human neurological development.

Konjikusic MJ(1)(2), Yeetong P(3)(4)(5), Boswell CW(6), Lee C(2), Roberson 
EC(2), Ittiwut R(3)(4), Suphapeetiporn K(3)(4), Ciruna B(6), Gurnett CA(7), 
Wallingford JB(2), Shotelersuk V(3)(4), Gray RS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Dell Pediatric Research Institute, The University 
of Texas at Austin, Dell Medical School, Austin, Texas, United States of 
America.
(2)Department of Molecular Biosciences, Patterson Labs, The University of Texas 
at Austin, Austin, Texas, United States of America.
(3)Center of Excellence for Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Faculty 
of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(4)Excellence Center for Medical Genetics, King Chulalongkorn Memorial Hospital, 
the Thai Red Cross Society, Bangkok, Thailand.
(5)Division of Human Genetics, Department of Botany, Faculty of Science, 
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(6)Program in Developmental & Stem Cell Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Department of Molecular Genetics, The University of 
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(7)Department of Neurology, Division Pediatric Neurology, Washington University 
School of Medicine, St Louis, MO, United States of America.

Cerebrospinal fluid flow is crucial for neurodevelopment and homeostasis of the 
ventricular system of the brain, with localized flow being established by the 
polarized beating of the ependymal cell (EC) cilia. Here, we report a homozygous 
one base-pair deletion, c.1193delT (p.Leu398Glnfs*2), in the Kinesin Family 
Member 6 (KIF6) gene in a child displaying neurodevelopmental defects and 
intellectual disability. To test the pathogenicity of this novel human KIF6 
mutation we engineered an analogous C-terminal truncating mutation in mouse. 
These mutant mice display severe, postnatal-onset hydrocephalus. We generated a 
Kif6-LacZ transgenic mouse strain and report expression specifically and 
uniquely within the ependymal cells (ECs) of the brain, without labeling other 
multiciliated mouse tissues. Analysis of Kif6 mutant mice with scanning electron 
microscopy (SEM) and immunofluorescence (IF) revealed specific defects in the 
formation of EC cilia, without obvious effect of cilia of other multiciliated 
tissues. Dilation of the ventricular system and defects in the formation of EC 
cilia were also observed in adult kif6 mutant zebrafish. Finally, we report 
Kif6-GFP localization at the axoneme and basal bodies of multi-ciliated cells 
(MCCs) of the mucociliary Xenopus epidermis. Overall, this work describes the 
first clinically-defined KIF6 homozygous null mutation in human and defines KIF6 
as a conserved mediator of neurological development with a specific role for EC 
ciliogenesis in vertebrates.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1007817
PMCID: PMC6307780
PMID: 30475797 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.