1. Nat Rev Urol. 2019 Jan;16(1):7-22. doi: 10.1038/s41585-018-0119-5.

Prostate-specific markers to identify rare prostate cancer cells in liquid 
biopsies.

van der Toom EE(1), Axelrod HD(2)(3), de la Rosette JJ(4), de Reijke TM(1), 
Pienta KJ(2), Valkenburg KC(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(2)The James Buchanan Brady Urological Institute, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(3)Graduate Program in Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(4)Department of Urology, Istanbul Medipol University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(5)The James Buchanan Brady Urological Institute, Baltimore, MD, USA. 
kvalken1@jhmi.edu.

Despite improvements in early detection and advances in treatment, patients with 
prostate cancer continue to die from their disease. Minimal residual disease 
after primary definitive treatment can lead to relapse and distant metastases, 
and increasing evidence suggests that circulating tumour cells (CTCs) and bone 
marrow-derived disseminated tumour cells (BM-DTCs) can offer clinically relevant 
biological insights into prostate cancer dissemination and metastasis. Using 
epithelial markers to accurately detect CTCs and BM-DTCs is associated with 
difficulties, and prostate-specific markers are needed for the detection of 
these cells using rare cell assays. Putative prostate-specific markers have been 
identified, and an optimized strategy for staining rare cancer cells from liquid 
biopsies using these markers is required. The ideal prostate-specific marker 
will be expressed on every CTC or BM-DTC throughout disease progression (giving 
high sensitivity) and will not be expressed on non-prostate-cancer cells in the 
sample (giving high specificity). Some markers might not be specific enough to 
the prostate to be used as individual markers of prostate cancer cells, whereas 
others could be truly prostate-specific and would make ideal markers for use in 
rare cell assays. The goal of future studies is to use sensitive and specific 
prostate markers to consistently and reliably identify rare cancer cells.

DOI: 10.1038/s41585-018-0119-5
PMCID: PMC6324967
PMID: 30479377 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure statement The authors declare no 
financial conflicts of interest.