1. Int J Mol Sci. 2018 Nov 30;19(12):3832. doi: 10.3390/ijms19123832.

CTCF Expression is Essential for Somatic Cell Viability and Protection Against 
Cancer.

Bailey CG(1), Metierre C(2), Feng Y(3), Baidya K(4), Filippova GN(5), Loukinov 
DI(6), Lobanenkov VV(7), Semaan C(8), Rasko JE(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Gene and Stem Cell Therapy Program Centenary Institute, The University of 
Sydney, Camperdown, 2050 NSW, Australia. c.bailey@centenary.org.au.
(2)Gene and Stem Cell Therapy Program Centenary Institute, The University of 
Sydney, Camperdown, 2050 NSW, Australia. c.metierre@centenary.org.au.
(3)Gene and Stem Cell Therapy Program Centenary Institute, The University of 
Sydney, Camperdown, 2050 NSW, Australia. j.feng@centenary.org.au.
(4)Gene and Stem Cell Therapy Program Centenary Institute, The University of 
Sydney, Camperdown, 2050 NSW, Australia. kinsha_3@hotmail.com.
(5)Department of Pathology, University of Washington, 98195 Seattle, USA. 
gfilippo@u.washington.edu.
(6)Laboratory of Immunogenetics, Molecular Pathology Section, National Institute 
of Allergy & Infectious Diseases, 20852-8152 Rockville, USA. 
dloukinov@niaid.nih.gov.
(7)Laboratory of Immunogenetics, Molecular Pathology Section, National Institute 
of Allergy & Infectious Diseases, 20852-8152 Rockville, USA. 
vlobanenkov@niaid.nih.gov.
(8)Gene and Stem Cell Therapy Program Centenary Institute, The University of 
Sydney, Camperdown, 2050 NSW, Australia. c.semaan@centenary.org.au.
(9)Gene and Stem Cell Therapy Program Centenary Institute, The University of 
Sydney, Camperdown, 2050 NSW, Australia. j.rasko@centenary.org.au.
(10)Cell and Molecular Therapies, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Camperdown, 2050 
NSW, Australia. j.rasko@centenary.org.au.

CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) is a conserved transcription factor that performs 
diverse roles in transcriptional regulation and chromatin architecture. Cancer 
genome sequencing reveals diverse acquired mutations in CTCF, which we have 
shown functions as a tumour suppressor gene. While CTCF is essential for 
embryonic development, little is known of its absolute requirement in somatic 
cells and the consequences of CTCF haploinsufficiency. We examined the 
consequences of CTCF depletion in immortalised human and mouse cells using shRNA 
knockdown and CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing as well as examined the growth and 
development of heterozygous Ctcf (Ctcf+/-) mice. We also analysed the impact of 
CTCF haploinsufficiency by examining gene expression changes in CTCF-altered 
endometrial carcinoma. Knockdown and CRISPR/Cas9-mediated editing of CTCF 
reduced the cellular growth and colony-forming ability of K562 cells. CTCF 
knockdown also induced cell cycle arrest and a pro-survival response to 
apoptotic insult. However, in p53 shRNA-immortalised Ctcf+/- MEFs we observed 
the opposite: increased cellular proliferation, colony formation, cell cycle 
progression, and decreased survival after apoptotic insult compared to wild-type 
MEFs. CRISPR/Cas9-mediated targeting in Ctcf+/- MEFs revealed a predominance of 
in-frame microdeletions in Ctcf in surviving clones, however protein expression 
could not be ablated. Examination of CTCF mutations in endometrial cancers 
showed locus-specific alterations in gene expression due to CTCF 
haploinsufficiency, in concert with downregulation of tumour suppressor genes 
and upregulation of estrogen-responsive genes. Depletion of CTCF expression 
imparts a dramatic negative effect on normal cell function. However, CTCF 
haploinsufficiency can have growth-promoting effects consistent with known 
cancer hallmarks in the presence of additional genetic hits. Our results confirm 
the absolute requirement for CTCF expression in somatic cells and provide 
definitive evidence of CTCF's role as a haploinsufficient tumour suppressor 
gene. CTCF genetic alterations in endometrial cancer indicate that gene 
dysregulation is a likely consequence of CTCF loss, contributing to, but not 
solely driving cancer growth.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms19123832
PMCID: PMC6321389
PMID: 30513694 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.