1. Am J Med Genet A. 2019 Jan;179(1):78-84. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.6. Epub 2018 Dec
4.

Prenatal and postnatal presentation of PRMT7 related syndrome: Expanding the 
phenotypic manifestations.

Birnbaum R(1)(2), Yosha-Orpaz N(3)(4), Yanoov-Sharav M(3)(5), Kidron D(2)(6), 
Gur H(7), Yosovich K(3)(7), Lerman-Sagie T(2)(3)(4), Malinger G(1)(2), Lev 
D(2)(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)OB-GYN Ultrasound Unit, Lis Maternity Hospital, Tel Aviv Medical Center, Tel 
Aviv, Israel.
(2)Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel.
(3)Metabolic Neurogenetic Service, Holon, Israel.
(4)Pediatric Neurology Unit, Holon, Israel.
(5)The Rina Mor Institute of Medical Genetics, Wolfson Medical Center, Holon, 
Israel.
(6)Pathology Department, Sapir Medical Center, Kfar Saba, Israel.
(7)Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Wolfson Medical Center, Holon, Israel.

Protein arginine methyltransferase 7 (PRMT7) is a member of a family of enzymes 
that catalyze the transfer of methyl groups from S-adenosyl-l-methionine to 
nitrogen atoms on arginine residues. Arginine methylation is involved in 
multiple biological processes, such as signal transduction, mRNA splicing, 
transcriptional control, DNA repair, and protein translocation. Currently, 10 
patients have been described with mutations in PRMT7. The shared findings 
include: hypotonia, intellectual disability, short stature, brachydactyly, and 
mild dysmorphic features. We describe the prenatal, postnatal, and pathological 
findings in two male sibs homozygote for a mutation in PRMT7. Both had 
intrauterine growth restriction involving mainly the long bones. In addition, 
eye tumor was found in the first patient, and nonspecific brain calcifications 
and a systemic venous anomaly in the second. The pregnancy of the first child 
was terminated and we describe the autopsy findings. The second child had 
postnatal growth restriction of prenatal onset, hypotonia, strabismus, 
sensorineural hearing loss, genitourinary and skeletal involvement, and global 
developmental delay. He had dysmorphic features that included frontal bossing, 
upslanting palpebral fissures, small nose with depressed nasal bridge, and 
pectus excavatum. Our patients provide additional clinical and pathological data 
and expand the phenotypic manifestations associated with PRMT7 
homozygote/compound heterozygote mutations to include brain calcifications and 
delayed myelination, and congenital orbital tumor.

© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.6
PMID: 30513135 [Indexed for MEDLINE]