1. Curr Phys Med Rehabil Rep. 2018;6(4):264-276. doi: 10.1007/s40141-018-0203-z. 
Epub 2018 Nov 15.

Guideline Approaches for Cardioendocrine Disease Surveillance and Treatment 
Following Spinal Cord Injury.

Nash MS(1)(2), Bilzon JLJ(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)1The Miami Project to Cure Paralysis, University of Miami Miller School of 
Medicine, Miami, FL USA.
(2)2Departments of Neurological Surgery and Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation, 
University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL USA.
(3)3Department for Health, University of Bath, Bath, Somerset UK.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Persons with spinal cord injuries (SCI) commonly experience 
individual risks and coalesced health hazards of the cardiometabolic syndrome 
(CMS). This review will examinethe role of exercise and nutritional intervention 
as countermeasures to these disease risks.
RECENT FINDINGS: The CMS hazards of overweight/obesity, insulin resistance, 
hypertension, and dyslipidemia are strongly associated with physical 
deconditioning and are common after SCI. Both the CMS diagnosis and physical 
deconditioning worsen the prognosis for all-cause cardiovascular disease 
occurring early after SCI. Evidence supports a therapeutic role for physical 
activity after SCI as an effective countermeasure to these risks and often 
represents the first-line approach to CMS abatement. This evidence is supported 
by authoritative systematic reviews and associated guidelines that recommend 
specific activities, frequencies, and activities of work. In many cases, the 
most effective exercise programming uses more intense periods of work with 
limited rest. As SCI is also associated with poor dietary habits, including 
excessive energy intake and saturated fat consumption, more comprehensive 
lifestyle management incorporating both exercise and nutrition represents a 
preferred approach for overall health management.
SUMMARY: Irrespective of the interventional strategy, improved surveillance of 
the population for CMS risks and encouraged incorporation of exercise and 
nutritional management according to recent population-specific guidelines will 
most likely play an important role in the preservation of activity, optimal 
health, and independence throughout the lifespan.

DOI: 10.1007/s40141-018-0203-z
PMCID: PMC6267529
PMID: 30546969

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.This article does not contain any studies with human or animal 
subjects performed by any of the authors.