1. Theranostics. 2018 Nov 9;8(20):5610-5624. doi: 10.7150/thno.27559. eCollection
 2018.

Longitudinal intravital imaging of transplanted mesenchymal stem cells 
elucidates their functional integration and therapeutic potency in an animal 
model of interstitial cystitis/bladder pain syndrome.

Ryu CM(1)(2), Yu HY(1)(2), Lee HY(2)(3), Shin JH(1), Lee S(2)(3), Ju H(2)(3), 
Paulson B(4)(5), Lee S(5)(6), Kim S(2)(3), Lim J(2)(3), Heo J(2)(3), Hong KS(7), 
Chung HM(7)(8), Kim JK(5)(6), Shin DM(2)(3), Choo MS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of 
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan 
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(3)Department of Physiology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of 
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(4)Department of Physics, Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea.
(5)Biomedical Engineering Research Center, ASAN Institute for Life Sciences, 
Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan, College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(6)Department of Convergence Medicine, University of Ulsan, College of Medicine, 
Seoul, Korea.
(7)Department of Stem Cell Biology, School of Medicine, Konkuk University, 
Seoul, Korea.
(8)Mirae Cell Bio Co. Ltd, Seoul, Korea.

Rationale: Mesenchymal stem cell (MSC) therapy may be a novel approach to 
improve interstitial cystitis/bladder pain syndrome (IC/BPS), an intractable 
disease characterized by severe pelvic pain and urinary frequency. 
Unfortunately, the properties of transplanted stem cells have not been directly 
analyzed in vivo, which hampers elucidation of the therapeutic mechanisms of 
these cells and optimization of transplantation protocols. Here, we monitored 
the behaviors of multipotent stem cells (M-MSCs) derived from human embryonic 
stem cells (hESCs) in real time using a novel combination of in vivo confocal 
endoscopic and microscopic imaging and demonstrated their improved therapeutic 
potency in a chronic IC/BPS animal model. Methods: Ten-week-old female 
Sprague-Dawley rats were instilled with 10 mg of protamine sulfate followed by 
750 μg of lipopolysaccharide weekly for 5 weeks. The sham group was instilled 
with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). Thereafter, the indicated dose (0.1, 0.25, 
0.5, and 1×106 cells) of M-MSCs or PBS was injected once into the outer layer of 
the bladder. The distribution, perivascular integration, and therapeutic effects 
of M-MSCs were monitored by in vivo endoscopic and confocal microscopic imaging, 
awake cystometry, and histological and gene expression analyses. Results: A 
novel combination of longitudinal intravital confocal fluorescence imaging and 
microcystoscopy in living animals, together with immunofluorescence analysis of 
bladder tissues, demonstrated that transplanted M-MSCs engrafted following 
differentiation into multiple cell types and gradually integrated into a 
perivascular-like structure until 30 days after transplantation. The beneficial 
effects of transplanted M-MSCs on bladder voiding function and the pathological 
characteristics of the bladder were efficient and long-lasting due to the stable 
engraftment of these cells. Conclusion: This longitudinal bioimaging study of 
transplanted hESC-derived M-MSCs in living animals reveals their long-term 
functional integration, which underlies the improved therapeutic effects of 
these cells on IC/BPS.

DOI: 10.7150/thno.27559
PMCID: PMC6276303
PMID: 30555567 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interest exists.