1. PLoS One. 2018 Dec 21;13(12):e0209552. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0209552. 
eCollection 2018.

Culture and cannabinoid receptor gene polymorphism interact to influence the 
perception of happiness.

Matsunaga M(1), Masuda T(2), Ishii K(3), Ohtsubo Y(4), Noguchi Y(4), Ochi M(4), 
Yamasue H(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health and Psychosocial Medicine, Aichi Medical University 
School of Medicine, Nagakute, Aichi, Japan.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(3)Department of Cognitive and Psychological Sciences, Graduate School of 
Informatics, Nagoya University, Nagoya, Aichi, Japan.
(4)Department of Psychology, Graduate School of Humanities, Kobe University, 
Kobe, Hyogo, Japan.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Hamamatsu, 
Shizuoka, Japan.

Previous studies have shown that a cytosine (C) to thymine (T) single nucleotide 
polymorphism (SNP) of the human cannabinoid receptor 1 (CNR1) gene is associated 
with positive emotional processing. C allele carriers are more sensitive to 
positive emotional stimuli including happiness. The effects of several gene 
polymorphisms related to sensitivity to emotional stimuli, such as that in the 
serotonin transporter gene-linked polymorphic region (5HTTLPR), on emotional 
processing have been reported to differ among cultures-e.g., between those that 
are independent and interdependent. Thus, we postulated that the effects of the 
CNR1 genotype on happiness might differ among different cultures because the 
concept of happiness varies by culture. We recruited healthy male and female 
young adults in Japan, where favorable external circumstances determine the 
concept of happiness, and Canada, where the concept of happiness centers on 
positive inner feelings, and compared the effects of the CNR1 genotype on both 
subjective happiness levels (self-evaluation as being a happy person) and 
situation-specific happiness (happy feelings accompanying various positive 
events) by using a questionnaire. We found that the effect of CNR1 on subjective 
happiness was different between the Japanese and Canadian groups. The subjective 
happiness level was the highest in Japanese individuals with the CC genotype, 
whereas in Canadian participants, it was the highest in individuals with the TT 
genotype. Furthermore, the effects of CNR1 genotype on situation-specific 
happiness were also different between the groups. Happiness accompanied with 
being surrounded by happy people was the highest among Japanese individuals with 
the CC genotype, whereas among Canadian individuals, it was the highest in TT 
genotype carriers. These findings suggest that culture and CNR1 polymorphism 
interact to influence the perception of happiness.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0209552
PMCID: PMC6303049
PMID: 30576341 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.