1. Front Mater. 2018 Jun;5:39. doi: 10.3389/fmats.2018.00039. Epub 2018 Jun 26.

Influence of Hyaluronic Acid Transitions in Tumor Microenvironment on 
Glioblastoma Malignancy and Invasive Behavior.

Chen JE(1), Pedron S(2), Shyu P(3), Hu Y(3), Sarkaria JN(4), Harley BAC(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of Illinois 
at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, United States.
(2)Carl R. Woese Institute for Genomic Biology, University of Illinois at 
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, United States.
(3)Department of Mechanical Science and Engineering, University of Illinois at 
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, United States.
(4)Department of Radiation Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States.

The extracellular matrix (ECM) is critical in tumor growth and invasive 
potential of cancer cells. In glioblastoma tumors, some components of the native 
brain ECM such as hyaluronic acid (HA) have been suggested as key regulators of 
processes associated with poor patient outlook such as invasion and therapeutic 
resistance. Given the importance of cell-mediated remodeling during invasion, it 
is likely that the molecular weight of available HA polymer may strongly 
influence GBM progression. Biomaterial platforms therefore provide a unique 
opportunity to systematically examine the influence of the molecular weight 
distribution of HA on GBM cell activity. Here we report the relationship between 
the molecular weight of matrix-bound HA within a methacrylamidefunctionalized 
gelatin (GelMA) hydrogel, the invasive phenotype of a patient-derived xenograft 
GBM population that exhibits significant in vivo invasivity, and the local 
production of soluble HA during GBM cell invasion. Hyaluronic acid of different 
molecular weights spanning a range associated with cell-mediated remodeling (10, 
60, and 500 kDa) was photopolymerized into GelMA hydrogels, with cell activity 
compared to GelMA only conditions (-HA). Polymerization conditions were tuned to 
create a homologous series of GelMA hydrogels with conserved poroelastic 
properties (i.e., shear modulus, Poisson's ratio, and diffusivity). GBM 
migration was strongly influenced by HA molecular weight; while markers 
associated with active remodeling of HA (hyaluronan synthase and hyaluronidase) 
were found to be uninfluenced. These results provide new information regarding 
the importance of local hyaluronic acid content on the invasive phenotype of 
GBM.

DOI: 10.3389/fmats.2018.00039
PMCID: PMC6300158
PMID: 30581816

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors 
declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or 
financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of 
interest.