1. Elife. 2018 Dec 28;7:e37015. doi: 10.7554/eLife.37015.

Panproteome-wide analysis of antibody responses to whole cell pneumococcal 
vaccination.

Campo JJ(1), Le TQ(1), Pablo JV(1), Hung C(1), Teng AA(1), Tettelin H(2), Tate 
A(3), Hanage WP(4), Alderson MR(3), Liang X(1), Malley R(5), Lipsitch M(4)(6), 
Croucher NJ(7).

Author information:
(1)Antigen Discovery Inc, California, United States.
(2)Institute for Genome Sciences, School of Medicine, University of Maryland, 
Baltimore, United States.
(3)PATH, Seattle, United States.
(4)Center for Communicable Disease Dynamics, Department of Epidemiology, Harvard 
TH Chan School of Public Health, Boston, United States.
(5)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Boston Children's 
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, United States.
(6)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard TH Chan School of 
Public Health, Boston, United States.
(7)MRC Centre for Global Infectious Disease Analysis, Department of Infectious 
Disease Epidemiology, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom.

Pneumococcal whole cell vaccines (WCVs) could cost-effectively protect against a 
greater strain diversity than current capsule-based vaccines. Immunoglobulin G 
(IgG) responses to a WCV were characterised by applying longitudinally-sampled 
sera, available from 35 adult placebo-controlled phase I trial participants, to 
a panproteome microarray. Despite individuals maintaining distinctive antibody 
'fingerprints', responses were consistent across vaccinated cohorts. Seventy-two 
functionally distinct proteins were associated with WCV-induced increases in IgG 
binding. These shared characteristics with naturally immunogenic proteins, being 
enriched for transporters and cell wall metabolism enzymes, likely unusually 
exposed on the unencapsulated WCV's surface. Vaccine-induced responses were 
specific to variants of the diverse PclA, PspC and ZmpB proteins, whereas PspA- 
and ZmpA-induced antibodies recognised a broader set of alleles. Temporal 
variation in IgG levels suggested a mixture of anamnestic and novel responses. 
These reproducible increases in IgG binding to a limited, but functionally 
diverse, set of conserved proteins indicate WCV could provide species-wide 
immunity. Clinical trial registration: The trial was registered with 
ClinicalTrials.gov with Identifier NCT01537185; the results are available from 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/results/NCT01537185.

© 2018, Campo et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.37015
PMCID: PMC6344088
PMID: 30592459 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: JC, TL, JP, CH, AT are employees of Antigen 
Discovery, Inc, HT, AT, MA No competing interests declared, WH, NC were 
supported by consulting payments from Antigen Discovery, Inc to work on this 
project, XL is an employee of Antigen Discovery, Inc and has an equity interest 
in Antigen Discovery, Inc, RM has received honoraria or consulting fees from 
Merck and Affinivax, and has received research grants through his institution 
from PATH, the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, and Pfizer, ML Reviewing 
editor, eLife