1. Cells. 2019 Jan 1;8(1):16. doi: 10.3390/cells8010016.

Relevance of Autophagy in Parenchymal and Non-Parenchymal Liver Cells for Health 
and Disease.

Weiskirchen R(1), Tacke F(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Pathobiochemistry, Experimental Gene Therapy and 
Clinical Chemistry, University Hospital RWTH Aachen, D-52074 Aachen, Germany. 
rweiskirchen@ukaachen.de.
(2)Department of Medicine III, University Hospital RWTH Aachen, D-52074 Aachen, 
Germany. frank.tacke@gmx.net.

Autophagy is a highly conserved intracellular process for the ordered 
degradation and recycling of cellular components in lysosomes. In the liver, 
parenchymal cells (i.e., mainly hepatocytes) utilize autophagy to provide amino 
acids, glucose, and free fatty acids as sources of energy and biosynthesis 
functions, but also for recycling and controlling organelles such as 
mitochondria. Non-parenchymal cells of the liver, including endothelial cells, 
macrophages (Kupffer cells), and hepatic stellate cells (HSC), also employ 
autophagy, either for maintaining cellular homeostasis (macrophages, 
endothelium) or for providing energy for their activation (stellate cells). In 
hepatocytes, autophagy contributes to essential homeostatic functions (e.g., 
gluconeogenesis, glycogenolysis, fatty acid oxidation), but is also implicated 
in diseases. For instance, storage disorders (alpha 1 antitrypsin deficiency, 
Wilson's disease), metabolic (non-alcoholic steatohepatitis, NASH), and toxic 
(alcohol) liver diseases may benefit from augmenting autophagy in hepatocytes. 
In hepatic fibrosis, autophagy has been implicated in the fibrogenic activation 
of HSC to collagen-producing myofibroblasts. In hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), 
autophagy may contribute to tumor surveillance as well as invasiveness, 
indicating a dual and stage-dependent function in cancer. As many drugs directly 
or indirectly modulate autophagy, it is intriguing to investigate 
autophagy-targeting, possibly even cell type-directed strategies for the 
treatment of hereditary liver diseases, NASH, fibrosis, and HCC.

DOI: 10.3390/cells8010016
PMCID: PMC6357193
PMID: 30609663 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest 
related to this article. However, work in the laboratory of F.T. has been 
supported by funding from Allergan, Galapagos, Inventiva, and Bristol Myers 
Squibb. The laboratory of R.W. cooperates with Silence Therapeutics. The funders 
or cooperation companies had no role in the design of the study, in the writing 
of the manuscript, or in the decision to publish this review.