1. Front Immunol. 2018 Dec 10;9:2836. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.02836. eCollection 
2018.

β2-Glycoprotein I-Reactive T Cells in Autoimmune Disease.

Rauch J(1), Salem D(1), Subang R(1), Kuwana M(2), Levine JS(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Research Institute of the 
McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(2)Department of Allergy and Rheumatology, Graduate School of Medicine, Nippon 
Medical School, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Section of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, University of Illinois at 
Chicago and Section of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Jesse Brown Veterans 
Affairs Medical Center, Chicago, IL, United States.

Anti-phospholipid syndrome (APS) and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) are 
autoimmune diseases characterized by autoantibody production and 
autoantibody-related pathology. Anti-phospholipid antibodies (aPL) are found in 
all patients with APS and in 20-30% of individuals with SLE. aPL recognize a 
number of autoantigens, but the primary target in both APS and SLE is 
β2-glycoprotein I (β2GPI). The production of IgG aPL in APS and SLE, as well as 
the association of aPL with certain MHC class II molecules, has led to 
investigation of the role of β2GPI-reactive T helper (Th). β2GPI-reactive CD4 Th 
cells have been associated with the presence of aPL and/or APS in both primary 
APS and secondary APS associated with SLE, as well as in SLE patients and 
healthy controls lacking aPL. CD4 T cells reactive with β2GPI have also been 
associated with atherosclerosis and found within atherosclerotic plaques. In 
most cases, the epitopes targeted by autoreactive β2GPI-reactive CD4 T cells in 
APS and SLE appear to arise as a consequence of antigenic processing of β2GPI 
that is structurally different from the soluble native form. This may arise from 
molecular interactions (e.g., with phospholipids), post-translational 
modification (e.g., oxidation or glycation), genetic alteration (e.g., β2GPI 
variants), or molecular mimicry (e.g., microbiota). A number of T cell epitopes 
have been characterized, particularly in Domain V, the lipid-binding domain of 
β2GPI. Possible sources of negatively charged lipid that bind β2GPI include 
oxidized LDL, activated platelets, microbiota (e.g., gut commensals), and dying 
(e.g., apoptotic) cells. Apoptotic cells not only bind β2GPI, but also express 
multiple other cellular autoantigens targeted in both APS and SLE. Dying cells 
that have bound β2GPI thus provide a rich source of autoantigens that can be 
recognized by B cells across a wide range of autoantigen specificities. 
β2GPI-reactive T cells could potentially provide T cell help to 
autoantigen-specific B cells that have taken up and processed apoptotic (or 
other dying) cells, and subsequently present β2GPI on their surface in the 
context of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II molecules. Here, we 
review the literature on β2GPI-reactive T cells, and highlight findings 
supporting the hypothesis that these T cells drive autoantibody production in 
both APS and SLE.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.02836
PMCID: PMC6295551
PMID: 30619248 [Indexed for MEDLINE]