1. mBio. 2019 Jan 8;10(1):e02327-18. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02327-18.

Glycyl Radical Enzyme-Associated Microcompartments: Redox-Replete Bacterial 
Organelles.

Ferlez B(1), Sutter M(1)(2), Kerfeld CA(3)(4)(2).

Author information:
(1)MSU-DOE Plant Research Laboratory, Michigan State University, East Lansing, 
Michigan, USA.
(2)Environmental Genomics and Systems Biology and Molecular Biophysics and 
Integrated Bioimaging Divisions, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 
Berkeley, California, USA.
(3)MSU-DOE Plant Research Laboratory, Michigan State University, East Lansing, 
Michigan, USA ckerfeld@lbl.gov.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing, Michigan, USA.

An increasing number of microbes are being identified that organize catabolic 
pathways within self-assembling proteinaceous structures known as bacterial 
microcompartments (BMCs). Most BMCs are characterized by their singular 
substrate specificity and commonly employ B12-dependent radical mechanisms. In 
contrast, a less-well-known BMC type utilizes the B12-independent radical 
chemistry of glycyl radical enzymes (GREs). Unlike B12-dependent enzymes, GREs 
require an activating enzyme (AE) as well as an external source of electrons to 
generate an adenosyl radical and form their catalytic glycyl radical. Organisms 
encoding these glycyl radical enzyme-associated microcompartments (GRMs) 
confront the challenge of coordinating the activation and maintenance of their 
GREs with the assembly of a multienzyme core that is encapsulated in a protein 
shell. The GRMs appear to enlist redox proteins to either generate reductants 
internally or facilitate the transfer of electrons from the cytosol across the 
shell. Despite this relative complexity, GRMs are one of the most widespread 
types of BMC, with distinct subtypes to catabolize different substrates. 
Moreover, they are encoded by many prominent gut-associated and pathogenic 
bacteria. In this review, we will focus on the diversity, function, and 
physiological importance of GRMs, with particular attention given to their 
associated and enigmatic redox proteins.

Copyright © 2019 Ferlez et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02327-18
PMCID: PMC6325248
PMID: 30622187 [Indexed for MEDLINE]