1. Mol Neurodegener. 2019 Jan 10;14(1):1. doi: 10.1186/s13024-018-0301-5.

Early increase of CSF sTREM2 in Alzheimer's disease is associated with tau 
related-neurodegeneration but not with amyloid-β pathology.

Suárez-Calvet M(1)(2)(3), Morenas-Rodríguez E(4)(5), Kleinberger G(6)(7), 
Schlepckow K(4), Araque Caballero MÁ(8), Franzmeier N(8), Capell A(6), Fellerer 
K(6), Nuscher B(6), Eren E(6)(9)(10), Levin J(4)(11), Deming Y(12), Piccio 
L(13)(14), Karch CM(12)(14)(15), Cruchaga C(12)(14)(15), Shaw LM(16)(17), 
Trojanowski JQ(16)(17), Weiner M(18), Ewers M(8), Haass C(19)(20)(21); 
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Chair of Metabolic Biochemistry, Biomedical Center (BMC), Faculty of 
Medicine, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Munich, Germany. 
msuarez@barcelonabeta.org.
(2)German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE) Munich, Munich, Germany. 
msuarez@barcelonabeta.org.
(3)Barcelonaβeta Brain Research Center (BBRC), Pasqual Maragall Foundation, 
Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain. msuarez@barcelonabeta.org.
(4)German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE) Munich, Munich, Germany.
(5)Department of Neurology, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques, Hospital de 
la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, 
Catalonia, Spain.
(6)Chair of Metabolic Biochemistry, Biomedical Center (BMC), Faculty of 
Medicine, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Munich, Germany.
(7)Munich Cluster for Systems Neurology (SyNergy), Munich, Germany.
(8)Institute for Stroke and Dementia Research, Klinikum der Universität München, 
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Munich, Germany.
(9)Izmir International Biomedicine and Genome Institute Dokuz Eylul University, 
Izmir, Turkey.
(10)Department of Neuroscience, Institute of Health Sciences, Dokuz Eylul 
University, Izmir, Turkey.
(11)Department of Neurology, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Munich, 
Germany.
(12)Department of Psychiatry, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint 
Louis, MO, USA.
(13)Department of Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. 
Louis, MO, USA.
(14)Hope Center for Neurological Disorders, Washington University in St. Louis, 
St. Louis, MO, USA.
(15)Knight Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, Washington University in St. 
Louis, St. Louis, MO, USA.
(16)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(17)Center for Neurodegenerative Disease Research, Institute on Aging, Perelman 
School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(18)University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(19)Chair of Metabolic Biochemistry, Biomedical Center (BMC), Faculty of 
Medicine, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Munich, Germany. 
christian.haass@mail03.med.uni-muenchen.de.
(20)German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE) Munich, Munich, Germany. 
christian.haass@mail03.med.uni-muenchen.de.
(21)Munich Cluster for Systems Neurology (SyNergy), Munich, Germany. 
christian.haass@mail03.med.uni-muenchen.de.

BACKGROUND: TREM2 is a transmembrane receptor that is predominantly expressed by 
microglia in the central nervous system. Rare variants in the TREM2 gene 
increase the risk for late-onset Alzheimer's disease (AD). Soluble TREM2 
(sTREM2) resulting from shedding of the TREM2 ectodomain can be detected in the 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and is a surrogate measure of TREM2-mediated microglia 
function. CSF sTREM2 has been previously reported to increase at different 
clinical stages of AD, however, alterations in relation to Amyloid β-peptide 
(Aβ) deposition or additional pathological processes in the amyloid cascade 
(such as tau pathology or neurodegeneration) remain unclear. In the current 
cross-sectional study, we employed the biomarker-based classification framework 
recently proposed by the NIA-AA consensus guidelines, in combination with 
clinical staging, in order to examine the CSF sTREM2 alterations at early 
asymptomatic and symptomatic stages of AD.
METHODS: A cross-sectional study of 1027 participants of the Alzheimer's Disease 
Imaging Initiative (ADNI) cohort, including 43 subjects carrying TREM2 rare 
genetic variants, was conducted to measure CSF sTREM2 using a previously 
validated enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). ADNI participants were 
classified following the A/T/N framework, which we implemented based on the CSF 
levels of Aβ1-42 (A), phosphorylated tau (T) and total tau as a marker of 
neurodegeneration (N), at different clinical stages defined by the clinical 
dementia rating (CDR) score.
RESULTS: CSF sTREM2 differed between TREM2 variants, whereas the p.R47H variant 
had higher CSF sTREM2, p.L211P had lower CSF sTREM2 than non-carriers. We found 
that CSF sTREM2 increased in early symptomatic stages of late-onset AD but, 
unexpectedly, we observed decreased CSF sTREM2 levels at the earliest 
asymptomatic phase when only abnormal Aβ pathology (A+) but no tau pathology or 
neurodegeneration (TN-), is present.
CONCLUSIONS: Aβ pathology (A) and tau pathology/neurodegeneration (TN) have 
differing associations with CSF sTREM2. While tau-related neurodegeneration is 
associated with an increase in CSF sTREM2, Aβ pathology in the absence of 
downstream tau-related neurodegeneration is associated with a decrease in CSF 
sTREM2.

DOI: 10.1186/s13024-018-0301-5
PMCID: PMC6327425
PMID: 30630532 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: The 
study was approved by the Ludwig-Maximilians Universität München institutional 
review board (IRB), as well as the IRB of all participating centers in ADNI. 
CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: CH collaborates 
with DENALI Therapeutics and received speakers honoraria from Novartis and 
Roche. KS collaborates with DENALI. JL reports to receive consulting fees from 
Aesku, Axon Neuroscience and Ionis Pharmaceuticals, speakers’ fees from Bayer 
Vital and the Willi Gross and non-financial support from Abbvie, outside the 
submitted work. CC receives research support from Biogen, EISAI, Alector and 
Parabon, and is a member of the advisory board of ADx Healthcare. The funders of 
the study had no role in the collection, analysis, or interpretation of data; in 
the writing of the report; or in the decision to submit the paper for 
publication. The remaining authors declare that they have no competing of 
interest. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.