1. Neuroimage. 2019 Apr 1;189:180-191. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.01.007.
Epub  2019 Jan 7.

Amyloid-beta induced retrograde axonal degeneration in a mouse tauopathy model.

Nishioka C(1), Liang HF(2), Barsamian B(1), Sun SW(3).

Author information:
(1)Basic Sciences, School of Medicine, Loma Linda University, CA, USA; 
Neuroscience Graduate Program, University of California, Riverside, USA.
(2)Basic Sciences, School of Medicine, Loma Linda University, CA, USA.
(3)Basic Sciences, School of Medicine, Loma Linda University, CA, USA; 
Neuroscience Graduate Program, University of California, Riverside, USA; 
Pharmaceutical Science, School of Pharmacy, Loma Linda University, CA, USA. 
Electronic address: rsun@llu.edu.

White matter abnormalities, revealed by Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI), are 
observed in patients with Alzheimer's Disease (AD), representing neural network 
deficits that underlie gradual cognitive decline in patients. However, how DTI 
changes related to the development of Amyloid beta (Aβ) and tau pathology, two 
key hallmarks of AD, remain elusive. We hypothesized that tauopathy induced by 
Aβ could initiate an axonal degeneration, leading to DTI-detectable white matter 
abnormalities. We utilized the visual system of the transgenic p301L tau mice as 
a model system. Aβ was injected in Lateral Geniculate Nucleus (LGN), where the 
Retinal Ganglion Cell (RGC) axons terminate. Longitudinal DTI was conducted to 
detect changes in the optic tract (OT) and optic nerve (ON), containing the 
distal and proximal segments of RGC axons, respectively. Our results showed DTI 
changes in OT (significant 13.2% reduction in axial diffusion, AxD vs. vehicle 
controls) followed by significant alterations in ON AxD and fractional 
anisotropy, FA. Histology data revealed loss of synapses, RGC axons and cell 
bodies resulting from the Aβ injection. We further tested whether 
microtubule-stabilizing compound Epothilone D (EpoD) could ameliorate the 
damage. EpoD co-treatment with Aβ was sufficient to prevent Aβ-induced axon and 
cell loss. Using an acute injection paradigm, our data suggest that EpoD may 
mediate its protective effect by blocking localized, acute Aβ-induced tau 
phosphorylation. This study demonstrates white matter disruption resulting from 
localized Aβ, the importance of tau pathology induction to changes in white 
matter connectivity, and the use of EpoD as a potential therapeutic avenue to 
prevent the axon loss in AD.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.01.007
PMCID: PMC6422724
PMID: 30630081 [Indexed for MEDLINE]