1. Mol Metab. 2019 Mar;21:1-12. doi: 10.1016/j.molmet.2018.12.007. Epub 2018 Dec 
24.

Friend and foe: β-cell Ca(2+) signaling and the development of diabetes.

Sabatini PV(1), Speckmann T(2), Lynn FC(3).

Author information:
(1)Diabetes Research Group, BC Children's Hospital Research Institute, 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada; Department of Surgery, University of 
British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada; Department of Cellular 
and Physiological Sciences, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British 
Columbia, Canada; Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, MI, USA.
(2)Diabetes Research Group, BC Children's Hospital Research Institute, 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada; Department of Surgery, University of 
British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada; Department of Cellular 
and Physiological Sciences, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British 
Columbia, Canada.
(3)Diabetes Research Group, BC Children's Hospital Research Institute, 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada; Department of Surgery, University of 
British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada; Department of Cellular 
and Physiological Sciences, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British 
Columbia, Canada. Electronic address: francis.lynn@ubc.ca.

BACKGROUND: The divalent cation Calcium (Ca2+) regulates a wide range of 
processes in disparate cell types. Within insulin-producing β-cells, increases 
in cytosolic Ca2+ directly stimulate insulin vesicle exocytosis, but also 
initiate multiple signaling pathways. Mediated through activation of downstream 
kinases and transcription factors, Ca2+-regulated signaling pathways leverage 
substantial influence on a number of critical cellular processes within the 
β-cell. Additionally, there is evidence that prolonged activation of these same 
pathways is detrimental to β-cell health and may contribute to Type 2 Diabetes 
pathogenesis.
SCOPE OF REVIEW: This review aims to briefly highlight canonical Ca2+ signaling 
pathways in β-cells and how β-cells regulate the movement of Ca2+ across 
numerous organelles and microdomains. As a main focus, this review synthesizes 
experimental data from in vitro and in vivo models on both the beneficial and 
detrimental effects of Ca2+ signaling pathways for β-cell function and health.
MAJOR CONCLUSIONS: Acute increases in intracellular Ca2+ stimulate a number of 
signaling cascades, resulting in (de-)phosphorylation events and activation of 
downstream transcription factors. The short-term stimulation of these Ca2+ 
signaling pathways promotes numerous cellular processes critical to β-cell 
function, including increased viability, replication, and insulin production and 
secretion. Conversely, chronic stimulation of Ca2+ signaling pathways increases 
β-cell ER stress and results in the loss of β-cell differentiation status. 
Together, decades of study demonstrate that Ca2+ movement is tightly regulated 
within the β-cell, which is at least partially due to its dual roles as a potent 
signaling molecule.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier GmbH.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molmet.2018.12.007
PMCID: PMC6407368
PMID: 30630689 [Indexed for MEDLINE]