1. J Thromb Haemost. 2019 Mar;17(3):470-481. doi: 10.1111/jth.14384. Epub 2019
Feb  13.

Sirtilins - the new old members of the vitamin K-dependent coagulation factor 
family.

Dahms SO(1), Demir F(2), Huesgen PF(2), Thorn K(3), Brandstetter H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biosciences, University of Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria.
(2)ZEA-3 Analytics, Central Institute for Engineering, Electronics and 
Analytics, Forschungszentrum Jülich, Jülich, Germany.
(3)Haemophilia Research, Novo Nordisk A/S, Måløv, Denmark.

Essentials Blood coagulation is driven by vitamin K (VK)-dependent proteases. We 
have identified and characterized 'sirtilin' as an additional VK-dependent 
protease. Sirtilins emerged early in the evolution of the coagulation system of 
vertebrates. Ubiquitous occurrence might indicate an important functional role 
of sirtilins. SUMMARY: Background Vitamin K (VK)-dependent proteases are major 
players in blood coagulation, including both the initiation and the regulation 
of the cascade. Five different members of this protease family have been 
described, comprising the following coagulation factors: factor VII, FIX, FX, 
protein C (PC), and prothrombin (FII). FVII, FIX, FX and PC share a typical 
domain architecture, with an N-terminal γ-carboxyglutamate (Gla) domain, two 
epidermal growth factor-like (EGF) domains, and a C-terminal trypsin-like serine 
protease (SP) domain. Objectives We have identified uncharacterized proteins in 
snake genomes showing the typical Gla-EGF1-EGF2-SP domain architecture but 
relatively low sequence conservation compared to known VK-dependent proteases. 
On the basis of sequence analysis, we hypothesized that these proteins are 
functional members of the VK-dependent protease family. Methods/results Using 
phylogenetic analyses, we confirmed the so-called 'sirtilins' as an additional 
VK-dependent protease class. These proteases were found in several vertebrates, 
including jawless fish, cartilaginous fish, bony fish, reptiles, birds, and 
marsupials, but not in other mammals. The recombinant zymogen form of Thamnophis 
sirtalis sirtilin was produced by in vitro renaturation, and was activated with 
human activated FXI. The activated form of sirtilin proteolytically cleaved 
peptide and protein substrates, including prothrombin. Mass spectrometry-based 
substrate profiling of sirtilin revealed a narrower sequence specificity than 
those of FIX and FX. Conclusions The ubiquitous occurrence of sirtilins in many 
vertebrate classes might indicate an important functional role. Understanding 
the detailed functions of sirtilins might contribute to a deeper understanding 
of the evolution and function of the vertebrate coagulation system.

© 2019 The Authors. Journal of Thrombosis and Haemostasis published by Wiley 
Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of International Society on Thrombosis and 
Haemostasis.

DOI: 10.1111/jth.14384
PMCID: PMC6850207
PMID: 30644641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: S. O. Dahms and H. Brandstetter received funding 
from Novo Nordisk. K. Thorn is an employee of Novo Nordisk. The other authors 
state that they have no conflict of interest.