1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2019 Jan 14;15(1):e1006734. doi:
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006734.  eCollection 2019 Jan.

PAIRUP-MS: Pathway analysis and imputation to relate unknowns in profiles from 
mass spectrometry-based metabolite data.

Hsu YH(1)(2)(3), Churchhouse C(4)(5), Pers TH(6)(7), Mercader JM(3)(8), Metspalu 
A(9), Fischer K(9)(10), Fortney K(11), Morgen EK(11), Gonzalez C(12)(13), 
Gonzalez ME(12)(13), Esko T(3)(9), Hirschhorn JN(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United 
States of America.
(2)Division of Endocrinology and Center for Basic and Translational Obesity 
Research, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of 
America.
(3)Programs in Metabolism and Medical & Population Genetics, Broad Institute of 
Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(4)Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(5)Analytical and Translational Genomics Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(6)Novo Nordisk Foundation Centre for Basic Metabolic Research, University of 
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(7)Department of Epidemiology Research, Statens Serum Institut, Copenhagen, 
Denmark.
(8)Diabetes Unit and Center for Genomic Medicine, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(9)Estonian Genome Center, Institute of Genomics, University of Tartu, Tartu, 
Estonia.
(10)Institute of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Tartu, Tartu, 
Estonia.
(11)BioAge Labs, Richmond, CA, United States of America.
(12)Instituto Nacional de Salud Publica, Cuernavaca, Morelos, Mexico.
(13)Centro de Estudios en Diabetes, Mexico City, Mexico.

Metabolomics is a powerful approach for discovering biomarkers and for 
characterizing the biochemical consequences of genetic variation. While 
untargeted metabolite profiling can measure thousands of signals in a single 
experiment, many biologically meaningful signals cannot be readily identified as 
known metabolites nor compared across datasets, making it difficult to infer 
biology and to conduct well-powered meta-analyses across studies. To overcome 
these challenges, we developed a suite of computational methods, PAIRUP-MS, to 
match metabolite signals across mass spectrometry-based profiling datasets and 
to generate metabolic pathway annotations for these signals. To pair up signals 
measured in different datasets, where retention times (RT) are often not 
comparable or even available, we implemented an imputation-based approach that 
only requires mass-to-charge ratios (m/z). As validation, we treated each shared 
known metabolite as an unmatched signal and showed that PAIRUP-MS correctly 
matched 70-88% of these metabolites from among thousands of signals, equaling or 
outperforming a standard m/z- and RT-based approach. We performed further 
validation using genetic data: the most stringent set of matched signals and 
shared knowns showed comparable consistency of genetic associations across 
datasets. Next, we developed a pathway reconstitution method to annotate unknown 
signals using curated metabolic pathways containing known metabolites. We 
performed genetic validation for the generated annotations, showing that 
annotated signals associated with gene variants were more likely to be enriched 
for pathways functionally related to the genes compared to random expectation. 
Finally, we applied PAIRUP-MS to study associations between metabolites and 
genetic variants or body mass index (BMI) across multiple datasets, identifying 
up to ~6 times more significant signals and many more BMI-associated pathways 
compared to the standard practice of only analyzing known metabolites. These 
results demonstrate that PAIRUP-MS enables analysis of unknown signals in a 
robust, biologically meaningful manner and provides a path to more 
comprehensive, well-powered studies of untargeted metabolomics data.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006734
PMCID: PMC6347288
PMID: 30640898 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: I have read the journal's policy and the authors 
of this manuscript have the following competing interests: K.Fortney and E.K.M. 
are affiliated with BioAge Labs, Inc.; J.N.H. serves on the Scientific Advisory 
Board of Camp4 Therapeutics.