1. Mol Neurodegener. 2019 Jan 22;14(1):7. doi: 10.1186/s13024-019-0307-7.

Reduced presynaptic vesicle stores mediate cellular and network plasticity 
defects in an early-stage mouse model of Alzheimer's disease.

Chakroborty S(1), Hill ES(2), Christian DT(1), Helfrich R(1), Riley S(1), 
Schneider C(1), Kapecki N(1), Mustaly-Kalimi S(1), Seiler FA(3), Peterson DA(1), 
West AR(1), Vertel BM(2)(3), Frost WN(2), Stutzmann GE(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, The Chicago Medical School; The Center for 
Neurodegenerative Disease and Therapeutics, Rosalind Franklin University of 
Medicine and Science, 3333 Green Bay Rd, North Chicago, IL, 60064, USA.
(2)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, The Chicago Medical School; Center 
for Brain Function and Repair, Rosalind Franklin University of Medicine and 
Science, 3333 Green Bay Rd, North Chicago, IL, 60064, USA.
(3)Electron Microscopy Center, RFUMS, North Chicago, IL, 60064, USA.
(4)Department of Neuroscience, The Chicago Medical School; The Center for 
Neurodegenerative Disease and Therapeutics, Rosalind Franklin University of 
Medicine and Science, 3333 Green Bay Rd, North Chicago, IL, 60064, USA. 
grace.stutzmann@rosalindfranklin.edu.

BACKGROUND: Identifying effective strategies to prevent memory loss in AD has 
eluded researchers to date, and likely reflects insufficient understanding of 
early pathogenic mechanisms directly affecting memory encoding. As synaptic loss 
best correlates with memory loss in AD, refocusing efforts to identify factors 
driving synaptic impairments may provide the critical insight needed to advance 
the field. In this study, we reveal a previously undescribed cascade of events 
underlying pre and postsynaptic hippocampal signaling deficits linked to 
cognitive decline in AD. These profound alterations in synaptic plasticity, 
intracellular Ca2+ signaling, and network propagation are observed in 3-4 month 
old 3xTg-AD mice, an age which does not yet show overt histopathology or major 
behavioral deficits.
METHODS: In this study, we examined hippocampal synaptic structure and function 
from the ultrastructural level to the network level using a range of techniques 
including electron microscopy (EM), patch clamp and field potential 
electrophysiology, synaptic immunolabeling, spine morphology analyses, 2-photon 
Ca2+ imaging, and voltage-sensitive dye-based imaging of hippocampal network 
function in 3-4 month old 3xTg-AD and age/background strain control mice.
RESULTS: In 3xTg-AD mice, short-term plasticity at the CA1-CA3 Schaffer 
collateral synapse is profoundly impaired; this has broader implications for 
setting long-term plasticity thresholds. Alterations in spontaneous vesicle 
release and paired-pulse facilitation implicated presynaptic signaling 
abnormalities, and EM analysis revealed a reduction in the ready-releasable and 
reserve pools of presynaptic vesicles in CA3 terminals; this is an entirely new 
finding in the field. Concurrently, increased synaptically-evoked Ca2+ in CA1 
spines triggered by LTP-inducing tetani is further enhanced during PTP and E-LTP 
epochs, and is accompanied by impaired synaptic structure and spine morphology. 
Notably, vesicle stores, synaptic structure and short-term plasticity are 
restored by normalizing intracellular Ca2+ signaling in the AD mice.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest the Ca2+ dyshomeostasis within synaptic 
compartments has an early and fundamental role in driving synaptic 
pathophysiology in early stages of AD, and may thus reflect a foundational 
disease feature driving later cognitive impairment. The overall significance is 
the identification of previously unidentified defects in pre and postsynaptic 
compartments affecting synaptic vesicle stores, synaptic plasticity, and network 
propagation, which directly impact memory encoding.

DOI: 10.1186/s13024-019-0307-7
PMCID: PMC6343260
PMID: 30670054 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: The 
authors declare that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: 
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.