1. Front Neurosci. 2019 Jan 9;12:1034. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2018.01034. eCollection
 2018.

Analysis of α-Synuclein Pathology in PINK1 Knockout Rat Brains.

Creed RB(1), Goldberg MS(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Neurodegeneration and Experimental Therapeutics, Department of 
Neurology, The University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, United 
States.
(2)Department of Neurobiology, The University of Alabama at Birmingham, 
Birmingham, AL, United States.

Mutations in PTEN induced kinase 1 (PINK1) cause autosomal recessive Parkinson's 
disease (PD). The main pathological hallmarks of PD are loss of dopaminergic 
neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta and the formation of protein 
aggregates containing α-synuclein. Previous studies of PINK1 knockout (PINK1-/-) 
rats have reported mitochondrial dysfunction, locomotor behavioral deficits, 
loss of neurons in the substantia nigra and α-synuclein aggregates in various 
brain regions. We sought to characterize PINK1-/- rats in more detail 
specifically with respect to α-synuclein pathology because abnormal α-synuclein 
has been implicated genetically, biophysically and neuropathologically as a 
mechanism of PD pathogenesis. Moreover, the spontaneous formation of α-synuclein 
aggregates without α-synuclein overexpression, injection or toxin administration 
is a rare and important characteristic for an animal model of PD or other 
synucleinopathies, such as dementia with Lewy bodies and multiple system 
atrophy. We observed α-synuclein-immunoreactive aggregates in various brain 
regions of PINK1-/- rats including cortex, thalamus, striatum and ventral 
midbrain, but nowhere in wild-type (WT) rats. Co-immunofluorescence showed that 
the α-synuclein-immunoreactive aggregates are both thioflavin S and ubiquitin 
positive. Many cells in the brains of PINK1-/- rats but not WT rats contained 
protease-resistant α-synuclein. Total synuclein protein levels were unchanged; 
however, biochemical fractionation showed a significant shift of α-synuclein 
from the cytosolic fraction to the synaptic vesicle-enriched fraction of 
PINK1-/- brain homogenates compared to WT. This data indicates that PINK1 
deficiency results in abnormal α-synuclein localization, protease resistance and 
aggregation in vivo. The PINK1-/- rat could be a useful animal model to study 
the role of abnormal α-synuclein in PD-related neurodegeneration.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2018.01034
PMCID: PMC6333903
PMID: 30686993