1. BMC Vet Res. 2019 Feb 4;15(1):50. doi: 10.1186/s12917-019-1794-z.

Prion protein polymorphisms associated with reduced CWD susceptibility limit 
peripheral PrP(CWD) deposition in orally infected white-tailed deer.

Otero A(1), Duque Velásquez C(2)(3), Johnson C(4), Herbst A(5)(3), Bolea R(1), 
Badiola JJ(1), Aiken J(5)(3), McKenzie D(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Centro de Encefalopatías y Enfermedades Transmisibles Emergentes, IA2, IIS, 
Universidad de Zaragoza, Zaragoza, Spain.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, 
Canada.
(3)Centre for Prions and Protein Folding Diseases, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(4)Department of Medicine, School of Medicine and Public Health, University of 
Wisconsin, Madison, USA.
(5)Department of Agricultural, Food and Nutritional Sciences, University of 
Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(6)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, 
Canada. debbie.mckenzie@ualberta.ca.
(7)Centre for Prions and Protein Folding Diseases, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. 
debbie.mckenzie@ualberta.ca.

BACKGROUND: Chronic wasting disease (CWD) is a prion disease affecting members 
of the Cervidae family. PrPC primary structures play a key role in CWD 
susceptibility resulting in extended incubation periods and regulating the 
propagation of CWD strains. We analyzed the distribution of abnormal prion 
protein (PrPCWD) aggregates in brain and peripheral organs from orally 
inoculated white-tailed deer expressing four different PRNP genotypes: 
Q95G96/Q95G96 (wt/wt), S96/wt, H95/wt and H95/S96 to determine if there are 
substantial differences in the deposition pattern of PrPCWD between different 
PRNP genotypes.
RESULTS: Although we detected differences in certain brain areas, globally, the 
different genotypes showed similar PrPCWD deposition patterns in the brain. 
However, we found that clinically affected deer expressing H95 PrPC, despite 
having the longest survival periods, presented less PrPCWD immunoreactivity in 
particular peripheral organs. In addition, no PrPCWD was detected in skeletal 
muscle of any of the deer.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that expression of H95-PrPC limits peripheral 
accumulation of PrPCWD as detected by immunohistochemistry. Conversely, infected 
S96/wt and wt/wt deer presented with similar PrPCWD peripheral distribution at 
terminal stage of disease, suggesting that the S96-PrPC allele, although 
delaying CWD progression, does not completely limit the peripheral accumulation 
of the infectious agent.

DOI: 10.1186/s12917-019-1794-z
PMCID: PMC6360794
PMID: 30717795 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: 
Experiments involving deer sampled in the present study were conducted in strict 
accordance with the recommendations in the Guide for the Care and Use of 
Laboratory Animals of the National Institutes of Health. The protocol was 
approved by the School of Veterinary Medicine Animal Care and Use Committee at 
the University of Wisconsin (Permit Number: V910). Details of CWD oral challenge 
have been previously published [18]. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not Applicable. 
COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no competing interests. 
PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.