1. J Immunol Res. 2019 Jan 6;2019:8567364. doi: 10.1155/2019/8567364. eCollection
 2019.

Microbial Agents as Putative Inducers of B Cell Lymphoma in Sjögren's Syndrome 
through an Impaired Epigenetic Control: The State-of-The-Art.

Talotta R(1), Sarzi-Puttini P(2), Atzeni F(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Milan, 
Milan, Italy.
(2)Department of Rheumatology, University Hospital ASST Fatebenefratelli Sacco, 
Milan, Italy.
(3)Rheumatology Unit, University of Messina, Messina, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Understanding the mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis of 
Sjögren's syndrome (SS) is crucially important in order to be able to 
discriminate the steps that lead to B cell transformation and promptly identify 
the patients at risk of lymphomagenesis. The aim of this narrative review is to 
describe the evidence concerning the role that infections or dysbiosis plays in 
the epigenetic control of gene expression in SS patients and their possible 
involvement in B cell lymphomagenesis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We searched the PubMed and Google Scholar databases and 
selected a total of 92 articles published during the last 25 years that describe 
experimental and clinical studies of the potential associations of microbiota 
and epigenetic aberrations with the risk of B cell lymphoma in SS patients.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: The genetic background of SS patients is characterized 
by the hyperexpression of genes that are mainly involved in regulating the 
innate and adaptive immune responses and oncogenesis. In addition, salivary 
gland epithelial cells and lymphocytes both have an altered epigenetic 
background that enhances the activation of proinflammatory and survival 
pathways. Dysbiosis or chronic latent infections may tune the immune response 
and modify the cell epigenetic machinery in such a way as to give B lymphocytes 
an activated or transformed phenotype. It is also worth noting that transposable 
integrated retroelements may participate in the pathogenesis of SS and B cell 
lymphomagenesis by inducing DNA breaks, modulating cell gene expression, or 
generating aberrant transcripts that chronically stimulate the immune system.
CONCLUSIONS: Microorganisms may epigenetically modify target cells and induce 
their transcriptome to generate an activated or transformed phenotype. The 
occurrence of lymphoma in more than 15% of SS patients may be the end result of 
a combination of genetics, epigenetics, and dysbiosis or latent infections.

DOI: 10.1155/2019/8567364
PMCID: PMC6339763
PMID: 30723750 [Indexed for MEDLINE]