1. JCO Precis Oncol. 2018;2018:PO.18.00060. doi: 10.1200/PO.18.00060. Epub 2018
Aug  16.

Evolving Intersection Between Inherited Cancer Genetics and Therapeutic Clinical 
Trials in Prostate Cancer: A White Paper From the Germline Genetics Working 
Group of the Prostate Cancer Clinical Trials Consortium.

Carlo MI(1), Giri VN(2), Paller CJ(3), Abida W(1), Alumkal JJ(4), Beer TM(4), 
Beltran H(5), George DJ(6), Heath EI(7), Higano CS(8), McKay RR(9), Morgans 
AK(10), Patnaik A(11), Ryan CJ(12), Schaeffer EM(10), Stadler WM(11), Taplin 
ME(13), Kauff ND(6), Vinson J(14), Antonarakis ES(3), Cheng HH(8).

Author information:
(1)Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY.
(2)Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center at Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA.
(3)Johns Hopkins Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Baltimore, MD.
(4)Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR.
(5)Weill Cornell Medical Center, New York, NY.
(6)Duke University, Durham, NC.
(7)Wayne State University, Detroit, MI.
(8)University of Washington and Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, 
WA.
(9)University of California San Diego, San Diego.
(10)Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL.
(11)University of Chicago, Chicago, IL.
(12)University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA.
(13)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA.
(14)Prostate Cancer Clinical Trials Consortium, New York, NY.

PURPOSE: Advances in germline genetics, and related therapeutic opportunities, 
present new opportunities and challenges in prostate cancer. The Prostate Cancer 
Clinical Trials Consortium Germline Genetics Working Group was established to 
address genetic testing for men with prostate cancer, especially those with 
advanced disease undergoing testing for treatment-related objectives and 
clinical trials.
METHODS: The Prostate Cancer Clinical Trials Consortium Germline Genetics 
Working Group met monthly to discuss the current state of genetic testing of men 
with prostate cancer for therapeutic or clinical trial purposes. We assessed 
current institutional practices, developed a framework to address unique 
challenges in this population, and identified areas of future research.
RESULTS: Genetic testing practices in men with prostate cancer vary across 
institutions; however, there were several areas of agreement. The group 
recognized the clinical benefits of expanding germline genetic testing, beyond 
cancer risk assessment, for the goal of treatment selection or clinical trial 
eligibility determination. Genetic testing for treatment selection should ensure 
patients receive appropriate pretest education and consent and occur under 
auspices of a research study whenever feasible. Providers offering genetic 
testing should be able to interpret results and recommend post-test genetic 
counseling for patients. When performing tumor (somatic) genomic profiling, 
providers should discuss the potential for uncovering germline mutations and 
recommend appropriate genetic counseling. In addition, family members may 
benefit from cascade testing and early cancer screening and prevention 
strategies.
CONCLUSION: As germline genetic testing is incorporated into practice, further 
development is needed in establishing prompt testing for time-sensitive 
treatment decisions, integrating cascade testing for family, ensuring equitable 
access to testing, and elucidating the role of less-characterized germline DNA 
damage repair genes, individual gene-level biologic consequences, and treatment 
response prediction in advanced disease.

DOI: 10.1200/PO.18.00060
PMCID: PMC6370313
PMID: 30761386

Conflict of interest statement: AUTHORS’ DISCLOSURES OF POTENTIAL CONFLICTS OF 
INTEREST The following represents disclosure information provided by authors of 
this manuscript. All relationships are considered compensated. Relationships are 
self-held unless noted. I = Immediate Family Member, Inst = My Institution. 
Relationships may not relate to the subject matter of this manuscript. For more 
information about ASCO’s conflict of interest policy, please refer to 
www.asco.org/rwc or ascopubs.org/po/author-center.