1. Cereb Cortex. 2019 Apr 1;29(4):1834-1850. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhz016.

Aberrant Excitatory-Inhibitory Synaptic Mechanisms in Entorhinal Cortex 
Microcircuits During the Pathogenesis of Alzheimer's Disease.

Petrache AL(1), Rajulawalla A(1), Shi A(1), Wetzel A(1), Saito T(2), Saido 
TC(2), Harvey K(1), Ali AB(1).

Author information:
(1)UCL School of Pharmacy, University College London, London, UK.
(2)RIKEN Center for Brain Science, Wako-shi, Saitama, Japan.

Synaptic dysfunction is widely proposed as an initial insult leading to the 
neurodegeneration observed in Alzheimer's disease (AD). We hypothesize that the 
initial insult originates in the lateral entorhinal cortex (LEC) due to deficits 
in key interneuronal functions and synaptic signaling mechanisms, in particular, 
Wnt (Wingless/integrated). To investigate this hypothesis, we utilized the first 
knock-in mouse model of AD (AppNL-F/NL-F), expressing a mutant form of human 
amyloid-β (Aβ) precursor protein. This model shows an age-dependent accumulation 
of Aβ, neuroinflammation, and neurodegeneration. Prior to the typical AD 
pathology, we showed a decrease in canonical Wnt signaling activity first 
affecting the LEC in combination with synaptic hyperexcitation and severely 
disrupted excitatory-inhibitory inputs onto principal cells. This synaptic 
imbalance was consistent with a reduction in the number of 
parvalbumin-containing (PV) interneurons, and a reduction in the somatic 
inhibitory axon terminals in the LEC compared with other cortical regions. 
However, targeting GABAA receptors on PV cells using allosteric modulators, 
diazepam, zolpidem, or a nonbenzodiazepine, L-838,417 (modulator of α2/3 
subunit-containing GABAA receptors), restored the excitatory-inhibitory 
imbalance observed at principal cells in the LEC. These data support our 
hypothesis, providing a rationale for targeting the synaptic imbalance in the 
LEC for early stage therapeutic intervention to prevent neurodegeneration in AD.

© The Author 2019. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/cercor/bhz016
PMCID: PMC6418384
PMID: 30766992 [Indexed for MEDLINE]