1. World J Gastroenterol. 2019 Feb 7;25(5):539-551. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v25.i5.539.

Contribution of ghrelin to functional gastrointestinal disorders' pathogenesis.

Koutouratsas T(1), Kalli T(2), Karamanolis G(3), Gazouli M(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Basic Medical Science, Laboratory of Biology, School of 
Medicine, University of Athens, Athens 11527, Greece.
(2)Gastroenterology Department, Larnaca General Hospital, Larnaca 6301, Cyprus.
(3)Gastroenterology Unit, 2 Department of Surgery, "Aretaieio" University 
Hospital, School of Medicine, University of Athens, Athens 11527, Greece.
(4)Department of Basic Medical Science, Laboratory of Biology, School of 
Medicine, University of Athens, Athens 11527, Greece. mgazouli@med.uoa.gr.

Functional gastrointestinal disorders (FGID) are heterogeneous disorders with a 
variety of clinical manifestations, primarily defined by signs and symptoms 
rather than a definite underlying cause. Their pathophysiology remains obscure 
and, although it is expected to differ according to the specific FGID, 
disruptions in the brain-gut axis are now thought to be a common denominator in 
their pathogenesis. The hormone ghrelin is an important component of this axis, 
exerting a wide repertoire of physiological actions, including regulation of 
gastrointestinal motility and protection of mucosal tissue. Ghrelin's gene shows 
genetic polymorphism, while its protein product undergoes complex regulation and 
metabolism in the human body. Numerous studies have studied ghrelin's relation 
to the emergence of FGIDs, its potential value as an index of disease severity 
and as a predictive marker for symptom relief during attempted treatment. 
Despite the mixed results currently available in scientific literature, the 
plethora of statistically significant findings shows that disruptions in ghrelin 
genetics and expression are plausibly related to FGID pathogenesis. The aim of 
this paper is to review current literature studying these associations, in an 
effort to uncover certain patterns of alterations in both genetics and 
expression, which could delineate its true contribution to FGID emergence, 
either as a causative agent or as a pathogenetic intermediate.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v25.i5.539
PMCID: PMC6371003
PMID: 30774270 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: No conflicts of 
interest.