1. Infect Drug Resist. 2019 Jan 29;12:297-309. doi: 10.2147/IDR.S186651. 
eCollection 2019.

Platelet-rich plasma plays an antibacterial, anti-inflammatory and cell 
proliferation-promoting role in an in vitro model for diabetic infected wounds.

Li T(1), Ma Y(2), Wang M(1), Wang T(3), Wei J(4), Ren R(1), He M(1), Wang G(2), 
Boey J(5), Armstrong DG(6), Deng W(2), Chen B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Southwest Hospital, Army Medical University, 
Chongqing, People's Republic of China, chenbing3@medmail.com.cn.
(2)Department of Endocrinology and Nephrology, Key Laboratory for Biorheological 
Science and Technology of Ministry of Education, Chongqing University, 
Affiliated Central Hospital of Chongqing University, Chongqing, People's 
Republic of China, wuquandeng@gmail.com.
(3)Institute of Combined Injury, State Key Laboratory of Trauma, Burn and 
Combined Injury, Army Medical University, Chongqing, People's Republic of China.
(4)Department of Endocrinology, General Hospital of Xinjiang Military Region, 
The Chinese People's Liberation Army, Urumqi, People's Republic of China.
(5)Department of Podiatry, Singapore General Hospital, Singapore.
(6)Southwestern Academic Limb Salvage Alliance (SALSA), Department of Surgery, 
Keck School of Medicine of the University of Southern California, Los Angeles, 
CA, USA.

AIM: This study was designed to examine the potential mechanism underlying these 
roles of platelet-rich plasma in treating diabetic foot ulcers (DFUs).
METHODS: Staphylococcus aureus and HaCaT were co-cultured under high glucose 
conditions to serve as an in vitro model for infected cells in DFUs. 
Platelet-rich gel (PRG) or extract liquid of platelet-rich gel (EPG) were used 
to interfere with the model to observe the growth of HaCaT cells and S. aureus, 
and the effect of miR-21 changes in HaCaT cells on PDCD4, NF-κB activity and 
related inflammatory factors.
RESULTS: Incubation of HaCaT cells with S. aureus promoted the decline of cell 
proliferation. Under this condition, the level of PDCD4 and the activity of 
NF-κB were increased in HaCaT cells with concomitant increased of IL-6, TNF-α 
and decreased IL-10, TGF-β1 in cultured supernatant. Both of PRG and EPG 
exhibited specific anti-S. aureus activity where they protect HaCaT cells from 
bacterial damage and promote cell proliferation. Meanwhile, EPG was observed to 
increase intracellular miRNA-21 while reduce PDCD4 expression and inhibit NF-κB 
activity to suppress the inflammation in HaCaT cells.
CONCLUSION: This in vitro model provides a valuable tool for study of wound 
healing in the treatment of DFUs. Our results suggest that miRNA-21 may regulate 
the expression of NF-κB through PDCD4 where it plays an anti-inflammatory role 
and promote proliferation in infected DFUs treated by PRP. These findings could 
provide novel therapeutic targets for refractory wounds.

DOI: 10.2147/IDR.S186651
PMCID: PMC6357877
PMID: 30774397

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of 
interest in this work.