1. Arthritis Res Ther. 2019 Feb 18;21(1):62. doi: 10.1186/s13075-019-1836-8.

Two subgroups in systemic lupus erythematosus with features of antiphospholipid 
or Sjögren's syndrome differ in molecular signatures and treatment perspectives.

Idborg H(1), Zandian A(2), Sandberg AS(3), Nilsson B(4), Elvin K(5), Truedsson 
L(6), Sohrabian A(4), Rönnelid J(4), Mo J(7), Grosso G(1), Kvarnström M(1), 
Gunnarsson I(1), Lehtiö J(3), Nilsson P(2), Svenungsson E(8), Jakobsson PJ(9).

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine Solna, Karolinska 
Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital, 171 76, Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Division of Affinity Proteomics, SciLifeLab, Department of Protein Science, 
KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Clinical Proteomics Mass Spectrometry, Department of Oncology-Pathology, 
Science for Life Laboratory and Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, 
Uppsala, Sweden.
(5)Unit of Clinical Immunology, Department of Clinical Immunology and 
Transfusion Medicine, Karolinska University Hospital, Karolinska Institutet, 
Solna, Stockholm, Sweden.
(6)Section of Microbiology, Immunology and Glycobiology, Department of 
Laboratory Medicine, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
(7)Patient Safety Respiratory, Inflammation, Autoimmunity, Infection and 
Vaccines, AstraZeneca R&D, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(8)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine Solna, Karolinska 
Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital, 171 76, Stockholm, Sweden. 
elisabet.svenungsson@ki.se.
(9)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine Solna, Karolinska 
Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital, 171 76, Stockholm, Sweden. 
per-johan.jakobsson@ki.se.

BACKGROUND: Previous studies and own clinical observations of patients with 
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) suggest that SLE harbors distinct 
immunophenotypes. This heterogeneity might result in differences in response to 
treatment in different subgroups and obstruct clinical trials. Our aim was to 
understand how SLE subgroups may differ regarding underlying pathophysiology and 
characteristic biomarkers.
METHODS: In a cross-sectional study, including 378 well-characterized SLE 
patients and 316 individually matched population controls, we defined subgroups 
based on the patients' autoantibody profile at inclusion. We selected a core of 
an antiphospholipid syndrome-like SLE (aPL+ group; positive in the lupus 
anticoagulant (LA) test and negative for all three of SSA (Ro52 and Ro60) and 
SSB antibodies) and a Sjögren's syndrome-like SLE (SSA/SSB+ group; positive for 
all three of SSA (Ro52 and Ro60) and SSB antibodies but negative in the LA 
test). We applied affinity-based proteomics, targeting 281 proteins, together 
with well-established clinical biomarkers and complementary immunoassays to 
explore the difference between the two predefined SLE subgroups.
RESULTS: The aPL+ group comprised 66 and the SSA/SSB+ group 63 patients. The 
protein with the highest prediction power (receiver operating characteristic 
(ROC) area under the curve = 0.89) for separating the aPL+ and SSA/SSB+ SLE 
subgroups was integrin beta-1 (ITGB1), with higher levels present in the 
SSA/SSB+ subgroup. Proteins with the lowest p values comparing the two SLE 
subgroups were ITGB1, SLC13A3, and CERS5. These three proteins, rheumatoid 
factor, and immunoglobulin G (IgG) were all increased in the SSA/SSB+ subgroup. 
This subgroup was also characterized by a possible activation of the interferon 
system as measured by high KRT7, TYK2, and ETV7 in plasma. In the aPL+ subgroup, 
complement activation was more pronounced together with several biomarkers 
associated with systemic inflammation (fibrinogen, α-1 antitrypsin, neutrophils, 
and triglycerides).
CONCLUSIONS: Our observations indicate underlying pathogenic differences between 
the SSA/SSB+ and the aPL+ SLE subgroups, suggesting that the SSA/SSB+ subgroup 
may benefit from IFN-blocking therapies while the aPL+ subgroup is more likely 
to have an effect from drugs targeting the complement system. Stratifying SLE 
patients based on an autoantibody profile could be a way forward to understand 
underlying pathophysiology and to improve selection of patients for clinical 
trials of targeted treatments.

DOI: 10.1186/s13075-019-1836-8
PMCID: PMC6378708
PMID: 30777133 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: The 
ethical board at the Karolinska University Hospital approved the study 
(reference number 03-556). All study participants gave written informed consent 
to participate. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: All coauthors have declared consent for 
publication. COMPETING INTERESTS: LT has consultancies for Euro Diagnostica 
(< $10,000), JM is employed by AstraZeneca, and JR is a member of the scientific 
advisory board for Phadia/Thermo Fisher. This study was supported by the 
AstraZeneca-Karolinska Institutet Joint Research Program in Translational 
Science. Other authors declare that they have no competing interests. 
PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.