1. Oncotarget. 2019 Jan 25;10(8):897-915. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.26618. 
eCollection 2019 Jan 25.

Targeted human cytolytic fusion proteins at the cutting edge: harnessing the 
apoptosis-inducing properties of human enzymes for the selective elimination of 
tumor cells.

Mungra N(1), Jordaan S(1), Hlongwane P(1), Naran K(#)(1), Chetty S(#)(1), Barth 
S(#)(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Medical Biotechnology and Immunotherapy Unit, Institute of Infectious Disease 
and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Cape Town, 
Cape Town 7700, South Africa.
(2)South African Research Chair in Cancer Biotechnology, Department of 
Integrative Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Cape 
Town, Cape Town 7700, South Africa.
(#)Contributed equally

Patient-specific targeted therapy represents the holy grail of anti-cancer 
therapeutics, allowing potent tumor depletion without detrimental off-target 
toxicities. Disease-specific monoclonal antibodies have been employed to bind to 
oncogenic cell-surface receptors, representing the earliest form of 
immunotherapy. Targeted drug delivery was first achieved by means of 
antibody-drug conjugates, which exploit the differential expression of 
tumor-associated antigens as a guiding mechanism for the specific delivery of 
chemically-conjugated chemotherapeutic agents to diseased target cells. 
Biotechnological advances have expanded the repertoire of immunology-based 
tumor-targeting strategies, also paving the way for the next intuitive step in 
targeted drug delivery: the construction of recombinant protein drugs consisting 
of an antibody-based targeting domain genetically fused with a cytotoxic 
peptide, known as an immunotoxin. However, the most potent protein toxins have 
typically been derived from bacterial or plant virulence factors and commonly 
feature both off-target toxicity and immunogenicity in human patients. Further 
refinement of immunotoxin technology thus led to the replacement of monoclonal 
antibodies with humanized antibody derivatives, including the substitution of 
non-human toxic peptides with human cytolytic proteins. Preclinically tested 
human cytolytic fusion proteins (hCFPs) have proven promising as non-immunogenic 
combinatory anti-cancer agents, however they still require further enhancement 
to achieve convincing candidacy as a single-mode therapeutic. To date, a 
portfolio of highly potent human toxins has been established; ranging from 
microtubule-associated protein tau (MAP tau), RNases, granzyme B (GrB) and 
death-associated protein kinase (DAPk). In this review, we discuss the most 
recent findings on the use of these apoptosis-inducing hCFPs for the treatment 
of various cancers.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.26618
PMCID: PMC6368230
PMID: 30783518

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.