1. mBio. 2019 Feb 19;10(1):e01580-18. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01580-18.

Structure and Mechanism of LcpA, a Phosphotransferase That Mediates 
Glycosylation of a Gram-Positive Bacterial Cell Wall-Anchored Protein.

Siegel SD(#)(1), Amer BR(#)(2), Wu C(1), Sawaya MR(2), Gosschalk JE(2), Clubb 
RT(3), Ton-That H(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of Texas Health 
Science Center, Houston, Texas, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry and the UCLA-DOE Institute of 
Genomics and Proteomics, University of California, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(3)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry and the UCLA-DOE Institute of 
Genomics and Proteomics, University of California, Los Angeles, California, USA 
rclubb@mbi.ucla.edu htonthat@dentistry.ucla.edu.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of Texas Health 
Science Center, Houston, Texas, USA rclubb@mbi.ucla.edu 
htonthat@dentistry.ucla.edu.
(5)Division of Oral Biology and Medicine, School of Dentistry, University of 
California, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    mBio. 2019 Apr 16;10(2):e00617-19. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00617-19.

The widely conserved LytR-CpsA-Psr (LCP) family of enzymes in Gram-positive 
bacteria is known to attach glycopolymers, including wall teichoic acid, to the 
cell envelope. However, it is undetermined if these enzymes are capable of 
catalyzing glycan attachment to surface proteins. In the actinobacterium 
Actinomyces oris, an LCP homolog here named LcpA is genetically linked to GspA, 
a glycoprotein that is covalently attached to the bacterial peptidoglycan by the 
housekeeping sortase SrtA. Here we show by X-ray crystallography that LcpA 
adopts an α-β-α structural fold, akin to the conserved LCP domain, which harbors 
characteristic catalytic arginine residues. Consistently, alanine substitution 
for these residues, R149 and R266, abrogates GspA glycosylation, leading to 
accumulation of an intermediate form termed GspALMM, which is also observed in 
the lcpA mutant. Unlike other LCP proteins characterized to date, LcpA contains 
a stabilizing disulfide bond, mutations of which severely affect LcpA stability. 
In line with the established role of disulfide bond formation in oxidative 
protein folding in A. oris, deletion of vkor, coding for the thiol-disulfide 
oxidoreductase VKOR, also significantly reduces LcpA stability. Biochemical 
studies demonstrated that the recombinant LcpA enzyme possesses pyrophosphatase 
activity, enabling hydrolysis of diphosphate bonds. Furthermore, this 
recombinant enzyme, which weakly interacts with GspA in solution, catalyzes 
phosphotransfer to GspALMM Altogether, the findings support that A. oris LcpA is 
an archetypal LCP enzyme that glycosylates a cell wall-anchored protein, a 
process that may be conserved in Actinobacteria, given the conservation of LcpA 
and GspA in these high-GC-content organisms.IMPORTANCE In Gram-positive 
bacteria, the conserved LCP family enzymes studied to date are known to attach 
glycopolymers, including wall teichoic acid, to the cell envelope. It is unknown 
if these enzymes catalyze glycosylation of surface proteins. We show here in the 
actinobacterium Actinomyces oris by X-ray crystallography and biochemical 
analyses that A. oris LcpA is an LCP homolog, possessing pyrophosphatase and 
phosphotransferase activities known to belong to LCP enzymes that require 
conserved catalytic Arg residues, while harboring a unique disulfide bond 
critical for protein stability. Importantly, LcpA mediates glycosylation of the 
surface protein GspA via phosphotransferase activity. Our studies provide the 
first experimental evidence of an archetypal LCP enzyme that promotes 
glycosylation of a cell wall-anchored protein in Gram-positive bacteria.

Copyright © 2019 Siegel et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01580-18
PMCID: PMC6381275
PMID: 30782654 [Indexed for MEDLINE]