1. PLoS Med. 2019 Feb 21;16(2):e1002742. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1002742. 
eCollection 2019 Feb.

COSMOS-E: Guidance on conducting systematic reviews and meta-analyses of 
observational studies of etiology.

Dekkers OM(1)(2)(3), Vandenbroucke JP(1)(3)(4), Cevallos M(5), Renehan AG(6), 
Altman DG(7), Egger M(5)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Epidemiology, Leiden University Medical Center, 
Leiden, the Netherlands.
(2)Department of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism, Leiden University 
Medical Centre, Leiden, the Netherlands.
(3)Department of Clinical Epidemiology, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, 
Denmark.
(4)Faculty of Epidemiology and Population Health, London School of Hygiene and 
Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
(5)Institute of Social and Preventive Medicine (ISPM), University of Bern, Bern, 
Switzerland.
(6)Manchester Cancer Research Centre, NIHR Manchester Biomedical Research 
Centre, Division of Cancer Sciences, School of Medical Sciences, Faculty of 
Biology, Medicine and Health, University of Manchester, Manchester, United 
Kingdom.
(7)Centre for Statistics in Medicine, Nuffield Department of Orthopaedics, 
Rheumatology and Musculoskeletal Sciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, United 
Kingdom.
(8)Centre for Infectious Diseases Epidemiology and Research (CIDER), School of 
Public Health and Family Medicine, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South 
Africa.

Comment in
    Front Public Health. 2024 Jan 16;12:1347794. doi: 
10.3389/fpubh.2024.1347794.

BACKGROUND: To our knowledge, no publication providing overarching guidance on 
the conduct of systematic reviews of observational studies of etiology exists.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: Conducting Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses of 
Observational Studies of Etiology (COSMOS-E) provides guidance on all steps in 
systematic reviews of observational studies of etiology, from shaping the 
research question, defining exposure and outcomes, to assessing the risk of bias 
and statistical analysis. The writing group included researchers experienced in 
meta-analyses and observational studies of etiology. Standard peer-review was 
performed. While the structure of systematic reviews of observational studies on 
etiology may be similar to that for systematic reviews of randomised controlled 
trials, there are specific tasks within each component that differ. Examples 
include assessment for confounding, selection bias, and information bias. In 
systematic reviews of observational studies of etiology, combining studies in 
meta-analysis may lead to more precise estimates, but such greater precision 
does not automatically remedy potential bias. Thorough exploration of sources of 
heterogeneity is key when assessing the validity of estimates and causality.
CONCLUSION: As many reviews of observational studies on etiology are being 
performed, this document may provide researchers with guidance on how to conduct 
and analyse such reviews.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1002742
PMCID: PMC6383865
PMID: 30789892 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: I have read the journal's policy and the authors 
of this manuscript have the following competing interests: AGR has received 
lecture honoraria from Merck Serona and Janssen-Cilag, and independent research 
funding and lecture honoraria from Novo Nordisk and Sanofi Pasteur MSD. ME 
receives a stipend as a Specialty Consulting Editor for PLOS Medicine and serves 
on the journal's Editorial Board.