1. Trials. 2019 Feb 21;20(1):145. doi: 10.1186/s13063-019-3225-7.

Oxytocin-enhanced motivational interviewing group therapy for methamphetamine 
use disorder in men who have sex with men: study protocol for a randomized 
controlled trial.

Stauffer CS(1), Moschetto JM(2), McKernan SM(3), Hsiang E(4), Borsari B(5), 
Woolley JD(5).

Author information:
(1)University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco VA Medical Center, San 
Francisco, CA, USA. christopher.stauffer@ucsf.edu.
(2)Palo Alto University, Palo Alto, CA, USA.
(3)University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(4)University of California, San Francisco School of Medicine, San Francisco, 
CA, USA.
(5)University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco VA Medical Center, San 
Francisco, CA, USA.

BACKGROUND: The prevalence of methamphetamine use disorder (MUD) in the United 
States has risen dramatically in the past four decades and is concentrated in 
populations such as men who have sex with men (MSM). Despite the public health 
consequences of MUD, there are no FDA-approved psychopharmacological treatments. 
Psychosocial treatment alone has been shown to reduce methamphetamine use, but 
high attrition rates limit treatment efficacy. Promising findings from animal 
models of MUD using exogenous oxytocin, a social neuropeptide, have set the 
stage for translational work. Along with unique anti-addiction effects, oxytocin 
holds a primary role in enhancing social salience and modulating stress. In 
humans, oxytocin administration, combined with evidence-based psychosocial 
interventions, may act synergistically to improve addiction treatment outcomes 
and improve retention rates in current MUD treatment.
METHODS/DESIGN: We are conducting a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled 
trial of oxytocin-enhanced motivational interviewing group therapy (MIGT). 
Oxytocin or placebo 40 IU is administered intranasally in conjunction with six, 
weekly MIGT sessions. We will recruit 50 MSM, initiating treatment for MUD from 
specialized community health programs in San Francisco, CA, USA. Individuals 
will be randomized (1:1) to receive six, weekly sessions of MIGT with or without 
oxytocin. Our primary outcome is session attendance. Other outcomes of interest 
include: measures of group cohesion, anxiety, psychophysiology, and stimulant 
craving and use.
DISCUSSION: This will be the first study of oxytocin's effects in humans with 
MUD. Findings from this novel protocol will attempt to bridge existing animal 
data with the need for innovative clinical treatments for MUD, inform the 
growing field of pharmacologically-enhanced psychotherapy, and help to elucidate 
mechanisms behind oxytocin's potential anti-addiction effects.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov, ID: NCT02881177 . Registered on 26 
August 2016.

DOI: 10.1186/s13063-019-3225-7
PMCID: PMC6385415
PMID: 30791944 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: This 
study established ethical approval from the Institutional Review Board (IRB) at 
the University of California, San Francisco Human Research Protection Program on 
6 November 2016 (#16–20,360). CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING 
INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no competing interests. 
PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.