1. BMC Cancer. 2019 Feb 22;19(1):170. doi: 10.1186/s12885-019-5372-3.

BRAF gene mutations in synchronous papillary thyroid carcinoma and Langerhans 
cell histiocytosis co-existing in the thyroid gland: a case report and 
literature review.

A Al Hamad M(1)(2), Albisher HM(3), Al Saeed WR(4), Almumtin AT(3), Allabbad 
FM(3), A Shawarby M(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, Imam Abdulrahman Bin Faisal 
University, Dammam, Saudi Arabia. mhamad@iau.edu.sa.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, King Fahad Hospital of the 
University, PO Box 2208, Khobar, 31952-2208, Saudi Arabia. mhamad@iau.edu.sa.
(3)Department of Surgery, College of Medicine, Imam Abdulrahman Bin Faisal 
University, Dammam, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, Imam Abdulrahman Bin Faisal 
University, Dammam, Saudi Arabia.

BACKGROUND: Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH) is a rare clonal disease, 
characterized by hyperproliferation of Langerhans cells. It may rarely involve 
the thyroid gland. Its association with papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) is 
extremely rare; with only few case reports available in the English literature. 
BRAF mutations are implicated in the development of papillary thyroid carcinoma, 
and have also been identified in Langerhans cell histiocytosis.
CASE PRESENTATION: Here we present a rare case of a 36-year-old Indonesian 
female patient with dysphagia associated with neck mass which was complicated by 
skin sinus formation. The diagnosis of PTC was rendered on fine needle 
aspiration (FNA). Debulking thyroidectomy revealed co-existeence of PTC and LCH. 
On subsequent molecular testing, BRAF V600E and V600K mutations were detected in 
tissues macrodissected from both lesions, respectively. To the best of our 
knowledge, this case is the first case to report two different BRAF mutations in 
tissues of a Langerhans cell histiocytosis and a papillary thyroid carcinoma 
co-existing in the thyroid gland. The patient received chemotherapy of etoposide 
combined with prednisone. At the most recent follow-up, the patient is in a 
stable clinical condition.
CONCLUSIONS: The coexistence of a PTC with LCH harboring BRAF mutation may 
suggest etiologic relation between the two conditions that involves the BRAF 
gene. Clinically, it may suggest an aggressive, locally advanced thyroid cancer, 
an impression that may reflect on the selected surgical management, chemotherapy 
and BRAF mutation-targeting therapy to these patients.

DOI: 10.1186/s12885-019-5372-3
PMCID: PMC6387536
PMID: 30795755 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: This 
research was approved by the research ethics committee of Imam Abdulrahman Bin 
Faisal and Informed consent as documented by signature was obtained from this 
patient. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Written informed consent was obtained from the 
patient for publication of the Case Report and any accompanying images. 
COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no competing interests. 
PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.