1. Avicenna J Med Biotechnol. 2019 Jan-Mar;11(1):112-117.

Enhancing Stability of Destabilized Green Fluorescent Protein Using Chimeric 
mRNA Containing Human Beta-Globin 5' and 3' Untranslated Regions.

Adibzadeh S(1)(2), Fardaei M(3), Takhshid MA(1), Miri MR(1), Rafiei Dehbidi 
G(1), Farhadi A(1), Ranjbaran R(1), Alavi P(1), Nikouyan N(1), Seyyedi N(1), 
Naderi S(1), Eskandari A(1), Behzad-Behbahani A(1).

Author information:
(1)Diagnostic Laboratory Sciences and Technology Research Center, Faculty of 
Paramedical Sciences, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.
(2)Department of Medical Biotechnology, Faculty of Paramedical Sciences, Shiraz 
University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.
(3)Department of Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Shiraz University of Medical 
Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.

BACKGROUND: In spite of recent progress in mRNA technologies and their potential 
applications for treatment of human diseases, problems such as the transient 
nature of mRNA limit the stability of gene up-regulation and, thus, potentially 
reduce mRNA efficiency for gene therapy. Using human β-globin 5' and 3' 
untranslated regions (UTRs), this study aimed to develop the different chimeric 
constructs of mRNAs to increase the stability of destabilized green fluorescent 
protein (EGFPd2) in HEK 293 cells.
METHODS: Purified human β-globin (HBG) 5'-3'UTRs, and the coding sequence of 
destabilized green fluorescent protein (EGFPd2) were amplified separately and 
ligated to each other using SOEing PCR method in a different format. As 
controls, the original construct of EGFPd2 under the control of T7 promoter was 
used. Following in vitro transcription, HEK 293 cells were then transfected with 
several constructs and incubated at 37°C in a CO2 incubator. They were monitored 
under a fluorescence microscope every four hours for the first 24 hr, then every 
12 hr afterwards. The resulting fluorescence was measured as a surrogate for 
translation efficiency and duration.
RESULTS: By monitoring the HEK cells over 48 hr, cells transfected with mRNA 
with various HBG UTRs showed significantly different fluorescence intensity and 
stability in comparison with the pEGFPd2 prototype (control transcript) 
overtime. Overall, the images show that replacement of the 3' UTR end of the 
prototype vector pGFPd2 with the 3' end of β-globin mRNA increases the half-life 
of the chimeric mRNA for more than 32 hr.
CONCLUSION: This result indicates that β-globin 3' UTR would definitely increase 
the half-life of mRNA and may help to decrease the mRNA therapeutic dosage in 
the treatment of diseases associated with mRNA therapy.

PMCID: PMC6359690
PMID: 30800251

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest None.