1. Front Microbiol. 2019 Feb 8;10:203. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.00203. eCollection
 2019.

HEXIM1 Peptide Exhibits Antimicrobial Activity Against Antibiotic Resistant 
Bacteria Through Guidance of Cell Penetrating Peptide.

Ho PL(1), Ong HK(2), Teo J(3), Ow DS(1), Chao SH(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Microbial Cells, Bioprocessing Technology Institute, Agency for Science, 
Technology and Research, Singapore, Singapore.
(2)Expression Engineering Groups, Bioprocessing Technology Institute, Agency for 
Science, Technology and Research, Singapore, Singapore.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine, National University Hospital, Singapore, 
Singapore.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, National University of Singapore, 
Singapore, Singapore.

The emergence of antibiotic resistant bacteria is one of the biggest threats to 
human health worldwide. In 2017, World Health Organization listed the world's 
most dangerous antibiotic-resistant bacteria or "superbugs," such as 
carbapenem-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Escherichia coli, indicating the 
highest priority needs for new antibiotics. The possibility that such infectious 
diseases may soon be untreatable, due to decreased antibiotic efficacy, creates 
an urgent need for novel and alternative antimicrobials. Antimicrobial peptides 
are naturally occurring small molecules found in the innate immunity of mammals, 
plants and bacteria, and are potentially therapeutic candidates against 
drug-resistant bacteria. In this study, we examine the antimicrobial activities 
of the cytotoxic peptides derived from the basic region (BR) of the human 
hexamethylene bisacetamide-inducible protein 1 (HEXIM1). We found that, when 
fused with a cell penetrating peptide, the HEXIM1 BR peptide and its derivative, 
BR-RRR12, exhibited inhibitory activities against selected "superbugs." 
Negligible effects on the viability of human keratinocyte cell line were 
observed when the bactericidal dosages of HEXIM1 BR peptides were used. 
Different killing kinetics were observed between the membrane permeabilizing 
antimicrobial peptides and HEXIM1 BR peptides, suggesting that a different 
antimicrobial mechanism might be utilized by the HEXIM1 BR peptides. Using an in 
vitro translation system based on E. coli lysates, we found that HEXIM1 BR 
peptides blocked bacterial translation. Taken together, we identify the HEXIM1 
BR peptide as a novel antimicrobial peptide with potent inhibitory activity 
against antibiotic-resistant "superbugs."

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.00203
PMCID: PMC6376162
PMID: 30800117