1. Sci Rep. 2019 Feb 27;9(1):2965. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-39182-6.

Differential epithelial and stromal protein profiles in cone and non-cone 
regions of keratoconus corneas.

Yam GH(1)(2), Fuest M(3)(4), Zhou L(5)(6)(7), Liu YC(3)(5), Deng L(8), Chan 
AS(3)(5)(9)(10), Ong HS(3)(10), Khor WB(10), Ang M(5)(10), Mehta 
JS(11)(12)(13)(14).

Author information:
(1)Tissue Engineering and Stem Cell Group, Singapore Eye Research Institute, 
Singapore, Singapore. gary.yam@gmail.com.
(2)Ophthalmology and Visual Science Academic Clinical Research Program, 
Duke-National University of Singapore Graduate Medical School, Singapore, 
Singapore. gary.yam@gmail.com.
(3)Tissue Engineering and Stem Cell Group, Singapore Eye Research Institute, 
Singapore, Singapore.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany.
(5)Ophthalmology and Visual Science Academic Clinical Research Program, 
Duke-National University of Singapore Graduate Medical School, Singapore, 
Singapore.
(6)Ocular Proteomics Platform, Singapore Eye Research Institute, Singapore, 
Singapore.
(7)Department of Ophthalmology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National 
University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.
(8)Department of Statistics and Applied Probability, National University of 
Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.
(9)Ophthalmic Pathology Platform, Singapore Eye Research Institute, Singapore, 
Singapore.
(10)Singapore National Eye Centre, Singapore, Singapore.
(11)Tissue Engineering and Stem Cell Group, Singapore Eye Research Institute, 
Singapore, Singapore. jodmehta@gmail.com.
(12)Ophthalmology and Visual Science Academic Clinical Research Program, 
Duke-National University of Singapore Graduate Medical School, Singapore, 
Singapore. jodmehta@gmail.com.
(13)Singapore National Eye Centre, Singapore, Singapore. jodmehta@gmail.com.
(14)School of Material Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological 
University, Singapore, Singapore. jodmehta@gmail.com.

Keratoconus (KC) is an ectatic corneal disease characterized by progressive 
thinning and irregular astigmatism, and a leading indication for corneal 
transplantation. KC-associated changes have been demonstrated for the entire 
cornea, but the pathological thinning and mechanical weakening is usually 
localized. We performed quantitative proteomics using Sequential Windowed 
Acquisition of All Theoretical Fragment Ion Mass Spectrometry (SWATH-MS) to 
analyze epithelial and stromal changes between the topographically-abnormal cone 
and topographically-normal non-cone regions of advanced KC corneas, compared to 
age-matched normal corneas. Expression of 20 epithelial and 14 stromal proteins 
was significantly altered (≥2 or ≤0.5-fold) between cone and non-cone in all 4 
KC samples. Ingenuity pathway analysis illustrated developmental and metabolic 
disorders for the altered epithelial proteome with mitochondrion as the 
significant gene ontology (GO) term. The differential stromal proteome was 
related to cellular assembly, tissue organization and connective tissue 
disorders with endoplasmic reticulum protein folding as the significant GO term. 
Validation of selected protein expression was performed on archived KC, non-KC 
and normal corneal specimens by immunohistochemistry. This is the first time to 
show that KC-associated proteome changes were not limited to the 
topographically-thinner and mechanically-weakened cone but also non-cone region 
with normal topography, indicating a peripheral involvement in KC development.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-019-39182-6
PMCID: PMC6393548
PMID: 30814630 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.