1. Front Plant Sci. 2019 Feb 15;10:141. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2019.00141. eCollection
 2019.

Redox Systemic Signaling and Induced Tolerance Responses During 
Soybean-Bradyrhizobium japonicum Interaction: Involvement of Nod Factor Receptor 
and Autoregulation of Nodulation.

Fernandez-Göbel TF(1), Deanna R(2), Muñoz NB(1)(3), Robert G(1)(3), Asurmendi 
S(4), Lascano R(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Fisiología y Recursos Genéticos Vegetales, Centro de 
Investigaciones Agropecuarias, Instituto Nacional de Tecnología Agropecuaria, 
Córdoba, Argentina.
(2)Departamento de Ciencias Farmacéuticas, Facultad de Ciencias Químicas, 
Instituto Multidisciplinario de Biología Vegetal, Universidad Nacional de 
Córdoba, Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas, Córdoba, 
Argentina.
(3)Cátedra de Fisiología Vegetal, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas, Físicas y 
Naturales, Universidad Nacional de Córdoba, Córdoba, Argentina.
(4)Instituto de Biotecnología, Centro de Investigaciones en Ciencias 
Veterinarias y Agronómicas, Instituto Nacional de Tecnología Agropecuaria, 
Buenos Aires, Argentina.

The symbiotic relationship between legumes and nitrogen-fixing rhizobia induces 
local and systemic responses, which ultimately lead to nodule formation. The 
autoregulation of nodulation (AON) is a systemic mechanism related to innate 
immunity that controls nodule development and involves different components 
ranging from hormones, peptides, receptors to small RNAs. Here, we characterized 
a rapid systemic redox changes induced during soybean-Bradyrhizobium japonicum 
symbiotic interaction. A transient peak of reactive oxygen species (ROS) 
generation was found in soybean leaves after 30 min of root inoculation with B. 
japonicum. The ROS response was accompanied by changes in the redox state of 
glutathione and by activation of antioxidant enzymes. Moreover, the ROS peak and 
antioxidant enzyme activation were abolished in leaves by the addition, in 
either root or leaf, of DPI, an NADPH oxidase inhibitor. Likewise, these 
systemic redox changes primed the plant increasing its tolerance to 
photooxidative stress. With the use of non-nodulating nfr5-mutant and 
hyper-nodulating nark-mutant soybean plants, we subsequently studied the 
systemic redox changes. The nfr5-mutant lacked the systemic redox changes after 
inoculation, whereas the nark-mutant showed a similar redox systemic signaling 
than the wild type plants. However, neither nfr5- nor nark-mutant exhibited 
tolerance to photooxidative stress condition. Altogether, these results 
demonstrated that (i) the early redox systemic signaling during symbiotic 
interaction depends on a Nod factor receptor, and that (ii) the induced 
tolerance response depends on the AON mechanisms.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2019.00141
PMCID: PMC6384266
PMID: 30828341