1. Am J Med Genet A. 2019 May;179(5):813-816. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61076. Epub
2019  Mar 5.

Neu-Laxova syndrome presenting prenatally with increased nuchal translucency and 
cystic hygroma: The utility of exome sequencing in deciphering the diagnosis.

Bourque DK(1), Cloutier M(1), Kernohan KD(2), Bareke E(3)(4), Grynspan D(5), 
Michaud J(5); Care4Rare Canada Consortium(2); Boycott KM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Regional Genetics Program, CHEO, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, 
Canada.
(2)CHEO Research Institute, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, Québec, Canada.
(4)McGill University and Genome Quebec Innovation Centre, Montreal, Québec, 
Canada.
(5)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, CHEO, University of Ottawa, 
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

Neu-Laxova syndrome (NLS) is a lethal autosomal recessive microcephaly syndrome 
associated with intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) and multiple congenital 
anomalies. Clinical features include central nervous system malformations, joint 
contractures, ichthyosis, edema, and dysmorphic facial features. Biallelic 
pathogenic variants in either the PHGDH or PSAT1 genes have been shown to cause 
NLS. Using exome sequencing, we aimed to identify the underlying genetic 
diagnosis in three fetuses (from one family) with prenatal skin edema, severe 
IUGR, micrognathia, renal anomalies, and arthrogryposis and identified a 
homozygous c.1A>C (p.Met1?, NM_006623.3) variant in the PHGDH gene. Loss of the 
translation start codon is a novel genetic mechanism for the development of NLS. 
Prenatal diagnosis of NLS is challenging and few reports describe the fetal 
pathology. Fetal neuropathologic examination revealed: delayed brain 
development, congenital agenesis of the corticospinal tracts, and hypoplasia of 
the hippocampus, cerebellum and brainstem. Each pregnancy also showed increased 
nuchal translucency (NT) or cystic hygroma. While NLS is rare, it may be a cause 
of recurrent increased NT/cystic hygroma. This finding provides further support 
that cystic hygroma has many different genetic causes and that exome sequencing 
may shed light on the underlying genetic diagnoses in this group of prenatal 
patients.

© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61076
PMID: 30838783 [Indexed for MEDLINE]