1. Front Microbiol. 2019 Feb 21;10:100. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.00100.
eCollection  2019.

Deprivation of the Periplasmic Chaperone SurA Reduces Virulence and Restores 
Antibiotic Susceptibility of Multidrug-Resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa.

Klein K(1), Sonnabend MS(1), Frank L(1), Leibiger K(1), Franz-Wachtel M(2), 
Macek B(2), Trunk T(3), Leo JC(3), Autenrieth IB(1), Schütz M(1), Bohn E(1).

Author information:
(1)Interfakultäres Institut für Mikrobiologie und Infektionsmedizin Tübingen 
(IMIT), Institut für Medizinische Mikrobiologie und Hygiene, Universität 
Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(2)Proteome Center Tübingen, Universität Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(3)Section for Genetics and Evolutionary Biology, Department of Biosciences, 
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.

Pseudomonas aeruginosa is one of the main causative agents of nosocomial 
infections and the spread of multidrug-resistant strains is rising. Therefore, 
novel strategies for therapy are urgently required. The outer membrane 
composition of Gram-negative pathogens and especially of Pa restricts the 
efficacy of antibiotic entry into the cell and determines virulence. For 
efficient outer membrane protein biogenesis, the β-barrel assembly machinery 
(BAM) complex in the outer membrane and periplasmic chaperones like Skp and SurA 
are crucial. Previous studies indicated that the importance of individual 
proteins involved in outer membrane protein biogenesis may vary between 
different Gram-negative species. In addition, since multidrug-resistant Pa 
strains pose a serious global threat, the interference with both virulence and 
antibiotic resistance by disturbing outer membrane protein biogenesis might be a 
new strategy to cope with this challenge. Therefore, deletion mutants of the 
non-essential BAM complex components bamB and bamC, of the skp homolog hlpA as 
well as a conditional mutant of surA were investigated. The most profound 
effects for both traits were associated with reduced levels of SurA, 
characterized by increased membrane permeability, enhanced sensitivity to 
antibiotic treatment and attenuation of virulence in a Galleria mellonella 
infection model. Strikingly, the depletion of SurA in a multidrug-resistant 
clinical bloodstream isolate re-sensitized the strain to antibiotic treatment. 
From our data we conclude that SurA of Pa serves as a promising target for 
developing a drug that shows antiinfective activity and re-sensitizes 
multidrug-resistant strains to antibiotics.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.00100
PMCID: PMC6394205
PMID: 30846971