1. Rom J Morphol Embryol. 2018;59(4):1053-1059.

Determination of VEGFR-2 (KDR) -604A>G polymorphism in recurrent pregnancy loss.

Boldeanu L(1), Siloşi CA, Pădureanu V, Dijmărescu AL, Manolea MM, Tabacu MC, 
Boldeanu MV, Popescu-Drigă MV, Poenariu IS, Pădureanu R, Novac LV, Novac MB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Medicine and Pharmacy of Craiova, 
Romania; laborator.imunologie@umfcv.ro, boldeanumihailvirgil@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: Placental angiogenesis and vascular adaptation during pregnancy, 
along with diminished placental trophoblastic vascular endothelial growth factor 
immunoreactivity, play an important role in the early stages of human pregnancy, 
being possible causes of recurrent pregnancy loss (RPL).
AIMS: Our focus was directed towards investigating a possible association 
between vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2 (kinase insert domain 
receptor) VEGFR-2 (KDR) -604A>G (rs 2071559) gene polymorphism and RPL in the 
study area of Dolj County, Romania.
PATIENTS, MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this study, 169 women, diagnosed with RPL, 
were included. They were hospitalized in the Clinics of Obstetrics and 
Gynecology, "Filantropia" Municipal Hospital, Craiova, during the following 
period: October 2009-October 2016. The control group consisted of 145 women. All 
subjects were genotyped by means of allelic discrimination TaqMan polymerase 
chain reaction assay with specific probes.
RESULTS: No statistically significant difference was observed between the RPL 
patients and the control group, when one genotype was compared to another [in a 
dominant model, -604 AG+GG vs. AA: odds ratio (OR) 1.71, 95% confidence interval 
(CI) 0.99-2.96, p=0.051]. While studying the overall risk of RPL by the genotype 
frequencies of KDR polymorphism between controls and RPL patients, which were 
stratified according to the number of consecutive pregnancy losses (PLs), the 
chi-square test showed a significant association between the presence of this 
polymorphism and the increased risk observed in patients with four or more 
consecutive PLs, to develop RPL (in a dominant model - G allele carriers, KDR 
-604 AG+GG vs. AA: OR 1.91, 95% CI 1.03-3.52, p=0.037). These results prove that 
G allele carriers have an increased risk of RPL about 1.91-fold higher than 
those with the AA genotype do. Although our results bear limited statistical 
significance, the study nonetheless represents a step forward in the evaluation 
of recurrent abortion, which has not yet been explored sufficiently.
CONCLUSIONS: VEGFR-2 (KDR) polymorphism does not influence RPL susceptibility in 
the study area of Dolj County, Romania. Therefore, further studies, which 
include a larger sample size, are required in order to clarify the role of KDR 
polymorphism in RPL.

PMID: 30845284 [Indexed for MEDLINE]