1. Diabetes Spectr. 2019 Feb;32(1):61-68. doi: 10.2337/ds18-0071.

The American Diabetes Association in the Era of Health Care Transformation.

Hill-Briggs F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of General Internal Medicine, Johns Hopkins 
School of Medicine; Department of Health, Behavior, and Society, Johns Hopkins 
Bloomberg School of Public Health; Department of Acute and Chronic Care, Johns 
Hopkins School of Nursing; and Welch Center for Prevention, Epidemiology & 
Clinical Research, Baltimore, MD.

This address was delivered by Felicia Hill-Briggs, PhD, ABPP, President, Health 
Care & Education of the American Diabetes Association (ADA) at the ADA's 78th 
Scientific Sessions in Orlando, Fla., on 23 June 2018. Diabetes has become a 
high-priority condition in the current era of health care transformation due to 
diabetes and prediabetes prevalence rates, suboptimal diabetes outcomes at the 
health care system and population levels, and high health care and public health 
costs attributed to diabetes. Population health is the path forward for the ADA 
to facilitate diabetes health care and public health improvement nationally. 
Population health management initiatives underway at the ADA include Diabetes 
INSIDE for health care systems and a Mental Health Provider Training Program and 
referral directory. Population health improvement initiatives include the 
prediabetes Risk Test Campaign, National Diabetes Prevention Program (DPP) 
dissemination in underserved states and populations, a DPP Express information 
technology platform, and a social determinants of health scientific review and 
recommendations. Dr. Hill-Briggs is a professor of medicine; physical medicine 
and rehabilitation; health, behavior, and society; and acute and chronic care at 
Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, Md. She is a core faculty member of the 
Welch Center for Prevention, Epidemiology & Clinical Research and co-lead of 
behavioral, social, and systems science for the Johns Hopkins Institute for 
Clinical and Translational Research. Dr. Hill-Briggs has been elected to the 
National Academy of Medicine of The National Academies of Science, Engineering, 
and Medicine and is the 2018 recipient of the Rachmiel Levine Medal for 
Leadership from the ADA.

DOI: 10.2337/ds18-0071
PMCID: PMC6380239
PMID: 30853766