1. IUCrJ. 2019 Mar 1;6(Pt 2):167-177. doi: 10.1107/S2052252519002422. eCollection
 2019 Mar 1.

The expanding toolkit for structural biology: synchrotrons, X-ray lasers and 
cryoEM.

Muench SP(1), Antonyuk SV(2), Hasnain SS(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences and Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular 
Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, England.
(2)Molecular Biophysics Group, Institute of Integrative Biology, Faculty of 
Health and Life Sciences, University of Liverpool, Liverpool L69 7ZX, England.

Structural biology continues to benefit from an expanding toolkit, which is 
helping to gain unprecedented insight into the assembly and organization of 
multi-protein machineries, enzyme mechanisms and ligand/inhibitor binding. The 
combination of results from X-ray free-electron lasers (XFELs), modern 
synchrotron crystallographic beamlines and cryo-electron microscopy (cryoEM) is 
proving to be particularly powerful. The highly brilliant undulator beamlines at 
modern synchrotron facilities have empowered the crystallographic revolution of 
high-throughput structure determination at high resolution. The brilliance of 
the X-rays at these crystallographic beamlines has enabled this to be achieved 
using microcrystals, but at the expense of an increased absorbed X-ray dose and 
a consequent vulnerability to radiation-induced changes. The advent of serial 
femtosecond crystallography (SFX) with X-ray free-electron lasers provides a new 
opportunity in which damage-free structures can be obtained from much smaller 
crystals (2 µm) and more complex macromolecules, including membrane proteins and 
multi-protein complexes. For redox enzymes, SFX provides a unique opportunity by 
providing damage-free structures at both cryogenic and ambient temperatures. The 
promise of being able to visualize macromolecular structures and complexes at 
high resolution without the need for crystals using X-rays has remained a dream, 
but recent technological advancements in cryoEM have made this come true and 
hardly a month goes by when the structure of a new/novel macromolecular assembly 
is not revealed. The uniqueness of cryoEM in providing structural information 
for multi-protein complexes, particularly membrane proteins, has been 
demonstrated by examples such as respirasomes. The synergistic use of cryoEM and 
crystallography in lead-compound optimization is highlighted by the example of 
the visualization of antimalarial compounds in cytochrome bc 1. In this short 
review, using some recent examples including our own work, we share the 
excitement of these powerful structural biology methods.

DOI: 10.1107/S2052252519002422
PMCID: PMC6400194
PMID: 30867914