1. Theranostics. 2019 Feb 20;9(5):1387-1400. doi: 10.7150/thno.29761. eCollection
 2019.

ClC-7 Regulates the Pattern and Early Development of Craniofacial Bone and 
Tooth.

Zhang Y(1), Ji D(1), Li L(1), Yang S(1), Zhang H(1), Duan X(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Military Stomatology, National Clinical Research 
Center for Oral Diseases, Department of Oral Biology, Clinic of Oral Rare and 
Genetic Diseases, School of Stomatology, The Fourth Military Medical University, 
Xi'an, Shaanxi 710032, R.P. China.

Human CLCN7 encodes voltage-gated chloride channel 7 (ClC-7); mutations of CLCN7 
lead to osteopetrosis which is characterized by increased bone mass and impaired 
osteoclast function. In our previous clinical practice, we noticed that 
osteopetrosis patients with CLCN7 mutations had some special deformities in 
craniofacial morphology and tooth dysplasia. It is unclear whether these 
phenotypes are the typical features of CLCN7 involved osteopetrosis and whether 
ClC-7 could regulate the development of craniofacial bone and tooth in some 
signaling pathways. Methods: First, we collected 80 osteopetrosis cases from the 
literature and compared their craniofacial and dental phenotypes. Second, four 
osteopetrosis pedigrees with CLCN7 mutations were recruited from our clinic for 
gene testing and clinical analysis of their craniofacial and dental phenotypes. 
Third, we used a zebrafish model with clcn7 morpholino treatment to detect the 
effects of ClC-7 deficiency on the development of craniofacial and dental 
phenotypes. General observation, whole mount alcian blue and alizarin red 
staining, whole mount in situ hybridization, scanning electron microscope 
observation, lysoSensor staining, Q-PCR and western blotting were performed to 
observe the in vivo characteristics of craniofacial bone and tooth changes. 
Fourth, mouse marrow stromal cells were further primarily cultured to detect 
ClC-7 related mRNA and protein changes using siRNA, Q-PCR and western blotting. 
Results: Over 84% of osteopetrosis patients in the literature had some typical 
craniofacial and tooth phenotypes, including macrocephaly, frontal bossing, and 
changes in shape and proportions of facial skeleton, and these unique features 
are more severe and frequent in autosomal recessive osteopetrosis than in 
autosomal dominant osteopetrosis patients. Our four pedigrees with CLCN7 
mutations confirmed the aforementioned clinical features. clcn7 knockdown in 
zebrafish reproduced the craniofacial cartilage defects and various dental 
malformations combined the decreased levels of col10a1, sp7, dlx2b, eve1, and 
cx43. Loss of clcn7 function resulted in lysosomal storage in the brain and jaw 
as well as downregulated cathepsin K (CTSK). The craniofacial phenotype severity 
also presented a dose-dependent relationship with the levels of ClC-7 and CTSK. 
ClC-7/CTSK further altered the balance of TGF-β/BMP signaling pathway, causing 
elevated TGF-β-like Smad2 signals and reduced BMP-like Smad1/5/8 signals in 
clcn7 morphants. SB431542 inhibitor of TGF-β pathway partially rescued the 
aforementioned craniofacial bone and tooth defects of clcn7 morphants. The ClC-7 
involved CTSK/BMP and SMAD changes were also confirmed in mouse bone marrow 
stromal cells. Conclusion: These findings highlighted the vital role of clcn7 in 
zebrafish craniofacial bone and tooth development and mineralization, revealing 
novel insights for the causation of osteopetrosis with CLCN7 mutations. The 
mechanism chain of ClC-7/CTSK/ TGF-β/BMP/SMAD might explain the typical 
craniofacial bone and tooth changes in osteopetrosis as well as pycnodysostosis 
patients.

DOI: 10.7150/thno.29761
PMCID: PMC6401512
PMID: 30867839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interest exists.