1. Sci Rep. 2019 Mar 14;9(1):4572. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-41040-4.

Increased FUS levels in astrocytes leads to astrocyte and microglia activation 
and neuronal death.

Ajmone-Cat MA(1), Onori A(2), Toselli C(2)(3), Stronati E(2), Morlando M(2), 
Bozzoni I(2)(3), Monni E(4), Kokaia Z(4), Lupo G(5), Minghetti L(6), Biagioni 
S(2)(3), Cacci E(7).

Author information:
(1)National Center for Drug Research and Evaluation, Istituto Superiore di 
Sanità, Rome, Italy. mariaantonietta.ajmone-cat@iss.it.
(2)Department of Biology and Biotechnology "Charles Darwin", Sapienza University 
of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(3)Center for Life Nano Science, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Rome, Italy.
(4)Laboratory of Stem Cells & Restorative Neurology, Stem Cell Center, Lund 
University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.
(5)Department of Chemistry, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(6)Research Coordination and Support Service, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, 
Rome, Italy.
(7)Department of Biology and Biotechnology "Charles Darwin", Sapienza University 
of Rome, Rome, Italy. emanuele.cacci@uniroma1.it.

Mutations of Fused in sarcoma (FUS), a ribonucleoprotein involved in RNA 
metabolism, have been found associated with both familial and sporadic cases of 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Notably, besides mutations in the coding 
sequence, also mutations into the 3' untranslated region, leading to increased 
levels of the wild-type protein, have been associated with neuronal death and 
ALS pathology, in ALS models and patients. The mechanistic link between altered 
FUS levels and ALS-related neurodegeneration is far to be elucidated, as well as 
the consequences of elevated FUS levels in the modulation of the inflammatory 
response sustained by glial cells, a well-recognized player in ALS progression. 
Here, we studied the effect of wild-type FUS overexpression on the 
responsiveness of mouse and human neural progenitor-derived astrocytes to a 
pro-inflammatory stimulus (IL1β) used to mimic an inflammatory environment. We 
found that astrocytes with increased FUS levels were more sensitive to IL1β, as 
shown by their enhanced expression of inflammatory genes, compared with control 
astrocytes. Moreover, astrocytes overexpressing FUS promoted neuronal cell death 
and pro-inflammatory microglia activation. We conclude that overexpression of 
wild-type FUS intrinsically affects astrocyte reactivity and drives their 
properties toward pro-inflammatory and neurotoxic functions, suggesting that a 
non-cell autonomous mechanism can support neurodegeneration in FUS-mutated 
animals and patients.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-019-41040-4
PMCID: PMC6418113
PMID: 30872738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.