1. Redox Biol. 2019 May;23:101162. doi: 10.1016/j.redox.2019.101162. Epub 2019
Mar  9.

Restoration of aberrant mTOR signaling by intranasal rapamycin reduces oxidative 
damage: Focus on HNE-modified proteins in a mouse model of down syndrome.

Di Domenico F(1), Tramutola A(1), Barone E(2), Lanzillotta C(1), Defever O(1), 
Arena A(1), Zuliani I(1), Foppoli C(3), Iavarone F(4), Vincenzoni F(4), 
Castagnola M(5), Butterfield DA(6), Perluigi M(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemical Sciences, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Biochemical Sciences, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy; 
Universidad Autònoma de Chile, Instituto de Ciencias Biomédicas, Facultad de 
alud, Providencia, Santiago, Chile.
(3)CNR Institute of Molecular Biology and Pathology, Sapienza University of 
Rome, Rome, Italy.
(4)Istituto di Biochimica e Biochimica Clinica, Università Cattolica del Sacro 
Cuore, Rome, Italy; Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli, IRCCS, 
Rome, Italy.
(5)Laboratorio di Proteomica e Metabonomica, IRCCS, Fondazione Santa Lucia - 
Rome and Istituto per la Chimica del Riconoscimento Molecolare, CNR, Rome, 
Italy.
(6)Department of Chemistry and Sanders-Brown Center on Aging, University of 
Kentucky, Lexington, KY, USA .
(7)Department of Biochemical Sciences, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy. 
Electronic address: marzia.perluigi@uniroma1.it.

Increasing evidences support the notion that the impairment of intracellular 
degradative machinery is responsible for the accumulation of oxidized/misfolded 
proteins that ultimately results in the deposition of protein aggregates. These 
events are key pathological aspects of "protein misfolding diseases", including 
Alzheimer disease (AD). Interestingly, Down syndrome (DS) neuropathology shares 
many features with AD, such as the deposition of both amyloid plaques and 
neurofibrillary tangles. Studies from our group and others demonstrated, in DS 
brain, the dysfunction of both proteasome and autophagy degradative systems, 
coupled with increased oxidative damage. Further, we observed the aberrant 
increase of mTOR signaling and of its down-stream pathways in both DS brain and 
in Ts65Dn mice. Based on these findings, we support the ability of intranasal 
rapamycin treatment (InRapa) to restore mTOR pathway but also to restrain 
oxidative stress resulting in the decreased accumulation of lipoxidized 
proteins. By proteomics approach, we were able to identify specific proteins 
that showed decreased levels of HNE-modification after InRapa treatment compared 
with vehicle group. Among MS-identified proteins, we found that reduced 
oxidation of arginase-1 (ARG-1) and protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) might play a 
key role in reducing brain damage associated with synaptic transmission failure 
and tau hyperphosphorylation. InRapa treatment, by reducing ARG-1 protein-bound 
HNE levels, rescues its enzyme activity and conceivably contribute to the 
recovery of arginase-regulated functions. Further, it was shown that PP2A 
inhibition induces tau hyperphosphorylation and spatial memory deficits. Our 
data suggest that InRapa was able to rescue PP2A activity as suggested by 
reduced p-tau levels. In summary, considering that mTOR pathway is a central hub 
of multiple intracellular signaling, we propose that InRapa treatment is able to 
lower the lipoxidation-mediated damage to proteins, thus representing a valuable 
therapeutic strategy to reduce the early development of AD pathology in DS 
population.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.redox.2019.101162
PMCID: PMC6859577
PMID: 30876754 [Indexed for MEDLINE]