1. Trials. 2019 Mar 18;20(1):171. doi: 10.1186/s13063-019-3269-8.

Effects of Lysulin™ supplementation on pre-diabetes: study protocol for a 
randomized controlled trial.

Ranasinghe P(1), Jayawardena R(2)(3), Chandrasena L(4), Noetzel V(5), Burd J(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Colombo, 
Colombo, Sri Lanka. priyanga.ranasinghe@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Colombo, 
Colombo, Sri Lanka.
(3)Institute of Health and Biomedical Innovation, Queensland University of 
Technology, Brisbane, QLD, Australia.
(4)Nawaloka Hospital Research and Education Foundation (NHREF), Nawaloka 
Hospitals PLC, Colombo, Sri Lanka.
(5)Lysulin, Inc., San Diego, CA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Diabetes mellitus is rapidly becoming one of the leading causes of 
morbidity and mortality worldwide. Preventive measures have become important, 
especially in the South Asian region and other parts of the world where diabetes 
is becoming increasingly prevalent. We postulate that a product containing amino 
acid lysine, micronutrient zinc and vitamin C will have beneficial effects on 
glycemic control and disease progression in patients with pre-diabetes and we 
aim to evaluate this hypothesis using a phase II/III randomized double-blind 
controlled clinical trial design.
METHODS/DESIGN: The study will be conducted as a randomized, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled clinical trial for a period of 6 months. The study has been 
approved by the Ethics Review Committee of Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Colombo, Sri Lanka. A total of 110 adults with pre-diabetes will be recruited 
for the study. They will be randomly assigned to the test and placebo groups on 
a 1:1 ratio. The test group will receive two tablets of Lysulin™ three times a 
day and the control group will receive identical placebo tablets. The study 
drugs will be double blinded to both investigators and subjects. The visits and 
the evaluations will be done as follows: screening (visit 0), 1 month (visit 1), 
3 months (visit 2) and 6 months (visit 4). The primary outcome will be defined 
as change in glycemic control measured by HbA1c from baseline. Data will be 
analyzed using SPSS v16.
DISCUSSION: To our knowledge this is one of the first randomized controlled 
trials evaluating the effects of Lysulin™ (a combination of lysine, vitamin C 
and zinc) in pre-diabetes. This study will provide the necessary groundwork for 
future large-scale multicentered clinical trials. The result, positive or 
negative, should provide a step change in the evidence guiding current and 
future policies regarding management of pre-diabetes.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Sri Lanka Clinical Trials Registry, SLCTR/2018/022 . 
Registered on 13 July 2018. Study protocol version 2.0 (23 March 2018).

DOI: 10.1186/s13063-019-3269-8
PMCID: PMC6421713
PMID: 30885259 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable 
COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no competing interests, 
with the exception of John Burd, who is the CEO of Lysulin, Inc., and Vivianne 
Noetzel, the Vice President of Clinical and Regulatory affairs of Lysulin, Inc. 
John Burd and Vivianne Noetzel from Lysulin, Inc. are not involved in conduct of 
the study, data analysis and reporting of results. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer 
Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps 
and institutional affiliations.