1. Front Oncol. 2019 Mar 4;9:99. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2019.00099. eCollection 2019.

Targeting Molecular Pathways in Intracranial Metastatic Disease.

Venur VA(1), Cohen JV(1), Brastianos PK(1).

Author information:
(1)Divisions of Neuro-Oncology and Hematology/Oncology, Departments of Neurology 
and Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
MA, United States.

The discovery and clinical application of agents targeting pivotal molecular 
pathways in malignancies such as lung, breast, renal cell carcinoma, and 
melanoma have led to impressive improvements in clinical outcomes. Mutations in 
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), and rearrangements of anaplastic 
lymphoma kinase (ALK) are targetable in lung cancer, while BRAF mutations have 
been successfully targeted in metastatic melanoma. Targeting estrogen receptors, 
cyclin dependent kinases, and HER2 (Human Epidermal Receptor) have resulted in 
improvement in survival in breast cancer. Major strides have been made in the 
management of metastatic renal cell carcinoma by targeting the vascular 
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) pathway. However, intracranial metastases 
remain a major hurdle in the setting of targeted therapies. Traditional 
treatment options for brain metastases include surgery, whole brain radiation 
therapy (WBRT), and stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS). Surgery is effective in 
symptomatic patients with dominant lesions or solitary intracranial metastases, 
however, recovery time can be prolonged, often requiring an interruption in 
systemic treatment. WBRT and SRS provide symptomatic relief and local control 
but data on improving overall survival is limited. Most targeted therapies which 
provide extracranial control have limited penetration through the blood brain 
barrier. Given the limited therapeutic options and increasing prevalence of 
brain metastases, finding new strategies for the management of intracranial 
metastatic disease is critical. Genomic analysis of brain metastases has led to 
a better understanding of variations in the driver mutations compared to the 
primary malignancy. Furthermore, newer generations of targeted agents have shown 
promising intracranial activity. In this review, we will discuss the major 
molecular alterations in brain metastases from melanoma, lung, breast, and renal 
cell carcinoma. We will provide an in-depth review of the completed and ongoing 
clinical trials of drugs targeting the molecular pathways enriched in brain 
metastases.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2019.00099
PMCID: PMC6409309
PMID: 30886831