1. Front Plant Sci. 2019 Mar 7;10:261. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2019.00261. eCollection 
2019.

Critical Evaluation of Strategies for the Production of Blood Coagulation 
Factors in Plant-Based Systems.

Top O(1)(2), Geisen U(3), Decker EL(1), Reski R(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Plant Biotechnology, Faculty of Biology, University of Freiburg, Freiburg im 
Breisgau, Germany.
(2)Spemann Graduate School of Biology and Medicine, University of Freiburg, 
Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, Institute for Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory 
Medicine, University of Freiburg, Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany.
(4)Signalling Research Centres BIOSS and CIBSS, University of Freiburg, Freiburg 
im Breisgau, Germany.

The use of plants as production platforms for pharmaceutical proteins has been 
on the rise for the past two decades. The first marketed plant-made 
pharmaceutical, taliglucerase alfa against Gaucher's disease produced in carrot 
cells by Pfizer/Protalix Biotherapeutics, was approved by the US Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) in 2012. The advantages of plant systems are low cost and 
highly scalable biomass production compared to the fermentation systems, safety 
compared with other expression systems, as plant-based systems do not produce 
endotoxins, and the ability to perform complex eukaryotic post-translational 
modifications, e.g., N-glycosylation that can be further engineered to achieve 
humanized N-glycan structures. Although bleeding disorders affect only a small 
portion of the world population, costs of clotting factor concentrates impose a 
high financial burden on patients and healthcare systems. The majority of 
patients, ∼75% in the case of hemophilia, have no access to an adequate 
treatment. The necessity of large-scale and less expensive production of human 
blood coagulation factors, particularly factors associated with rare bleeding 
disorders, may be an important area for plant-based systems, as coagulation 
factors do not fit into the industry-favored production models. In this review, 
we explore previous studies on recombinant production of coagulation Factor II, 
VIII, IX, and XIII in different plant species. Production of bioactive FII and 
FIX in plants was not achieved yet due to complex post-translational 
modifications, including vitamin K-dependent γ-carboxylation and propeptide 
removal. Although plant-made FVIII and FXIII showed specific activities, there 
are no follow-up studies like pre-clinical/clinical trials. Significant progress 
has been achieved in oral delivery of bioencapsulated FVIII and FIX to induce 
immune tolerance in murine models of hemophilia A and B, resp. Potential 
strategies to overcome bottlenecks in the production systems are also addressed 
in this review.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2019.00261
PMCID: PMC6417376
PMID: 30899272