1. J Dent Sci. 2018 Dec;13(4):386-395. doi: 10.1016/j.jds.2018.08.004. Epub 2018 
Sep 3.

Abundant proteins in platelet-rich fibrin and their potential contribution to 
wound healing: An explorative proteomics study and review of the literature.

Yaprak E(1), Kasap M(2), Akpinar G(2), Islek EE(2), Sinanoglu A(3).

Author information:
(1)Kocaeli University, Faculty of Dentistry, Department of Periodontology, 
Kocaeli, Turkey.
(2)Kocaeli University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, 
Kocaeli, Turkey.
(3)Kocaeli University, Faculty of Dentistry, Department of Oral and 
Maxillofacial Radiology, Oral Diagnosis Clinic, Kocaeli, Turkey.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: It is well-known that diverse types of blood proteins 
contribute to healing process via different mechanisms. Presence and potential 
involvements of blood-derived abundant proteins in the platelet-rich fibrin 
(PRF) to its regenerative capacity have not been sufficiently emphasized in the 
literature. The aim of this paper was to analyze the abundant proteome content 
of PRF and summarize previously reported effects of identified proteins on wound 
healing via a literature review.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The PRF samples obtained from non-smoking, systemically 
healthy volunteers were subjected to 2D gel electrophoresis after extracting the 
proteins from fibrin matrices. All matching spots were excised from the gels and 
identified by MALDI TOF/TOF MS/MS analysis. A literature review was conducted to 
reveal possible contributions of identified proteins to wound healing.
RESULTS: Totally, thirty-five blood proteins were commonly identified among all 
studied samples. These proteins included serine protease inhibitors, such as 
alpha-1-antitrypsin, alpha-1-antichymotrypsin, alpha-1-acid glycoprotein, 
inter-alpha-trypsin-inhibitor, protease C1 inhibitor, and complement proteins. 
In addition, abundant presence of immunoglobulin G was observed. The abundance 
of albumin, haptoglobin, ceruloplasmin vitronectin, fetuin-A, ficolin-3 and 
transthyretin was also detected.
CONCLUSION: The results of this study indicated that PRF abundantly contains 
blood-origin actors which were previously reported for their direct contribution 
to wound healing. Further studies exploring the protein content of PRF are 
needed to reveal its undisclosed potential roles in the healing process.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jds.2018.08.004
PMCID: PMC6388803
PMID: 30895150