1. Cells. 2019 Mar 22;8(3):272. doi: 10.3390/cells8030272.

C-Met as a Key Factor Responsible for Sustaining Undifferentiated Phenotype and 
Therapy Resistance in Renal Carcinomas.

Marona P(1), Górka J(2), Kotlinowski J(3), Majka M(4), Jura J(5), Miekus K(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Biochemistry, Faculty of Biochemistry, Biopphisics and 
Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Gronostajowa Street 7, 30-387 Krakow, 
Poland. paulina.marona@doctoral.uj.edu.pl.
(2)Department of General Biochemistry, Faculty of Biochemistry, Biopphisics and 
Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Gronostajowa Street 7, 30-387 Krakow, 
Poland. judyta.ciesla.gorka@gmail.com.
(3)Department of General Biochemistry, Faculty of Biochemistry, Biopphisics and 
Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Gronostajowa Street 7, 30-387 Krakow, 
Poland. j.kotlinowski@uj.edu.pl.
(4)Department of Transplantation, Jagiellonian University Medical College, 
Jagiellonian University, Wielicka 265, 30-663 Krakow, Poland. 
mmajka@cm-uj.krakow.pl.
(5)Department of General Biochemistry, Faculty of Biochemistry, Biopphisics and 
Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Gronostajowa Street 7, 30-387 Krakow, 
Poland. jolanta.jura@uj.edu.pl.
(6)Department of General Biochemistry, Faculty of Biochemistry, Biopphisics and 
Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Gronostajowa Street 7, 30-387 Krakow, 
Poland. katarzyna.miekus@uj.edu.pl.

C-Met tyrosine kinase receptor plays an important role under normal and 
pathological conditions. In tumor cells' overexpression or incorrect activation 
of c-Met, this leads to stimulation of proliferation, survival and increase of 
motile activity. This receptor is also described as a marker of cancer 
initiating cells. The latest research shows that the c-Met receptor has an 
influence on the development of resistance to targeted cancer treatment. High 
c-Met expression and activation in renal cell carcinomas is associated with the 
progression of the disease and poor survival of patients. C-Met receptor has 
become a therapeutic target in kidney cancer. However, the therapies used so far 
using c-Met tyrosine kinase inhibitors demonstrate resistance to treatment. On 
the other hand, the c-Met pathway may act as an alternative target pathway in 
tumors that are resistant to other therapies. Combination treatment together 
with c-Met inhibitor reduces tumor growth, vascularization and pro-metastatic 
behavior and results in suppressed mesenchymal phenotype and vascular 
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) secretion. Recently, it has been shown that the 
acquirement of mesenchymal phenotype or lack of cell differentiation might be 
related to the presence of the c-Met receptor and is consequently responsible 
for therapy resistance. This review presents the results from recent studies 
identifying c-Met as an important factor in renal carcinomas being responsible 
for tumor growth, progression and metastasis, indicating the role of c-Met in 
resistance to antitumor therapy and demonstrating the pivotal role of c-Met in 
supporting mesenchymal cell phenotype.

DOI: 10.3390/cells8030272
PMCID: PMC6468372
PMID: 30909397 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.