1. mSphere. 2019 Mar 27;4(2):e00024-19. doi: 10.1128/mSphere.00024-19.

OXA-48-Mediated Ceftazidime-Avibactam Resistance Is Associated with Evolutionary 
Trade-Offs.

Fröhlich C(1), Sørum V(2), Thomassen AM(3), Johnsen PJ(2), Leiros HS(3), 
Samuelsen Ø(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)The Norwegian Structural Biology Centre (NorStruct), Department of Chemistry, 
UiT-The Arctic University of Norway, Tromsø, Norway christopher.frohlich@uit.no 
orjan.samuelsen@unn.no.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, UiT-The Arctic University of Norway, Tromsø, Norway.
(3)The Norwegian Structural Biology Centre (NorStruct), Department of Chemistry, 
UiT-The Arctic University of Norway, Tromsø, Norway.
(4)Department of Pharmacy, UiT-The Arctic University of Norway, Tromsø, Norway 
christopher.frohlich@uit.no orjan.samuelsen@unn.no.
(5)Norwegian National Advisory Unit on Detection of Antimicrobial Resistance, 
Department of Microbiology and Infection Control, University Hospital of North 
Norway, Tromsø, Norway.

Infections due to carbapenemase-producing Gram-negative pathogens are associated 
with limited treatment options and consequently lead to increased mortality and 
morbidity. In response, combinations of existing β-lactams and novel β-lactamase 
inhibitors, such as ceftazidime-avibactam (CAZ-AVI), have been developed as 
alternative treatment options. To understand the development of resistance and 
evolutionary trajectories under CAZ-AVI exposure, we studied the effects of 
ceftazidime (CAZ) and CAZ-AVI on the carbapenemase OXA-48 and the epidemic 
OXA-48 plasmid in Escherichia coli Exposure of CAZ and CAZ-AVI resulted in 
single (P68A) and double (P68A,Y211S) amino acid substitutions in OXA-48, 
respectively. The antimicrobial susceptibility data and enzyme kinetics showed 
that the P68A substitution was responsible for an increased activity toward CAZ, 
whereas P68A,Y211S led to a decrease in the inhibitory activity of AVI. X-ray 
crystallography and molecular modeling of the mutants demonstrated increased 
flexibility within the active site, which could explain the elevated CAZ 
hydrolysis and reduced inhibitory activity of AVI. Interestingly, these 
substitutions resulted in collateral effects compromising the activity of OXA-48 
toward carbapenems and penicillins. Moreover, exposure to CAZ-AVI selected for 
mutations within the OXA-48-encoding plasmid that severely reduced fitness in 
the absence of antimicrobial selection. These evolutionary trade-offs may 
contribute to limit the evolution of OXA-48-mediated CAZ and CAZ-AVI resistance, 
as well as potentially resensitize isolates toward other therapeutic 
alternatives.IMPORTANCE The recent introduction of novel β-lactam/β-lactamase 
inhibitor combinations like ceftazidime-avibactam has increased our ability to 
treat infections caused by multidrug-resistant Gram-negative bacteria, including 
carbapenemase-producing Enterobacterales However, the increasing number of cases 
of reported resistance to ceftazidime-avibactam is a concern. OXA-48 is a 
carbapenemase that has no significant effect on ceftazidime, but is inhibited by 
avibactam. Since isolates with OXA-48 frequently harbor extended-spectrum 
β-lactamases that are inhibited by avibactam, it is likely that 
ceftazidime-avibactam will be used to treat infections caused by 
OXA-48-producing Enterobacterales. Our data show that exposure to 
ceftazidime-avibactam can lead to changes in OXA-48, resulting in increased 
ability to hydrolyze ceftazidime and withstand the inhibitory effect of 
avibactam. Thus, resistance toward ceftazidime-avibactam among OXA-48-producing 
Enterobacterales should be monitored. Interestingly, the compromising effect of 
the amino acid substitutions in OXA-48 on other β-lactams and the effect of 
ceftazidime-avibactam exposure on the epidemic OXA-48 plasmid indicate that the 
evolution of ceftazidime-avibactam resistance comes with collateral effects.

Copyright © 2019 Fröhlich et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mSphere.00024-19
PMCID: PMC6437269
PMID: 30918055 [Indexed for MEDLINE]