1. PLoS One. 2019 Apr 2;14(4):e0214326. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0214326. 
eCollection 2019.

Disruption of KPC-producing Klebsiella pneumoniae membrane via induction of 
oxidative stress by cinnamon bark (Cinnamomum verum J. Presl) essential oil.

Yang SK(1), Yusoff K(2), Ajat M(3), Thomas W(4), Abushelaibi A(5), Akseer R(5), 
Lim SE(4)(5), Lai KS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Biotechnology and 
Biomolecular Sciences, Universiti Putra Malaysia, Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Biotechnology and Biomolecular 
Sciences, Universiti Putra Malaysia, Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia.
(3)Department of Veterinary Preclinical Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary 
Medicine, Universiti Putra Malaysia, Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia.
(4)Perdana University-Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, School of Medicine, 
Perdana University, Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia.
(5)Health Sciences Division, Abu Dhabi Women's College, Higher Colleges of 
Technology, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates.

Klebsiella pneumoniae (KP) remains the most prevalent nosocomial pathogen and 
carries the carbapenemase (KPC) gene which confers resistance towards 
carbapenem. Thus, it is necessary to discover novel antimicrobials to address 
the issue of antimicrobial resistance in such pathogens. Natural products such 
as essential oils are a promising source due to their complex composition. 
Essential oils have been shown to be effective against pathogens, but the 
overall mechanisms have yet to be fully explained. Understanding the molecular 
mechanisms of essential oil towards KPC-KP cells would provide a deeper 
understanding of their potential use in clinical settings. Therefore, we aimed 
to investigate the mode of action of essential oil against KPC-KP cells from a 
proteomic perspective by comparing the overall proteome profile of KPC-KP cells 
treated with cinnamon bark (Cinnamomum verum J. Presl) essential oil (CBO) at 
their sub-inhibitory concentration of 0.08% (v/v). A total of 384 proteins were 
successfully identified from the non-treated cells, whereas only 242 proteins 
were identified from the CBO-treated cells. Proteins were then categorized based 
on their biological processes, cellular components and molecular function prior 
to pathway analysis. Pathway analysis showed that CBO induced oxidative stress 
in the KPC-KP cells as indicated by the abundance of oxidative stress regulator 
proteins such as glycyl radical cofactor, catalase peroxidase and DNA mismatch 
repair protein. Oxidative stress is likely to oxidize and disrupt the bacterial 
membrane as shown by the loss of major membrane proteins. Several genes selected 
for qRT-PCR analysis validated the proteomic profile and were congruent with the 
proteomic abundance profiles. In conclusion, KPC-KP cells exposed to CBO undergo 
oxidative stress that eventually disrupts the bacterial membrane possibly via 
interaction with the phospholipid bilayer. Interestingly, several pathways 
involved in the bacterial membrane repair system were also affected by oxidative 
stress, contributing to the loss of cells viability.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0214326
PMCID: PMC6445408
PMID: 30939149 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.