1. Front Oncol. 2019 Mar 20;9:171. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2019.00171. eCollection
2019.

Lysosomal Pathways and Autophagy Distinctively Control Endothelial Cell Behavior 
to Affect Tumor Vasculature.

Schaaf MB(1), Houbaert D(1), Meçe O(1), To SK(1), Ganne M(1), Maes H(1), 
Agostinis P(1).

Author information:
(1)Cell Death Research and Therapy Laboratory, Department for Cellular and 
Molecular Medicine, KU Leuven University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

Cancer cell-stromal cell crosstalk is orchestrated by a plethora of 
ligand-receptor interactions generating a tumor microenvironment (TME) which 
favors tumor growth. The high pro-angiogenic nature of the TME perpetuates the 
chaotic network of structurally immature, low pericyte-covered vessels 
characteristic of the tumor vasculature. We previously demonstrated that 
chloroquine (CQ) -a lysosomotropic agent used as first-generation autophagy 
blocker in clinical trials- induced tumor vessel normalization and reduced tumor 
hypoxia. CQ improved both vessel structure and maturation, whereas the 
conditional knockout of the crucial autophagy gene Atg5 in endothelial cells 
(ECs) did not, thus highlighting a potential differential role for EC-associated 
autophagy and the lysosomes in pathological tumor angiogenesis. However, how CQ 
or ATG5-deficiency in ECs affect angiogenic signals regulating EC-pericyte 
interface and therefore vessel maturation, remains unknown. Here, we show that 
in ECs CQ constrained VEGF-A-mediated VEGF receptor (VEGFR)2 phosphorylation, a 
driver of angiogenic signaling. In the presence of CQ we observed increased 
expression of the decoy receptor VEGFR1 and of a lower molecular weight form of 
VEGFR2, suggesting receptor cleavage. Consequently, VEGF-A-driven EC spheroid 
sprouting was reduced by CQ treatment. Furthermore, CQ significantly affected 
the transcription and secretion of platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)-AB/BB 
(upregulated) and Endothelin-1 (EDN1, downregulated), both modulators of 
perivascular cell (PC) behavior. In contrast, silencing of ATG5 in ECs had no 
effect on VEGFR2 to VEGFR1 ratio nor on PDGFB and EDN1 expression. Accordingly, 
mice harboring B16F10 melanoma tumors treated with CQ, displayed both an 
increased number of αSMA+ PCs covering tumor vessels and co-expressed PDGF 
receptor-β, enabling PDGF ligand dependent recruitment. Moreover, upon CQ 
treatment the tumoral expression of angiopoietin-1 (Angpt1), which retains mural 
cells, and induces vessel stabilization by binding to the EC-localized cognate 
receptor (TIE2), was increased thus supporting the vessel normalization function 
of CQ. These features associated with improved tumor vasculature were not 
phenocopied by the specific deletion of Atg5 in ECs. In conclusion, this study 
further unravels endothelial cell autonomous and non-autonomous mechanisms by 
which CQ "normalizes" the intercellular communication in the tumor vasculature 
independent of autophagy.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2019.00171
PMCID: PMC6435524
PMID: 30949450