1. PLoS Pathog. 2019 Apr 4;15(4):e1007512. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007512. 
eCollection 2019 Apr.

A unique dynamin-related protein is essential for mitochondrial fission in 
Toxoplasma gondii.

Melatti C(1), Pieperhoff M(1), Lemgruber L(1), Pohl E(2), Sheiner L(1), Meissner 
M(1).

Author information:
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Molecular Parasitology, Institute of Infection, 
Immunity & Inflammation, Glasgow Biomedical Research Centre, University of 
Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Biosciences, & Biophysical Sciences Institute, Durham 
University, Durham, United Kingdom.

The single mitochondrion of apicomplexan protozoa is thought to be critical for 
all stages of the life cycle, and is a validated drug target against these 
important human and veterinary parasites. In contrast to other eukaryotes, 
replication of the mitochondrion is tightly linked to the cell cycle. A key step 
in mitochondrial segregation is the fission event, which in many eukaryotes 
occurs by the action of dynamins constricting the outer membrane of the 
mitochondria from the cytosolic face. To date, none of the components of the 
apicomplexan fission machinery have been identified and validated. We identify 
here a highly divergent, dynamin-related protein (TgDrpC), conserved in 
apicomplexans as essential for mitochondrial biogenesis and potentially for 
fission in Toxoplasma gondii. We show that TgDrpC is found adjacent to the 
mitochondrion, and is localised both at its periphery and at its basal part, 
where fission is expected to occur. We demonstrate that depletion or dominant 
negative expression of TgDrpC results in interconnected mitochondria and 
ultimately in drastic changes in mitochondrial morphology, as well as in 
parasite death. Intriguingly, we find that the canonical adaptor TgFis1 is not 
required for mitochondrial fission. The identification of an 
Apicomplexa-specific enzyme required for mitochondrial biogenesis and essential 
for parasite growth highlights parasite adaptation. This work paves the way for 
future drug development targeting TgDrpC, and for the analysis of additional 
partners involved in this crucial step of apicomplexan multiplication.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007512
PMCID: PMC6448817
PMID: 30947298 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.