1. J Neuroinflammation. 2019 Apr 9;16(1):76. doi: 10.1186/s12974-019-1443-2.

The role of microglia in viral encephalitis: a review.

Chen Z(1), Zhong D(2), Li G(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Harbin Medical 
University, 23 You Zheng Street, Harbin, 150001, Heilong Jiang Province, 
People's Republic of China. 1195273019@qq.com.
(2)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Harbin Medical 
University, 23 You Zheng Street, Harbin, 150001, Heilong Jiang Province, 
People's Republic of China.

Viral encephalitis is still very prominent around the world, and traditional 
antiviral therapies still have shortcomings. Some patients cannot get effective 
relief or suffer from serious sequelae. At present, people are studying the role 
of the innate immune system in viral encephalitis. Microglia, as resident cells 
of the central nervous system (CNS), can respond quickly to various CNS injuries 
including trauma, ischemia, and infection and maintain the homeostasis of CNS, 
but this response is not always good; sometimes, it will exacerbate damage. 
Studies have shown that microglia also act as a double-edged sword during viral 
encephalitis. On the one hand, microglia can sense ATP signals through the 
purinergic receptor P2Y12 and are recruited around infected neurons to exert 
phagocytic activity. Microglia can exert a direct antiviral effect by producing 
type 1 interferon (IFN-1) to induce IFN-stimulated gene (ISG) expression of 
themselves or indirect antiviral effects by IFN-1 acting on other cells to 
activate corresponding signaling pathways. In addition, microglia can also exert 
an antiviral effect by inducing autophagy or secreting cytokines. On the other 
hand, microglia mediate presynaptic membrane damage in the hippocampus through 
complement, resulting in long-term memory impairment and cognitive dysfunction 
in patients with encephalitis. Microglia mediate fetal congenital malformations 
caused by Zika virus (ZIKV) infection. The gene expression profile of microglia 
in HIV encephalitis changes, and they tend to be a pro-inflammatory type. 
Microglia inhibited neuronal autophagy and aggravated the damage of CNS in HIV 
encephalitis; E3 ubiquitin ligase Pellino (pelia) expressed by microglia 
promotes the replication of virus in neurons. The interaction between amyloid-β 
peptide (Aβ) produced by neurons and activated microglia during viral infection 
is uncertain. Although neurons can mediate antiviral effects by activating 
receptor-interacting protein kinases 3 (RIPK3) in a death-independent pathway, 
the RIPK3 pathway of microglia is unknown. Different brain regions have 
different susceptibility to viruses, and the gene expression of microglia in 
different brain regions is specific. The relationship between the two needs to 
be further confirmed. How to properly regulate the function of microglia and 
make it exert more anti-inflammatory effects is our next research direction.

DOI: 10.1186/s12974-019-1443-2
PMCID: PMC6454758
PMID: 30967139 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable as no patients/participants 
involved in this review. COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have 
no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with 
regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional 
affiliations.