1. Methods Mol Biol. 2019;1977:43-70. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-9232-4_5.

Isotopic Labeling and Quantitative Proteomics of Acetylation on Histones and 
Beyond.

Lund PJ(1), Kori Y(1), Zhao X(2), Sidoli S(1), Yuan ZF(1), Garcia BA(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Perelman School of Medicine, 
Epigenetics Institute, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)Hubei Key Laboratory of Cell Homeostasis, College of Life Sciences, Wuhan 
University, Wuhan, China.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Perelman School of Medicine, 
Epigenetics Institute, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. 
bgarci@mail.med.upenn.edu.

Lysine acetylation is an important posttranslational modification (PTM) that 
regulates the function of proteins by affecting their localization, stability, 
binding, and enzymatic activity. Aberrant acetylation patterns have been 
observed in numerous diseases, most notably cancer, which has spurred the 
development of potential therapeutics that target acetylation pathways. Mass 
spectrometry (MS) has become the most adopted tool not only for the qualitative 
identification of acetylation sites but also for their large-scale 
quantification. By using heavy isotope labeling in cell culture combined with 
MS, it is now possible to accurately quantify newly synthesized acetyl groups 
and other PTMs, allowing differentiation between dynamically regulated and 
steady-state modifications. Here, we describe MS-based protocols to identify 
acetylation sites and quantify acetylation rates on both proteins in general and 
in the special case of histones. In the experimental approach for the former, 
13C-glucose and D3-acetate are used to metabolically label protein acetylation 
in cells with stable isotopes, thus allowing isotope incorporation to be tracked 
over time. After protein extraction and digestion, acetylated peptides are 
enriched via immunoprecipitation and then analyzed by MS. For histones, a 
similar metabolic labeling approach is performed, followed by acid extraction, 
derivatization with propionic anhydride, and trypsin digestion prior to MS 
analysis. The procedures presented may be adapted to investigate acetylation 
dynamics in a broad range of experimental contexts, including different cell 
types and stimulation conditions.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-9232-4_5
PMCID: PMC6543536
PMID: 30980322 [Indexed for MEDLINE]