1. Cancers (Basel). 2019 Apr 15;11(4):538. doi: 10.3390/cancers11040538.

Next-Generation Hedgehog/GLI Pathway Inhibitors for Cancer Therapy.

Peer E(1), Tesanovic S(2), Aberger F(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biosciences, Paris-Lodron University of Salzburg, Cancer 
Cluster Salzburg, Hellbrunner Strasse 34, 5020 Salzburg, Austria. 
elisabeth.peer@sbg.ac.at.
(2)Department of Biosciences, Paris-Lodron University of Salzburg, Cancer 
Cluster Salzburg, Hellbrunner Strasse 34, 5020 Salzburg, Austria. 
suzana.tesanovic@sbg.ac.at.
(3)Department of Biosciences, Paris-Lodron University of Salzburg, Cancer 
Cluster Salzburg, Hellbrunner Strasse 34, 5020 Salzburg, Austria. 
fritz.aberger@sbg.ac.at.

The Hedgehog/Glioma-associated oncogene homolog (HH/GLI) signaling pathway 
regulates self-renewal of rare and highly malignant cancer stem cells (CSC), 
which have been shown to account for the initiation and maintenance of tumor 
growth as well as for drug resistance, metastatic spread and relapse. 
Efficacious therapeutic approaches targeting CSC pathways, such as HH/GLI 
signaling in combination with chemo, radiation or immunotherapy are, therefore, 
of high medical need. Pharmacological inhibition of HH/GLI pathway activity 
represents a promising approach to eliminate malignant CSC. Clinically approved 
HH/GLI pathway inhibitors target the essential pathway effector Smoothened (SMO) 
with striking therapeutic efficacy in skin and brain cancer patients. However, 
multiple genetic and molecular mechanisms resulting in de novo and acquired 
resistance to SMO inhibitors pose major limitations to anti-HH/GLI therapies 
and, thus, the eradication of CSC. In this review, we summarize reasons for 
clinical failure of SMO inhibitors, including mechanisms caused by genetic 
alterations in HH pathway effectors or triggered by additional oncogenic signals 
activating GLI transcription factors in a noncanonical manner. We then discuss 
emerging novel and rationale-based approaches to overcome SMO-inhibitor 
resistance, focusing on pharmacological perturbations of enzymatic modifiers of 
GLI activity and on compounds either directly targeting oncogenic GLI factors or 
interfering with synergistic crosstalk signals known to boost the oncogenicity 
of HH/GLI signaling.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers11040538
PMCID: PMC6520835
PMID: 30991683

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.