1. Dev Dyn. 2019 Jul;248(7):583-602. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.43. Epub 2019 May 2.

Transcriptomic analysis of differential gene expression during chick periocular 
neural crest differentiation into corneal cells.

Bi L(1), Lwigale P(1).

Author information:
(1)BioSciences, Rice University, Houston, Texas.

BACKGROUND: Multipotent neural crest cells (NCC) contribute to the corneal 
endothelium and keratocytes during ocular development, but the molecular 
mechanisms that underlie this process remain poorly understood. We performed 
RNA-Seq analysis on periocular neural crest (pNC), corneal endothelium, and 
keratocytes and validated expression of candidate genes by in situ 
hybridization.
RESULTS: RNA-Seq profiling revealed enrichment of genes between pNC and neural 
crest-derived corneal cells, which correspond to pathways involved in focal 
adhesion, ECM-receptor interaction, cell adhesion, melanogenesis, and MAPK 
signaling. Comparisons of candidate NCC genes to ocular gene expression revealed 
that majority of the NCC genes are expressed in the pNC, but they are either 
differentially expressed or maintained during corneal development. Several genes 
involved in retinoic acid, transforming growth factor-β, and Wnt signaling 
pathways and their modulators are also differentially expressed. We identified 
differentially expressed transcription factors as potential downstream 
candidates that may instruct expression of genes involved in establishing 
corneal endothelium and keratocyte identities.
CONCLUSION: Combined, our data reveal novel changes in gene expression profiles 
as pNC differentiate into highly specialized corneal endothelial cells and 
keratocytes. These data serve as platform for further analyses of the molecular 
networks involved in NCC differentiation into corneal cells and provide insights 
into genes involved in corneal dysgenesis and adult diseases.

© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/dvdy.43
PMCID: PMC6746171
PMID: 31004457 [Indexed for MEDLINE]