1. Eur Heart J Case Rep. 2018 Sep 4;2(3):yty098. doi: 10.1093/ehjcr/yty098. 
eCollection 2018 Sep.

A case report of locally invasive Aspergillus fumigatus infection in a patient 
on canakinumab.

Chandrakumaran A(1), Malik M(2), Stevens MP(3), Abbate A(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Virginia Commonwealth University Medical 
Center, Richmond, VA, USA.
(2)Division of Hospital Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Virginia 
Commonwealth University Medical Center, Richmond, VA, USA.
(3)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, Virginia 
Commonwealth University Medical Center, Richmond, VA, USA.
(4)Division of Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine, Virginia 
Commonwealth University Medical Center, Richmond, VA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Canakinumab is a human monoclonal interleukin-1 antibody that has 
been studied in the Canakinumab Anti-Inflammatory Thrombosis Outcome Study 
(CANTOS) trial and shown to prevent recurrent cardiovascular events, while 
increasing the incidence of neutropenia and risk of severe infections.
CASE SUMMARY: This is a case report of a locally invasive aspergillus infection 
in a patient with uncontrolled diabetes mellitus who was receiving canakinumab 
for 3.5 years as part of the CANTOS trial. He presented with headaches and left 
eye pain and was found to have a large left ethmoid sinus mass extending into 
the orbit on computed tomography scan of the head. Cultures from an endoscopic 
biopsy of left ethmoid sinus grew Aspergillus fumigatus. Canakinumab was 
discontinued, and he was discharged on voriconazole with improvement in his 
headaches and left eye pain.
DISCUSSION: The anti-inflammatory properties of canakinumab could have blunted 
the patient's immune response allowing the mycetoma to invade adjacent tissue. 
If canakinumab was approved for the secondary prevention of cardiovascular 
events then it is important to be cognizant of its potential to delay the 
presentation of any infection.

DOI: 10.1093/ehjcr/yty098
PMCID: PMC6177092
PMID: 31020175