1. Hum Brain Mapp. 2019 Aug 15;40(12):3488-3507. doi: 10.1002/hbm.24611. Epub
2019  Apr 29.

Accelerated estimation and permutation inference for ACE modeling.

Chen X(1)(2)(3)(4), Formisano E(2)(3), Blokland GAM(5)(6)(7), Strike LT(8), 
McMahon KL(9), de Zubicaray GI(10), Thompson PM(11), Wright MJ(8)(9), Winkler 
AM(12)(13), Ge T(5)(6)(14), Nichols TE(1)(15).

Author information:
(1)Department of Statistics, University of Warwick, Coventry, UK.
(2)Department of Cognitive Neuroscience, Faculty of Psychology and Neuroscience, 
Maastricht University, Maastricht, the Netherlands.
(3)Maastricht Centre for Systems Biology (MaCSBio), Maastricht University, 
Maastricht, the Netherlands.
(4)Department of Biomedical Data Sciences, Leiden University Medical Center, 
Leiden, the Netherlands.
(5)Psychiatric and Neurodevelopmental Genetics Unit, Center for Genomic 
Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.
(6)Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts.
(7)Department of Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(8)Queensland Brain Institute, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, 
Australia.
(9)Centre for Advanced Imaging, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, 
Australia.
(10)Faculty of Health and Institute of Health and Biomedical Innovation, 
Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.
(11)Imaging Genetics Center, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, 
California.
(12)Emotion and Development Branch, National Institute of Mental Health, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland.
(13)Department of Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut.
(14)Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Charlestown, Massachusetts.
(15)Oxford Big Data Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre for Health Information and 
Discovery, Nuffield Department of Population Health, University of Oxford, 
Oxford, UK.

There are a wealth of tools for fitting linear models at each location in the 
brain in neuroimaging analysis, and a wealth of genetic tools for estimating 
heritability for a small number of phenotypes. But there remains a need for 
computationally efficient neuroimaging genetic tools that can conduct analyses 
at the brain-wide scale. Here we present a simple method for heritability 
estimation on twins that replaces a variance component model-which requires 
iterative optimisation-with a (noniterative) linear regression model, by 
transforming data to squared twin-pair differences. We demonstrate that the 
method has comparable bias, mean squared error, false positive risk, and power 
to best practice maximum-likelihood-based methods, while requiring a small 
fraction of the computation time. Combined with permutation, we call this 
approach "Accelerated Permutation Inference for the ACE Model (APACE)" where ACE 
refers to the additive genetic (A) effects, and common (C), and unique (E) 
environmental influences on the trait. We show how the use of spatial statistics 
like cluster size can dramatically improve power, and illustrate the method on a 
heritability analysis of an fMRI working memory dataset.

© 2019 The Authors. Human Brain Mapping published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/hbm.24611
PMCID: PMC6680147
PMID: 31037793 [Indexed for MEDLINE]