1. Lab Chip. 2019 May 14;19(10):1877-1886. doi: 10.1039/c8lc01279b.

Microfluidic on-demand engineering of exosomes towards cancer immunotherapy.

Zhao Z(1), McGill J, Gamero-Kubota P, He M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical and Petroleum Engineering, Bioengineering Program, 
University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas, USA. meih@ku.edu.

Extracellular vesicles (EVs), particularly exosomes (30-150 nm), are an emerging 
delivery system in mediating cellular communications, which have been observed 
for priming immune responses by presenting parent cell signaling proteins or 
tumor antigens to immune cells. Therefore, preparation of antigenic exosomes 
that can play therapeutic roles, particularly in cancer immunotherapy, is 
emerging. However, standard benchtop methods (e.g., ultracentrifugation and 
filtration) lack the ability to purify antigenic exosomes specifically among 
other microvesicle subtypes, due to the non-selective and time-consuming (>10 h) 
isolation protocols. Exosome engineering approaches, such as the transfection of 
parent cells, also suffer from poor yields, low purity, and time-consuming 
operations. In this paper, we introduce a streamlined microfluidic cell culture 
platform for integration of harvesting, antigenic modification, and 
photo-release of surface engineered exosomes in one workflow, which enables the 
production of intact, MHC peptide surface engineered exosomes for cytolysis 
activation. A PDMS microfluidic cell culture chip is simply cast from a 
3D-printed mold. This proof-of-concept study demonstrated the enhanced ability 
of harvested exosomes in antigen presentation and T cell activation, by 
decorating melanoma tumor peptides on the exosome surface (e.g., gp-100, MART-1, 
and MAGE-A3). Such surface engineered antigenic exosomes were harvested in 
real-time from the on-chip culture of leukocytes isolated from human blood, 
leading to much faster cellular uptake. The activation of gp100-specific CD8 T 
cells which were purified from the spleen of 2 Pmel1 transgenic mice was 
evaluated using surface engineered exosomes prepared from murine antigen 
presenting cells. Antigen-specific CD8 T cell proliferation was significantly 
induced by the engineered exosomes compared to that by native, non-engineered 
exosomes. This microfluidic platform serves as an automated and highly 
integrated cell culture device for rapid and real-time production of therapeutic 
exosomes that could advance cancer immunotherapy.

DOI: 10.1039/c8lc01279b
PMCID: PMC6520140
PMID: 31044204 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest There are no conflicts to 
declare.