1. Elife. 2019 May 8;8:e46135. doi: 10.7554/eLife.46135.

Generation of endogenous pH-sensitive EGF receptor and its application in 
high-throughput screening for proteins involved in clathrin-mediated 
endocytosis.

Larsen MB(1), Perez Verdaguer M(1), Schmidt BF(2), Bruchez MP(2)(3)(4)(5), 
Watkins SC(1), Sorkin A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, 
Pittsburgh, United States.
(2)Molecular Biosensor and Imaging Center, Carnegie Mellon University, 
Pittsburgh, United States.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, 
United States.
(4)Department of Chemistry, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, United 
States.
(5)Sharp Edge Laboratories, Pittsburgh, United States.

Previously we used gene-editing to label endogenous EGF receptor (EGFR) with GFP 
and demonstrate that picomolar concentrations of EGFR ligand drive signaling and 
endocytosis of EGFR in tumors in vivo (Pinilla-Macua et al., 2017). We now use 
gene-editing to insert a fluorogen activating protein (FAP) in the EGFR 
extracellular domain. Binding of the tandem dye pair MG-Bis-SA to FAP-EGFR 
provides a ratiometric pH-sensitive model with dual fluorescence excitation and 
a single far-red emission. The excitation ratio of fluorescence intensities was 
demonstrated to faithfully report the fraction of FAP-EGFR located in acidic 
endosomal/lysosomal compartments. Coupling native FAP-EGFR expression with the 
high method sensitivity has allowed development of a high-throughput assay to 
measure the rates of clathrin-mediated FAP-EGFR endocytosis stimulated with 
physiological EGF concentrations. The assay was utilized to screen a phosphatase 
siRNA library. These studies highlight the utility of endogenous pH-sensitive 
FAP-receptor chimeras in high-throughput analysis of endocytosis.

© 2019, Larsen et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.46135
PMCID: PMC6533059
PMID: 31066673 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ML, MP, BS, SW, AS No competing interests 
declared, MB founder of Sharp Edge Laboratories, a company that licensed the FAP 
technology from CMU. The author has no other competing interests to declare