1. Endocr Connect. 2019 Jun;8(6):736-744. doi: 10.1530/EC-19-0149.

The first case of primary hypertrophic osteoarthropathy with soft tissue giant 
tumors caused by HPGD loss-of-function mutation.

Pang Q(1)(2), Xu Y(1)(3), Qi X(1), Jiang Y(1), Wang O(1), Li M(1), Xing X(1), 
Qin L(2), Xia W(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Key Laboratory of Endocrinology, Ministry of 
Health, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical 
Sciences, Beijing, China.
(2)Musculoskeletal Research Laboratory and Bone Quality and Health Assessment 
Centre, Department of Orthopedics & Traumatology, The Chinese University of Hong 
Kong, Hong Kong SAR, Hong Kong.
(3)Department of Endocrinology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Shanxi Medical 
University, Taiyuan, Shanxi, China.

BACKGROUND: Primary hypertrophic osteoarthropathy (PHO) is a rare genetic 
multi-organic disease characterized by digital clubbing, periostosis and 
pachydermia. Two genes, HPGD and SLCO2A1, which encodes 15-hydroxyprostaglandin 
dehydrogenase (15-PGDH) and prostaglandin transporter (PGT), respectively, have 
been reported to be related to PHO. Deficiency of aforementioned two genes leads 
to failure of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) degradation and thereby elevated levels of 
PGE2. PGE2 plays an important role in tumorigenesis. Studies revealed a tumor 
suppressor activity of 15-PGDH in tumors, such as lung, bladder and breast 
cancers. However, to date, no HPGD-mutated PHO patients presenting concomitant 
tumor has been documented. In the present study, we reported the first case of 
HPGD-mutated PHO patient with soft tissue giant tumors at lower legs and 
evaluated the efficacy of selective COX-2 inhibitor (etoricoxib) treatment in 
the patient.
METHODS: In this study, we summarized the clinical data, collected the serum and 
urine samples for biochemical test and analyzed the HPGD gene in our patient.
RESULTS: A common HPGD mutation c.310_311delCT was identified in the patient. In 
addition to typical clinical features (digital clubbing, periostosis and 
pachydermia), the patient demonstrated a new clinical manifestation, a giant 
soft tissue tumor on the left lower leg which has not been reported in 
HPGD-mutated PHO patient before. After 6-month treatment with etoricoxib, the 
patient showed decreased PGE2 levels and improved PHO-related symptoms. Though 
the soft tissue tumor persisted, it seemed to be controlled under the etoricoxib 
treatment.
CONCLUSION: This finding expanded the clinical spectrum of PHO and provided 
unique insights into the HPGD-mutated PHO.

DOI: 10.1530/EC-19-0149
PMCID: PMC6547301
PMID: 31063976