1. Sci Adv. 2019 May 8;5(5):eaau9093. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.aau9093. eCollection
2019  May.

Drug discovery for psychiatric disorders using high-content single-cell 
screening of signaling network responses ex vivo.

Lago SG(1), Tomasik J(1), van Rees GF(1), Steeb H(1), Cox DA(1), Rustogi N(1), 
Ramsey JM(1), Bishop JA(2), Petryshen T(3)(4)(5), Haggarty SJ(2), 
Vázquez-Bourgon J(6)(7)(8), Papiol S(9)(10)(11), Suarez-Pinilla P(6)(7), 
Crespo-Facorro B(6)(7)(8), van Beveren NJ(12)(13)(14), Bahn S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(2)Chemical Neurobiology Laboratory, Departments of Neurology and Psychiatry, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Center for Genomic Medicine, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Psychiatric and Neurodevelopmental Genetics Unit, Center for Genomic Medicine 
and Department of Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, 
Cambridge, MA, USA.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(6)Department of Psychiatry, Marqués de Valdecilla University Hospital, IDIVAL, 
School of Medicine, University of Cantabria, Santander, Spain.
(7)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Salud Mental (CIBERSAM), 
Santander, Spain.
(8)IDIVAL, Valdecilla Biomedical Research Institute, Santander, Spain.
(9)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Salud Mental (CIBERSAM), 
Barcelona, Spain.
(10)Institute of Psychiatric Phenomics and Genomics (IPPG), University Hospital, 
Ludwig Maximilian University, Munich, Germany.
(11)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Hospital, Ludwig 
Maximilian University, Munich, Germany.
(12)Department of Neuroscience, Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
(13)Department of Psychiatry, Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
(14)Department "Nieuwe Kennis," Delta Centre for Mental Health Care, Rotterdam, 
Netherlands.

There is a paucity of efficacious new compounds to treat neuropsychiatric 
disorders. We present a novel approach to neuropsychiatric drug discovery based 
on high-content characterization of druggable signaling network responses at the 
single-cell level in patient-derived lymphocytes ex vivo. Primary T lymphocytes 
showed functional responses encompassing neuropsychiatric medications and 
central nervous system ligands at established (e.g., GSK-3β) and emerging (e.g., 
CrkL) drug targets. Clinical application of the platform to schizophrenia 
patients over the course of antipsychotic treatment revealed therapeutic targets 
within the phospholipase Cγ1-calcium signaling pathway. Compound library 
screening against the target phenotype identified subsets of L-type calcium 
channel blockers and corticosteroids as novel therapeutically relevant drug 
classes with corresponding activity in neuronal cells. The screening results 
were validated by predicting in vivo efficacy in an independent schizophrenia 
cohort. The approach has the potential to discern new drug targets and 
accelerate drug discovery and personalized medicine for neuropsychiatric 
conditions.

DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.aau9093
PMCID: PMC6506238
PMID: 31086815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]