1. J Nanobiotechnology. 2019 May 13;17(1):61. doi: 10.1186/s12951-019-0497-8.

Production and characterization of novel ssRNA bacteriophage virus-like 
particles from metagenomic sequencing data.

Liekniņa I(1), Kalniņš G(1), Akopjana I(1), Bogans J(1), Šišovs M(1), Jansons 
J(1), Rūmnieks J(1), Tārs K(2).

Author information:
(1)Latvian Biomedical Research and Study Center, Rātsupītes 1, Riga, LV1067, 
Latvia.
(2)Latvian Biomedical Research and Study Center, Rātsupītes 1, Riga, LV1067, 
Latvia. kaspars@biomed.lu.lv.

BACKGROUND: Protein shells assembled from viral coat proteins are an attractive 
platform for development of new vaccines and other tools such as targeted 
bioimaging and drug delivery agents. Virus-like particles (VLPs) derived from 
the single-stranded RNA (ssRNA) bacteriophage coat proteins (CPs) have been 
important and successful contenders in the area due to their simplicity and 
robustness. However, only a few different VLP types are available that put 
certain limitations on continued developments and expanded adaptation of ssRNA 
phage VLP technology. Metagenomic studies have been a rich source for 
discovering novel viral sequences, and in recent years have unraveled numerous 
ssRNA phage genomes significantly different from those known before. Here, we 
describe the use of ssRNA CP sequences found in metagenomic data to 
experimentally produce and characterize novel VLPs.
RESULTS: Approximately 150 ssRNA phage CP sequences were sourced from 
metagenomic sequence data and grouped into 14 different clusters based on CP 
sequence similarity analysis. 110 CP-encoding sequences were obtained by gene 
synthesis and expressed in bacteria which in 80 cases resulted in VLP assembly. 
Production and purification of the VLPs was straightforward and compatible with 
established protocols, with the only exception that a considerable proportion of 
the CPs had to be produced at a lower temperature to ensure VLP assembly. The 
VLP morphology was similar to that of the previously studied phages, although a 
few deviations such as elongated or smaller particles were noted in certain 
cases. In addition, stabilizing inter-subunit disulfide bonds were detected in 
six VLPs and several possible candidate RNA structures in the phage genomes were 
identified that might bind to the coat protein and ensure specific RNA 
packaging.
CONCLUSIONS: Compared to the few types of ssRNA phage VLPs that were used 
before, several dozens of new particles representing ten distinct similarity 
groups are now available with a notable potential for biotechnological 
applications. It is believed that the novel VLPs described in this paper will 
provide the groundwork for future development of new vaccines and other 
applications based on ssRNA bacteriophage VLPs.

DOI: 10.1186/s12951-019-0497-8
PMCID: PMC6513524
PMID: 31084612 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: The 
authors declare that they have no competing interests.