1. PLoS Pathog. 2019 May 16;15(5):e1007756. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007756. 
eCollection 2019 May.

The coronavirus macrodomain is required to prevent PARP-mediated inhibition of 
virus replication and enhancement of IFN expression.

Grunewald ME(1), Chen Y(2), Kuny C(2), Maejima T(3), Lease R(4), Ferraris D(4), 
Aikawa M(3), Sullivan CS(2), Perlman S(1), Fehr AR(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, 
United States of America.
(2)Department of Molecular Biosciences, University of Texas, Austin, TX, United 
States of America.
(3)Center for Interdisciplinary Cardiovascular Sciences, Cardiovascular 
Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 
United States of America.
(4)McDaniel College, Westminster, MD, United States of America.
(5)Department of Molecular Biosciences, University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS, 
United States of America.

ADP-ribosylation is a ubiquitous post-translational addition of either monomers 
or polymers of ADP-ribose to target proteins by ADP-ribosyltransferases, usually 
by interferon-inducible diphtheria toxin-like enzymes known as PARPs. While 
several PARPs have known antiviral activities, these activities are mostly 
independent of ADP-ribosylation. Consequently, less is known about the antiviral 
effects of ADP-ribosylation. Several viral families, including Coronaviridae, 
Togaviridae, and Hepeviridae, encode for macrodomain proteins that bind to and 
hydrolyze ADP-ribose from proteins and are critical for optimal replication and 
virulence. These results suggest that macrodomains counter cellular 
ADP-ribosylation, but whether PARPs or, alternatively, other 
ADP-ribosyltransferases cause this modification is not clear. Here we show that 
pan-PARP inhibition enhanced replication and inhibited interferon production in 
primary macrophages infected with macrodomain-mutant but not wild-type 
coronavirus. Specifically, knockdown of two abundantly expressed PARPs, PARP12 
and PARP14, led to increased replication of mutant but did not significantly 
affect wild-type virus. PARP14 was also important for the induction of 
interferon in mouse and human cells, indicating a critical role for this PARP in 
the regulation of innate immunity. In summary, these data demonstrate that the 
macrodomain is required to prevent PARP-mediated inhibition of coronavirus 
replication and enhancement of interferon production.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007756
PMCID: PMC6521996
PMID: 31095648 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.