1. J Alzheimers Dis. 2019;69(4):1003-1018. doi: 10.3233/JAD-180932.

Mild Cognitive Impairment and Decline in Resting State Functional Connectivity 
after Total Knee Arthroplasty with General Anesthesia.

Hardcastle C(1), Huang H(2), Crowley S(1), Tanner J(1), Hernaiz C(1), Rice M(3), 
Parvataneni H(4), Ding M(2), Price CC(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Health Psychology, University of Florida, 
Gainesville, FL, USA.
(2)J Crayton Pruitt Family Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of 
Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(3)Division of Multispecialty Adult Anesthesiology, Vanderbilt University, 
Gainesville, FL, USA.
(4)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, 
USA.
(5)Department of Anesthesiology, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.

BACKGROUND: Research shows that older adults can have a decline in three key 
resting state networks (default mode network, central executive network, and 
salience network) after total knee arthroplasty and that patients' pre-surgery 
brain and cognitive integrity predicts decline.
OBJECTIVES: First, to assess resting state network connectivity decline from the 
perspective of nodal connectivity changes in a larger older adult surgery 
sample. Second, to compare pre-post functional connectivity changes in mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI) versus non-MCI.
METHODS: Surgery (n = 69) and non-surgery (n = 65) peers completed a 
comprehensive preoperative neuropsychological evaluation and pre- and acute 
(within 48 hours) post-surgery/pseudo-surgery functional brain magnetic 
resonance imaging scan. MCI was classified within both (MCI surgery, n = 13; MCI 
non-surgery, n = 10). Using standard coordinates, we defined default mode 
network, salience network, central executive network, and the visual network 
(serving as a control network). The functional connectivity of these networks 
and brain areas (nodes) that make up these networks were examined for 
pre-post-surgery changes through paired samples t-test and ANOVA.
RESULTS: There was a decline in RSN connectivity after surgery (p < 0.05) only 
in the three cognitive networks (not the visual network). The default mode and 
salience network showed nodal connectivity changes (p < 0.01). MCI surgery had 
greater functional connectivity decline in DMN and SN. Non-surgery participants 
showed no significant functional connectivity change.
CONCLUSION: Surgery with general anesthesia selectively alters functional 
connectivity in major cognitive resting state networks particularly in DMN and 
SN. Participants with MCI appear more vulnerable to these functional changes.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-180932
PMCID: PMC6629260
PMID: 31104019 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interest to 
report.