1. PLoS Biol. 2019 May 21;17(5):e3000255. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3000255. 
eCollection 2019 May.

Extensive loss of cell-cycle and DNA repair genes in an ancient lineage of 
bipolar budding yeasts.

Steenwyk JL(1), Opulente DA(2), Kominek J(2), Shen XX(1), Zhou X(3), Labella 
AL(1), Bradley NP(1), Eichman BF(1), Čadež N(4), Libkind D(5), DeVirgilio J(6), 
Hulfachor AB(7), Kurtzman CP(6), Hittinger CT(2), Rokas A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, 
Tennessee, United States of America.
(2)Laboratory of Genetics, Genome Center of Wisconsin, DOE Great Lakes Bioenergy 
Research Center, Wisconsin Energy Institute, J. F. Crow Institute for the Study 
of Evolution, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Wisconsin, United States of 
America.
(3)Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Microbial Signals and Disease Control, 
Integrative Microbiology Research Centre, South China Agricultural University, 
Guangzhou, China.
(4)University of Ljubljana Biotechnical Faculty, Department of Food Science and 
Technology, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(5)Laboratorio de Microbiología Aplicada, Biotecnología y Bioinformática, 
Instituto Andino Patagónico de Tecnologías Biológicas y Geoambientales, 
Universidad Nacional del Comahue-CONICET, San Carlos de Bariloche, Río Negro, 
Argentina.
(6)Mycotoxin Prevention and Applied Microbiology Research Unit, National Center 
for Agricultural Utilization Research, Agricultural Research Service, United 
States Department of Agriculture, Peoria, Illinois, United States of America.
(7)Laboratory of Genetics, Genome Center of Wisconsin, Wisconsin Energy 
Institute, J. F. Crow Institute for the Study of Evolution, University of 
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America.

Cell-cycle checkpoints and DNA repair processes protect organisms from 
potentially lethal mutational damage. Compared to other budding yeasts in the 
subphylum Saccharomycotina, we noticed that a lineage in the genus Hanseniaspora 
exhibited very high evolutionary rates, low Guanine-Cytosine (GC) content, small 
genome sizes, and lower gene numbers. To better understand Hanseniaspora 
evolution, we analyzed 25 genomes, including 11 newly sequenced, representing 
18/21 known species in the genus. Our phylogenomic analyses identify two 
Hanseniaspora lineages, a faster-evolving lineage (FEL), which began 
diversifying approximately 87 million years ago (mya), and a slower-evolving 
lineage (SEL), which began diversifying approximately 54 mya. Remarkably, both 
lineages lost genes associated with the cell cycle and genome integrity, but 
these losses were greater in the FEL. E.g., all species lost the cell-cycle 
regulator WHIskey 5 (WHI5), and the FEL lost components of the spindle 
checkpoint pathway (e.g., Mitotic Arrest-Deficient 1 [MAD1], Mitotic 
Arrest-Deficient 2 [MAD2]) and DNA-damage-checkpoint pathway (e.g., Mitosis 
Entry Checkpoint 3 [MEC3], RADiation sensitive 9 [RAD9]). Similarly, both 
lineages lost genes involved in DNA repair pathways, including the DNA 
glycosylase gene 3-MethylAdenine DNA Glycosylase 1 (MAG1), which is part of the 
base-excision repair pathway, and the DNA photolyase gene PHotoreactivation 
Repair deficient 1 (PHR1), which is involved in pyrimidine dimer repair. 
Strikingly, the FEL lost 33 additional genes, including polymerases (i.e., 
POLymerase 4 [POL4] and POL32) and telomere-associated genes (e.g., 
Repressor/activator site binding protein-Interacting Factor 1 [RIF1], 
Replication Factor A 3 [RFA3], Cell Division Cycle 13 [CDC13], Pbp1p Binding 
Protein [PBP2]). Echoing these losses, molecular evolutionary analyses reveal 
that, compared to the SEL, the FEL stem lineage underwent a burst of accelerated 
evolution, which resulted in greater mutational loads, homopolymer 
instabilities, and higher fractions of mutations associated with the common 
endogenously damaged base, 8-oxoguanine. We conclude that Hanseniaspora is an 
ancient lineage that has diversified and thrived, despite lacking many otherwise 
highly conserved cell-cycle and genome integrity genes and pathways, and may 
represent a novel, to our knowledge, system for studying cellular life without 
them.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3000255
PMCID: PMC6528967
PMID: 31112549 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.