1. Mol Cancer. 2019 May 24;18(1):101. doi: 10.1186/s12943-019-1030-2.

Crosstalk between autophagy and epithelial-mesenchymal transition and its 
application in cancer therapy.

Chen HT(1), Liu H(2), Mao MJ(3), Tan Y(1)(4), Mo XQ(5), Meng XJ(6), Cao MT(7), 
Zhong CY(8), Liu Y(1), Shan H(9), Jiang GM(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, The Fifth Affiliated Hospital of Sun 
Yat-sen University, Zhuhai, 2528000, Guangdong, China.
(2)Cancer Hospital and Cancer Research Institute, Guangzhou Medical University, 
Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine, State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South 
China, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, Sun Yat-sen 
University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(4)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Hunan Cancer Hospital, The Affiliated 
Cancer Hospital of Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South University, 
Changsha, Hunan, China.
(5)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, The Fifth Affiliated Hospital of Sun 
Yat-sen University, Zhuhai, Guangdong, China.
(6)Department of Endocrinology, The Fifth Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen 
University, Zhuhai, Guangdong, China.
(7)Department of Clinical Laboratory, The First Affiliated Hospital of 
University of South China, Hengyang, Hunan, China.
(8)Department of Geriatrics, The Fifth Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen 
University, Zhuhai, Guangdong, China.
(9)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Biomedical Imaging, The Fifth 
Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Zhuhai, 2528000, Guangdong, 
China. shanhong@mail.sysu.edu.cn.
(10)Department of Clinical Laboratory, The Fifth Affiliated Hospital of Sun 
Yat-sen University, Zhuhai, 2528000, Guangdong, China. 
jianggm3@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

Autophagy is a highly conserved catabolic process that mediates degradation of 
pernicious or dysfunctional cellular components, such as invasive pathogens, 
senescent proteins, and organelles. It can promote or suppress tumor 
development, so it is a "double-edged sword" in tumors that depends on the cell 
and tissue types and the stages of tumor. The epithelial-mesenchymal transition 
(EMT) is a complex biological trans-differentiation process that allows 
epithelial cells to transiently obtain mesenchymal features, including motility 
and metastatic potential. EMT is considered as an important contributor to the 
invasion and metastasis of cancers. Thus, clarifying the crosstalk between 
autophagy and EMT will provide novel targets for cancer therapy. It was reported 
that EMT-related signal pathways have an impact on autophagy; conversely, 
autophagy activation can suppress or strengthen EMT by regulating various 
signaling pathways. On one hand, autophagy activation provides energy and basic 
nutrients for EMT during metastatic spreading, which assists cells to survive in 
stressful environmental and intracellular conditions. On the other hand, 
autophagy, acting as a cancer-suppressive function, is inclined to hinder 
metastasis by selectively down-regulating critical transcription factors of EMT 
in the early phases. Therefore, the inhibition of EMT by autophagy inhibitors or 
activators might be a novel strategy that provides thought and enlightenment for 
the treatment of cancer. In this article, we discuss in detail the role of 
autophagy and EMT in the development of cancers, the regulatory mechanisms 
between autophagy and EMT, the effects of autophagy inhibition or activation on 
EMT, and the potential applications in anticancer therapy.

DOI: 10.1186/s12943-019-1030-2
PMCID: PMC6533683
PMID: 31126310 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.