1. PLoS One. 2019 May 23;14(5):e0217216. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0217216. 
eCollection 2019.

Trafficking of immune cells across the blood-brain barrier is modulated by 
neurofibrillary pathology in tauopathies.

Majerova P(1)(2), Michalicova A(1)(2), Cente M(1)(2), Hanes J(1)(2), Vegh J(1), 
Kittel A(3), Kosikova N(1), Cigankova V(4), Mihaljevic S(1), Jadhav S(1)(2), 
Kovac A(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neuroimmunology, Slovak Academy of Sciences, AD Centre, 
Bratislava, Slovak Republic.
(2)AXON Neuroscience R&D Services SE, Bratislava, Slovak Republic.
(3)Institute of Experimental Medicine, Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Budapest, 
Hungary.
(4)Department of Anatomy, Histology and Physiology, The University of Veterinary 
Medicine and Pharmacy, Kosice, Slovak Republic.
(5)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, The University of Veterinary 
Medicine and Pharmacy, Kosice, Slovak Republic.

Tauopathies represent a heterogeneous group of neurodegenerative disorders 
characterized by abnormal deposition of the hyperphosphorylated 
microtubule-associated protein tau. Chronic neuroinflammation in tauopathies is 
driven by glial cells that potentially trigger the disruption of the blood-brain 
barrier (BBB). Pro-inflammatory signaling molecules such as cytokines, 
chemokines and adhesion molecules produced by glial cells, neurons and 
endothelial cells, in general, cooperate to determine the integrity of BBB by 
influencing vascular permeability, enhancing migration of immune cells and 
altering transport systems. We considered the effect of tau about vascular 
permeability of peripheral blood cells in vitro and in vivo using primary rat 
BBB model and transgenic rat model expressing misfolded truncated protein tau. 
Immunohistochemistry, electron microscopy and transcriptomic analysis were 
employed to characterize the structural and functional changes in BBB manifested 
by neurofibrillary pathology in a transgenic model. Our results show that 
misfolded protein tau ultimately modifies the endothelial properties of BBB, 
facilitating blood-to-brain cell transmigration. Our results suggest that the 
increased diapedesis of peripheral cells across the BBB, in response to tau 
protein, could be mediated by the increased expression of endothelial signaling 
molecules, namely ICAM-1, VCAM-1, and selectins. We suggest that the 
compensation of BBB in the diseased brain represents a crucial factor in 
neurodegeneration of human tauopathies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0217216
PMCID: PMC6532920
PMID: 31120951 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: PM, AM, JH, MC, SJ and AK are employees of AXON 
Neuroscience R&D Services SE and do not own any shares of the company. This does 
not alter our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials. The 
authors declare that they have no other competing interests.