1. Neuropathology. 2019 Aug;39(4):268-278. doi: 10.1111/neup.12558. Epub 2019 May
 24.

Altered immunoreactivity of ErbB4, a causative gene product for ALS19, in the 
spinal cord of patients with sporadic ALS.

Takahashi Y(1), Uchino A(2), Shioya A(3), Sano T(3)(4), Matsumoto C(4)(5), 
Numata-Uematsu Y(5)(6), Nagano S(5)(7), Araki T(5), Murayama S(2), Saito Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, National Center Hospital, National Center of 
Neurology and Psychiatry, Kodaira, Japan.
(2)Department of Neurology and Neuropathology and Brain Bank for Aging Research, 
Tokyo Metropolitan Geriatric Hospital and Institute of Gerontology, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine, National Center Hospital, National Center 
of Neurology and Psychiatry, Kodaira, Japan.
(4)Tokyo Medical and Dental University Graduate School of Medical and Dental 
Sciences, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Peripheral Nervous System Research, National Institute of 
Neuroscience, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Kodaira, Japan.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Sendai, 
Japan.
(7)Department of Neurology, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka, 
Japan.

ErbB4 is the protein implicated in familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), 
designated as ALS19. ErbB4 is a receptor tyrosine kinase activated by its 
ligands, neuregulins (NRG), and plays an essential role in the function and 
viability of motor neurons. Mutations in the ALS19 gene lead to the reduced 
autophosphorylation capacity of the ErbB4 protein upon stimulation with NRG-1, 
suggesting that the disruption of the NRG-ErbB4 pathway causes motor neuron 
degeneration. We used immunohistochemistry to study ErbB4 in the spinal cord of 
patients with sporadic ALS (SALS) to test the hypothesis that ErbB4 may be 
involved in the pathogenesis of SALS. ErbB4 was specifically immunoreactive in 
the cytoplasm of motor neurons in the anterior horns of the spinal cord. In 
patients with SALS, some of the motor neurons lost immunoreactivity with ErbB4, 
with the proportion of motor neurons with a loss of immunoreactivity correlated 
with the severity of motor neuron loss. The subcellular localization was 
altered, demonstrating nucleolar or nuclear localization, threads/dots and 
spheroids. The ectopic glial immunoreactivity was observed, mainly in the 
oligodendrocytes of the lateral columns and anterior horns. The reduction in the 
ErbB4 immunoreactivity was significantly correlated with the cytoplasmic 
mislocalization of transactivation response DNA-binding protein 43 kDa (TDP-43) 
in the motor neurons. No alteration in immunoreactivity was observed in the 
motor neurons of mice carrying atransgene for mutant form of the superoxide 
dismutase 1 gene (SOD1). This study provided compelling evidence that ErbB4 is 
also involved in the pathophysiology of SALS, and that the disruption of the 
NRG-ErbB4 pathway may underlie the TDP-43-dependent motor neuron degeneration in 
ALS.

© 2019 The Authors. Neuropathology published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd 
on behalf of Japanese Society of Neuropathology.

DOI: 10.1111/neup.12558
PMCID: PMC6852233
PMID: 31124187 [Indexed for MEDLINE]