1. J Clin Med. 2019 Jun 1;8(6):784. doi: 10.3390/jcm8060784.

Systematic Review of the Long-Term Effects of Transgender Hormone Therapy on 
Bone Markers and Bone Mineral Density and Their Potential Effects in Implant 
Therapy.

Delgado-Ruiz R(1), Swanson P(2), Romanos G(3).

Author information:
(1)Prosthodontics and Digital Technology, School of Dental Medicine, Stony Brook 
University, Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA. 
rafael.delgado-ruiz@stonybrookmedicine.edu.
(2)Prosthodontics and Digital Technology, School of Dental Medicine, Stony Brook 
University, Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA. patricia.swanson@stonybrookmedicine.edu.
(3)Periodontology, School of Dental Medicine, Stony Brook University, Stony 
Brook, NY 11794, USA. georgios.romanos@stonybrookmedicine.edu.

This study seeks to evaluate the long-term effects of pharmacologic therapy on 
the bone markers and bone mineral density of transgender patients and to provide 
a basis for understanding its potential implications on therapies involving 
implant procedures. Following the referred Reporting Items for Systematic 
Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines and well-defined PICOT 
(Problem/Patient/Population, Intervention, Comparison, Outcome, Time) 
questionnaires, a literature search was completed for articles in English 
language, with more than a 3 year follow-up reporting the long-term effects of 
the cross-sex pharmacotherapy on the bones of adult transgender patients. 
Transgender demographics, time under treatment, and treatment received were 
recorded. In addition, bone marker levels (calcium, phosphate, alkaline 
phosphatase, and osteocalcin), bone mineral density (BMD), and bone turnover 
markers (Serum Procollagen type I N-Terminal pro-peptide (PINP), and Serum 
Collagen type I crosslinked C-telopeptide (CTX)) before and after the treatment 
were also recorded. The considerable variability between studies did not allow a 
meta-analysis. All the studies were completed in European countries. Transwomen 
(921 men to female) were more frequent than transmen (719 female to male). 
Transwomen's treatments were based in antiandrogens, estrogens, new drugs, and 
sex reassignment surgery, meanwhile transmen's surgeries were based in the 
administration of several forms of testosterone and sex reassignment. Calcium, 
phosphate, alkaline phosphatase, and osteocalcin levels remained stable. PINP 
increased in transwomen and transmen meanwhile, CTX showed contradictory values 
in transwomen and transmen. Finally, reduced BMD was observed in transwomen 
patients receiving long-term cross-sex pharmacotherapy. Considering the 
limitations of this systematic review, it was concluded that long-term cross-sex 
pharmacotherapy for transwomen and transmen transgender patients does not alter 
the calcium, phosphate, alkaline phosphatase, and osteocalcin levels, and will 
slightly increase the bone formation in both transwomen and transmen patients. 
Furthermore, long-term pharmacotherapy reduces the BMD in transwomen patients.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm8060784
PMCID: PMC6616494
PMID: 31159456

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.