1. Physiol Rep. 2019 Jun;7(11):e14101. doi: 10.14814/phy2.14101.

Beta-cell excitability and excitability-driven diabetes in adult Zebrafish 
islets.

Emfinger CH(1)(2)(3), Lőrincz R(1)(3)(4), Wang Y(1)(3), York NW(1)(3), 
Singareddy SS(1)(3), Ikle JM(1)(3)(5), Tryon RC(1)(3), McClenaghan C(1)(3), Shyr 
ZA(2)(3), Huang Y(1)(3)(5), Reissaus CA(1), Meyer D(4), Piston DW(1)(3), Hyrc 
K(3), Remedi MS(1)(2)(3), Nichols CG(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, Washington University in St. 
Louis, St. Louis, Missouri.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Lipid 
Research, Washington University in St. Louis School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
Missouri.
(3)Center for the Investigation of Membrane Excitability Diseases, Washington 
University in St. Louis School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri.
(4)Institute of Molecular Biology/CMBI, Leopold-Franzens-University Innsbruck, 
Innsbruck, Austria.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University in St. Louis School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri.

Islet β-cell membrane excitability is a well-established regulator of mammalian 
insulin secretion, and defects in β-cell excitability are linked to multiple 
forms of diabetes. Evolutionary conservation of islet excitability in lower 
organisms is largely unexplored. Here we show that adult zebrafish islet calcium 
levels rise in response to elevated extracellular [glucose], with similar 
concentration-response relationship to mammalian β-cells. However, zebrafish 
islet calcium transients are nor well coupled, with a shallower 
glucose-dependence of cytoplasmic calcium concentration. We have also generated 
transgenic zebrafish that conditionally express gain-of-function mutations in 
ATP-sensitive K+ channels (KATP -GOF) in β-cells. Following induction, these 
fish become profoundly diabetic, paralleling features of mammalian diabetes 
resulting from equivalent mutations. KATP -GOF fish become severely 
hyperglycemic, with slowed growth, and their islets lose glucose-induced calcium 
responses. These results indicate that, although lacking tight cell-cell 
coupling of intracellular Ca2+ , adult zebrafish islets recapitulate similar 
excitability-driven β-cell glucose responsiveness to those in mammals, and 
exhibit profound susceptibility to diabetes as a result of inexcitability. While 
illustrating evolutionary conservation of islet excitability in lower 
vertebrates, these results also provide important validation of zebrafish as a 
suitable animal model in which to identify modulators of islet excitability and 
diabetes.

© 2019 The Authors. Physiological Reports published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. 
on behalf of The Physiological Society and the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.14814/phy2.14101
PMCID: PMC6546968
PMID: 31161721 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None.