1. PLoS Genet. 2019 Jun 14;15(6):e1008209. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1008209. 
eCollection 2019 Jun.

Time of day and network reprogramming during drought induced CAM photosynthesis 
in Sedum album.

Wai CM(1), Weise SE(2), Ozersky P(3), Mockler TC(3), Michael TP(4), VanBuren 
R(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Horticulture, Michigan State University, East Lansing, 
Michigan, United States of America.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing, Michigan, United States of America.
(3)Donald Danforth Plant Science Center, St. Louis MO, United States of America.
(4)J. Craig Venter Institute, La Jolla, CA, United States of America.
(5)Plant Resilience Institute, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, 
United States of America.

Plants with facultative crassulacean acid metabolism (CAM) maximize performance 
through utilizing C3 or C4 photosynthesis under ideal conditions while 
temporally switching to CAM under water stress (drought). While genome-scale 
analyses of constitutive CAM plants suggest that time of day networks are 
shifted, or phased to the evening compared to C3, little is known for how the 
shift from C3 to CAM networks is modulated in drought induced CAM. Here we 
generate a draft genome for the drought-induced CAM-cycling species Sedum album. 
Through parallel sampling in well-watered (C3) and drought (CAM) conditions, we 
uncover a massive rewiring of time of day expression and a CAM and 
stress-specific network. The core circadian genes are expanded in S. album and 
under CAM induction, core clock genes either change phase or amplitude. While 
the core clock cis-elements are conserved in S. album, we uncover a set of novel 
CAM and stress specific cis-elements consistent with our finding of rewired 
co-expression networks. We identified shared elements between constitutive CAM 
and CAM-cycling species and expression patterns unique to CAM-cycling S. album. 
Together these results demonstrate that drought induced CAM-cycling 
photosynthesis evolved through the mobilization of a stress-specific, time of 
day network, and not solely the phasing of existing C3 networks. These results 
will inform efforts to engineer water use efficiency into crop plants for growth 
on marginal land.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1008209
PMCID: PMC6594660
PMID: 31199791 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.