1. Adv Ther. 2019 Aug;36(8):1950-1974. doi: 10.1007/s12325-019-01007-3. Epub 2019
 Jun 17.

Analysis of the Clinical Relevance of Histological Classification of Benign 
Epithelial Salivary Gland Tumours.

Hellquist H(1)(2)(3), Paiva-Correia A(4)(5)(6)(7), Vander Poorten V(8)(9), Quer 
M(9)(10), Hernandez-Prera JC(11), Andreasen S(12)(13), Zbären P(9)(14), Skalova 
A(9)(15), Rinaldo A(16), Ferlito A(17).

Author information:
(1)Epigenetics and Human Disease Laboratory, Faro, Portugal. 
henrikhellquist@gmail.com.
(2)Centre of Biomedical Research (CBMR) and Algarve Biomedical Centre (ABC), 
Faro, Portugal. henrikhellquist@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Medicine, University of Algarve, Faro, 
Portugal. henrikhellquist@gmail.com.
(4)Epigenetics and Human Disease Laboratory, Faro, Portugal.
(5)Centre of Biomedical Research (CBMR) and Algarve Biomedical Centre (ABC), 
Faro, Portugal.
(6)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Medicine, University of Algarve, Faro, 
Portugal.
(7)Histopathology Department, Wythenshawe Hospital, Manchester University NHS 
Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK.
(8)Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery and Department of Oncology, Section 
Head and Neck Oncology, University Hospitals Leuven, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(9)Multidisciplinary Salivary Gland Society, Geneva, Switzerland.
(10)Department of Otolaryngology, Hospital Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, 
Spain.
(11)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, FL, USA.
(12)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery and Audiology, 
Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(13)Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Maxillofacial Surgery, Zealand 
University Hospital, Køge, Denmark.
(14)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University 
Hospital, Bern, Switzerland.
(15)Department of Pathology, Charles University, Faculty of Medicine in Plzen, 
Plzeň, Czech Republic.
(16)University of Udine School of Medicine, Udine, Italy.
(17)Coordinator of the International Head and Neck Scientific Group, Padua, 
Italy.

INTRODUCTION: A vast increase in knowledge of numerous aspects of malignant 
salivary gland tumours has emerged during the last decade and, for several 
reasons, this has not been the case in benign epithelial salivary gland tumours. 
We have performed a literature review to investigate whether an accurate 
histological diagnosis of the 11 different types of benign epithelial salivary 
gland tumours is correlated to any differences in their clinical behaviour.
METHODS: A search was performed for histological classifications, recurrence 
rates and risks for malignant transformation, treatment modalities, and 
prognosis of these tumours. The search was performed primarily through PubMed, 
Google Scholar, and all versions of WHO classifications since 1972, as well as 
numerous textbooks on salivary gland tumours/head and neck/pathology/oncology. A 
large number of archival salivary tumours were also reviewed histologically.
RESULTS: Pleomorphic adenomas carry a considerable risk (5-15%) for malignant 
transformation but, albeit to a much lesser degree, so do basal cell adenomas 
and Warthin tumours, while the other eight types virtually never develop into 
malignancy. Pleomorphic adenoma has a rather high risk for recurrence while 
recurrence occurs only occasionally in sialadenoma papilliferum, oncocytoma, 
canalicular adenoma, myoepithelioma and the membranous type of basal cell 
adenoma. Papillomas, lymphadenoma, sebaceous adenoma, cystadenoma, basal cell 
adenoma (solid, trabecular and tubular subtypes) very rarely, if ever, recur.
CONCLUSIONS: A correct histopathological diagnosis of these tumours is necessary 
due to (1) preventing confusion with malignant salivary gland tumours; (2) only 
one (pleomorphic adenoma) has a considerable risk for malignant transformation, 
but all four histological types of basal cell adenoma can occasionally develop 
into malignancy, as does Warthin tumour; (3) sialadenoma papilliferum, 
oncocytoma, canalicular adenoma, myoepithelioma and Warthin tumour only 
occasionally recur; while (4) intraductal and inverted papilloma, lymphadenoma, 
sebaceous adenoma, cystadenoma, basal cell adenoma (apart from the membranous 
type) virtually never recur. No biomarker was found to be relevant for 
predicting recurrence or potential malignant development. Guidelines for 
appropriate treatment strategies are given.

DOI: 10.1007/s12325-019-01007-3
PMCID: PMC6822986
PMID: 31209701 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No named authors (Henrik Hellquist, António 
Paiva-Correia, Vincent Vander Poorten, Miquel Quer, Juan C. Hernandez-Prera, 
Simon Andreasen, Peter Zbären, Alena Skalova, Alessandra Rinaldo, or Alfio 
Ferlito) have any conflicts of interest to declare.