1. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 2019 May 30;15:1497-1506. doi: 10.2147/NDT.S205951. 
eCollection 2019.

GABA(B) receptor activation ameliorates spatial memory impairments in 
stress-exposed rats.

Sahraei H(1), Askaripour M(1), Esmaeilpour K(2), Shahsavari F(3), Rajabi S(4), 
Moradi-Kor N(5).

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Research Center, Baqiyatallah University of Medical Sciences, 
Tehran, Iran.
(2)Neuroscience Research Center, Institute of Neuropharmacology, Kerman 
University of Medical Sciences, Kerman, Iran.
(3)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Shahid Bahonar University, Kerman, 
Iran.
(4)Physiology Research Center and Department of Physiology, Institute of Basic 
and Clinical Physiology Sciences, Kerman University of Medical Sciences, Kerman, 
Iran.
(5)Research Center of Physiology, Semnan University of Medical Sciences, Semnan, 
Iran.

Objective: Due to the prevalence of stress in modern life and its impact on 
spatial memory, the role of inhibitory systems in brain areas such as the 
nucleus accumbens (NAc) in reducing stress is important. The current study aimed 
to examine the response of NAc shell GABAB receptors to stress and the role of 
intraperitoneally (i.p.) and intra-NAc injection of the GABAB receptor agonist 
baclofen on spatial memory impairments in stress-exposed rats. Methods: Eighty 
adult male Wistar rats were randomly divided into ten groups (n=8): two were 
control groups for intra-NAc and i.p baclofen; two groups were subjected to 
stress and injected with saline (baclofen vehicle); three groups were given 
baclofen (1, 5, and 10 µg/rat) intra-NAc 5 mins before stress was induced; and 
three groups received baclofen (1, 5, and 10 mg/kg/i.p.) 30 mins before being 
subjected to stress. Foot-shock stress was applied for 7 consecutive days. 
Behavioral assays using the Barnes maze were performed 24 hrs after the last 
baclofen injection. Results: Both the intra-NAc and the i.p administration of 
baclofen dose-dependently reduced escape latency and total distance and 
increased velocity in the treatment groups in the training trials. In the probe 
test, the rats that had received 5 mg/kg of baclofen had the highest target 
frequency, but there no significant differences were observed in velocity, 
duration, or distance to the target between the groups. Conclusion: According to 
the findings, baclofen can dose-dependently improve spatial memory, and GABAB 
receptor in the NAc plays an important role in spatial memory.

DOI: 10.2147/NDT.S205951
PMCID: PMC6549409
PMID: 31213819

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflicts of interest in this 
work were reported by the authors.