1. Sci Rep. 2019 Jun 21;9(1):9018. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-44957-y.

Molecular phenotyping of the surfaceome of migratory chondroprogenitors and 
mesenchymal stem cells using biotinylation, glycocapture and quantitative 
LC-MS/MS proteomic analysis.

Matta C(1)(2), Boocock DJ(3), Fellows CR(4), Miosge N(5), Dixon JE(6), Liddell 
S(7), Smith J(8), Mobasheri A(9)(10)(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy, Histology and Embryology, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Debrecen, Debrecen, H-4032, Hungary. matta.csaba@med.unideb.hu.
(2)Department of Veterinary Preclinical Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine, 
Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Surrey, Guildford, Surrey, 
GU2 7AL, United Kingdom. matta.csaba@med.unideb.hu.
(3)John van Geest Cancer Research Centre, Nottingham Trent University, 
Nottingham, NG11 8NS, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Veterinary Preclinical Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine, 
Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Surrey, Guildford, Surrey, 
GU2 7AL, United Kingdom.
(5)Department of Prosthodontics, Tissue Regeneration Work Group, Georg August 
University, Göttingen, Germany.
(6)School of Pharmacy, Wolfson Centre for Stem Cells, Tissue Engineering, and 
Modelling, Centre of Biomolecular Sciences, University of Nottingham, 
Nottingham, NG7 2RD, United Kingdom.
(7)School of Biosciences, University of Nottingham, Sutton Bonington, LE12 5RD, 
United Kingdom.
(8)Bruker UK Limited, Coventry, CV4 9GH, United Kingdom.
(9)Centre for Sport, Exercise and Osteoarthritis Research Versus Arthritis, 
Queen's Medical Centre, Nottingham, NG7 2UH, United Kingdom. 
ali.mobasheri.manuscripts@gmail.com.
(10)Sheikh Salem Bin Mahfouz Scientific Chair for Treatment of Osteoarthritis 
with Stem Cells, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. 
ali.mobasheri.manuscripts@gmail.com.
(11)Department of Regenerative Medicine, State Research Institute Centre for 
Innovative Medicine, Vilnius, Lithuania. ali.mobasheri.manuscripts@gmail.com.
(12)Research Unit of Medical Imaging, Physics and Technology, Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Oulu, Aapistie 5 A, Oulu, FIN-90230, Finland. 
ali.mobasheri.manuscripts@gmail.com.

The complement of cell surface proteins, collectively referred to as the 
surfaceome, is a useful indicator of normal differentiation processes, and the 
development of pathologies such as osteoarthritis (OA). We employed biochemical 
and proteomic tools to explore the surfaceome and to define biomarkers in 
chondrogenic progenitor cells (CPC) derived from human OA knee articular 
cartilage. These cells have great therapeutic potential, but their unexplored 
biology limits their clinical application. We performed biotinylation combined 
with glycocapture and high throughput shotgun proteomics to define the surface 
proteome of human bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) and human CPCs. We 
prepared cell surface protein-enriched fractions from MSCs and CPCs, and then a 
proteomic approach was used to compare and evaluate protein changes between 
undifferentiated MSCs and CPCs. 1256 proteins were identified in the study, of 
which 791 (63%) were plasma membrane, cell surface or extracellular matrix 
proteins. Proteins constituting the surfaceome were annotated and categorized. 
Our results provide, for the first time, a repository of quantitative proteomic 
data on the surfaceome of two closely related cell types relevant to cartilage 
biology and OA. These results may provide novel insights into the transformation 
of the surfaceome during chondrogenic differentiation and phenotypic changes 
during OA development.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-019-44957-y
PMCID: PMC6588563
PMID: 31227739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.