1. Stem Cell Res Ther. 2019 Jun 24;10(1):185. doi: 10.1186/s13287-019-1273-2.

Robust and highly efficient hiPSC generation from patient non-mobilized 
peripheral blood-derived CD34(+) cells using the auto-erasable Sendai virus 
vector.

Okumura T(1), Horie Y(1), Lai CY(1), Lin HT(1), Shoda H(2), Natsumoto B(2), 
Fujio K(2), Kumaki E(3), Okano T(3), Ono S(3), Tanita K(3), Morio T(3), Kanegane 
H(4), Hasegawa H(5), Mizoguchi F(5), Kawahata K(5)(6), Kohsaka H(5), Moritake 
H(7), Nunoi H(7), Waki H(8), Tamaru SI(8), Sasako T(8)(9), Yamauchi T(8), 
Kadowaki T(8)(10)(11), Tanaka H(12), Kitanaka S(12), Nishimura K(13), Ohtaka 
M(14)(15), Nakanishi M(14)(15), Otsu M(16).

Author information:
(1)Division of Stem Cell Processing/Stem Cell Bank, Center for Stem Cell Biology 
and Regenerative Medicine, The Institute of Medical Science, The University of 
Tokyo, 4-6-1 Shirokanedai, Minato-ku, Tokyo, 108-8639, Japan.
(2)Department of Allergy and Rheumatology, Graduation School of Medicine, The 
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Pediatrics and Developmental Biology, Graduate School of 
Medical and Dental Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Child Health and Development, Graduate School of Medical and 
Dental Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Rheumatology, Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, 
Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Division of Rheumatology and Allergy, Department of Internal Medicine, St. 
Marianna University School of Medicine, Kawasaki, Kanagawa, Japan.
(7)Division of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Miyazaki, 
Miyazaki, Japan.
(8)Department of Diabetes and Metabolic Diseases, Graduate School of Medicine, 
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(9)Department of Molecular Sciences on Diabetes, Graduate School of Medicine, 
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(10)Department of Prevention of Diabetes and Life-style Related Diseases, 
Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(11)Department of Metabolism and Nutrition, Mizonokuchi Hospital, Teikyo 
University, Kawasaki, Kanagawa, Japan.
(12)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of 
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(13)Laboratory of Gene Regulation, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tsukuba, 
Ibaraki, Japan.
(14)Biotechnology Research Institute for Drug Discovery, National Institute of 
Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.
(15)TOKIWA-Bio Inc., Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.
(16)Division of Stem Cell Processing/Stem Cell Bank, Center for Stem Cell 
Biology and Regenerative Medicine, The Institute of Medical Science, The 
University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Shirokanedai, Minato-ku, Tokyo, 108-8639, Japan. 
motsu@ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Disease modeling with patient-derived induced pluripotent stem cells 
(iPSCs) is a powerful tool for elucidating the mechanisms underlying disease 
pathogenesis and developing safe and effective treatments. Patient peripheral 
blood (PB) cells are used for iPSC generation in many cases since they can be 
collected with minimum invasiveness. To derive iPSCs that lack immunoreceptor 
gene rearrangements, hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs) are often 
targeted as the reprogramming source. However, the current protocols generally 
require HSPC mobilization and/or ex vivo expansion owing to their sparsity at 
the steady state and low reprogramming efficiencies, making the overall 
procedure costly, laborious, and time-consuming.
METHODS: We have established a highly efficient method for generating iPSCs from 
non-mobilized PB-derived CD34+ HSPCs. The source PB mononuclear cells were 
obtained from 1 healthy donor and 15 patients and were kept frozen until the 
scheduled iPSC generation. CD34+ HSPC enrichment was done using immunomagnetic 
beads, with no ex vivo expansion culture. To reprogram the CD34+-rich cells to 
pluripotency, the Sendai virus vector SeVdp-302L was used to transfer four 
transcription factors: KLF4, OCT4, SOX2, and c-MYC. In this iPSC generation 
series, the reprogramming efficiencies, success rates of iPSC line 
establishment, and progression time were recorded. After generating the iPSC 
frozen stocks, the cell recovery and their residual transgenes, karyotypes, T 
cell receptor gene rearrangement, pluripotency markers, and differentiation 
capability were examined.
RESULTS: We succeeded in establishing 223 iPSC lines with high reprogramming 
efficiencies from 15 patients with 8 different disease types. Our method allowed 
the rapid appearance of primary colonies (~ 8 days), all of which were 
expandable under feeder-free conditions, enabling robust establishment steps 
with less workload. After thawing, the established iPSC lines were verified to 
be pluripotency marker-positive and of non-T cell origin. A majority of the iPSC 
lines were confirmed to be transgene-free, with normal karyotypes. Their 
trilineage differentiation capability was also verified in a defined in vitro 
assay.
CONCLUSION: This robust and highly efficient method enables the rapid and 
cost-effective establishment of transgene-free iPSC lines from a small volume of 
PB, thus facilitating the biobanking of patient-derived iPSCs and their use for 
the modeling of various diseases.

DOI: 10.1186/s13287-019-1273-2
PMCID: PMC6591940
PMID: 31234949 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that have no competing 
interests.