1. PLoS One. 2019 Jun 26;14(6):e0218578. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0218578. 
eCollection 2019.

The state of the science of interprofessional collaborative practice: A scoping 
review of the patient health-related outcomes based literature published between 
2010 and 2018.

Lutfiyya MN(1), Chang LF(2), McGrath C(3), Dana C(1), Lipsky MS(4).

Author information:
(1)College of Dental Medicine, Roseman University of Health Sciences, South 
Jordan, Utah, United States of America.
(2)Department of Family and Community Medicine, University of Illinois-Chicago, 
College of Medicine at Rockford, Rockford, Illinois, United States of America.
(3)Saint Anthony College of Nursing, Rockford, Ilinois, United States of 
America.
(4)Office of the Chancellor, Roseman University of Health Sciences, South 
Jordan, Utah, United States of America.

INTRODUCTION: If interprofessional collaborative practice is to be an important 
component of healthcare reform, then an evidentiary base connecting 
interprofessional education to interprofessional practice with significantly 
improved health and healthcare outcomes is an unconditional necessity. This 
study is a scoping review of the current peer reviewed literature linking 
interprofessional collaborative care and interprofessional collaborative 
practice to clearly identified healthcare and/or patient health-related 
outcomes. The research question for this review was: What does the evidence from 
the past decade reveal about the impact of Interprofessional collaborative 
practice on patient-related outcomes in the US healthcare system?
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A modified preferred reporting items for systematic 
reviews and meta-analyses (PRISMA) approach was followed.
RESULTS: Of an initial 375 articles retrieved 20 met review criteria. The most 
common professions represented in the studies reviewed were physicians, 
pharmacists and nurses. Primary care was the most common care delivery setting 
and measures related to chronic disease the most commonly measured outcomes. No 
study identified negative impacts of interprofessional collaborative practice. 
Eight outcome categories emerged from a content analysis of the findings of the 
reviewed studies.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest a need for more research on the measurable 
impact of interprofessional collaborative practice and/or care on patient 
health-related outcomes to further document its benefits and to explore the 
models, systems and nature of collaborations that best improve population 
health, increase patient satisfaction, and reduce cost of care.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0218578
PMCID: PMC6594675
PMID: 31242239 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.