1. Plant Direct. 2019 Jan 17;3(1):e00112. doi: 10.1002/pld3.112. eCollection 2019
 Jan.

I see the light! Fluorescent proteins suitable for cell wall/apoplast targeting 
in Nicotiana benthamiana leaves.

Stoddard A(1), Rolland V(1).

Author information:
(1)CSIRO Agriculture & Food Canberra Australian Capital Territory Australia.

Correct subcellular targeting is crucial for protein function. Protein location 
can be visualized in vivo by fusion to a fluorescent protein (FP). Nevertheless, 
despite intense engineering efforts, most FPs are dim or completely quenched at 
low pH (<6). This is particularly problematic for the study of proteins targeted 
to acidic compartments such as vacuoles (pH ~ 3-6) or plant cell walls 
(pH ~ 3.5-8.3). Plant cell walls play important roles (e.g. 
structural/protective role, control of growth/morphogenesis), are diverse in 
structure and function, and are highly dynamic (e.g. during cell growth, in 
response to biotic/abiotic stresses). To study and engineer plant cell walls, it 
is therefore critical to identify robust tools which can be used to locate 
proteins expressed in the apoplast. Here we used a transient expression assay in 
Nicotiana benthamiana leaves to test a range of FPs in vivo, and determined 
which ones retained strong fluorescence in the acidic environment of the 
apoplast. We selected 10 fluorescent proteins with a range of in vitro 
properties; two historical FPs and eight FPs with in vitro properties suggesting 
lower pH sensitivity or improved brightness, some of which had never been tested 
in plants prior to our study. We targeted each FP to the cytosol or the apoplast 
and compared the fluorescence in both compartments, before testing the in vivo 
pH sensitivity of FPs across a pH 8-4 gradient. Our results suggest that 
mTurquoise2, mNeonGreen, and mCherry are suited to tracking proteins in the 
apoplast under dynamic pH conditions. These fluorescent proteins may also be 
useful in other acidic compartments such as vacuoles.

DOI: 10.1002/pld3.112
PMCID: PMC6508812
PMID: 31245754