1. Korean J Pain. 2019 Jul 1;32(3):168-177. doi: 10.3344/kjp.2019.32.3.168.

Diverse characters of Brennan's paw incision model regarding certain parameters 
in the rat.

Kumar R(1), Gupta S(1), Gautam M(1), Jhajhria SK(1), Ray SB(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, 
India.

BACKGROUND: Brennan's rodent paw incision model has been extensively used for 
understanding mechanisms underlying postoperative pain in humans. However, 
alterations of physiological parameters like blood pressure and heart rate, or 
even feeding and drinking patterns after the incision have not been documented 
as yet. Moreover, though eicosanoids like prostaglandins and leukotrienes 
contribute to inflammation, tissue levels of these inflammatory mediators have 
never been studied. This work further investigates the antinociceptive effect of 
protein C after intra-wound administration.
METHODS: Separate groups of Sprague-Dawley rats were used for quantitation of 
cyclooxygenase (COX) activity and leukotriene B4 level by enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay, as well as estimation of cardiovascular parameters and 
feeding and drinking behavior after paw incision. In the next part, rats were 
subjected to incision and 10 µg of protein C was locally administered by a 
micropipette. Both evoked and non-evoked pain parameters were then estimated.
RESULTS: COX, particularly COX-2 activity and leukotriene B4 levels increased 
after incision. Hemodynamic parameters were normal. Feeding and drinking were 
affected on days 1 and 3, and on day 1, respectively. Protein C attenuated 
non-evoked pain behavior alone up to day 2.
CONCLUSIONS: Based upon current observations, Brennan's rodent paw incision 
model appears to exhibit a prolonged period of nociception similar to that after 
surgery, with minimal interference of physiological parameters. Protein C, which 
is likely converted to activated protein C in the wound, attenuated the guarding 
score, which probably represents pain at rest after surgery in humans.

DOI: 10.3344/kjp.2019.32.3.168
PMCID: PMC6615451
PMID: 31257825

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTETEST No potential conflict of 
interest relevant to this article was reported.