1. AMIA Jt Summits Transl Sci Proc. 2019 May 6;2019:153-162. eCollection 2019.

Genetically-guided algorithm development and sample size optimization for 
age-related macular degeneration cases and controls in electronic health records 
from the VA Million Veteran Program.

Halladay CW(1), Hadi T(2), Anger MD(3)(4), Greenberg PB(5)(6), Sullivan 
JM(3)(4), Konicki PE(7)(8), Peachey NS(7)(9)(10), Igo RP Jr(7)(11), Iyengar 
SK(2)(7)(11)(12), Wu WC(13)(14), Crawford DC(7)(11)(12)(15)(16); VA Million 
Veteran Program.

Author information:
(1)Center for Innovation in Long Term Services and Supports, Providence VA 
Medical Center, Providence, RI.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University Hospitals Eye 
Institute, Cleveland, OH.
(3)Research Service, VA Western NY Healthcare System, Buffalo, NY.
(4)Ophthalmology, SUNY-University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY.
(5)Section of Ophthalmology, Providence VA Medical Center, Providence, RI.
(6)Division of Ophthalmology, Alpert Medical School, Brown University, 
Providence RI.
(7)Louis Stokes Cleveland VA Medical Center, Cleveland, OH.
(8)Department of Psychiatry, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH.
(9)Department of Ophthalmology, Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of Medicine of 
Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH.
(10)Cole Eye Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH.
(11)Department of Population and Quantitative Health Sciences, Case Western 
Reserve University, Cleveland, OH.
(12)Department of Genetics & Genome Sciences, Case Western Reserve University, 
Cleveland, OH.
(13)Section of Cardiology, Medical Service, Providence VA Medical Center, 
Providence, RI.
(14)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Alpert Medical School, Brown 
University, Providence, RI.
(15)Cleveland Institute for Computational Biology, Case Western Reserve 
University, Cleveland, OH.
(16)Corresponding author.

Electronic health records (EHRs) linked to extensive biorepositories and 
supplemented with lifestyle, behavioral, and environmental exposure data, have 
enormous potential to contribute to genomic discovery, a necessary step in the 
pathway towards translational or precision medicine. A major bottleneck in 
incorporating EHRs into genomic studies is the extraction of research-grade 
variables for analysis, particularly when gold-standard measurements are not 
available or accessible. Here we develop algorithms for age-related macular 
degeneration (AMD), a common cause of blindness among the elderly, and controls 
free of AMD. These computable phenotypes were developed using billing codes 
(ICD-9-CM and ICD-10-CM) and Current Procedural Terminology (CPT) codes and 
evaluated in two study sites of the Veterans Affairs Million Veteran Program: 
Louis Stokes Cleveland VA Medical Center and the Providence VA Medical Center. 
After establishing a high overall positive and negative predictive values (93% 
and 95%, respectively) through manual chart review, the candidate algorithm was 
deployed in the full VA MVP dataset of >500,000 participants. The algorithm was 
then optimized in a data cube using a variety of approaches including adjusting 
inclusion age thresholds by examining previously-reported genetic associations 
for CFH (rs10801555, a proxy for rs1061170) and ARMS2 (rs10490924). The 
algorithm with the smallest p-values for the known genetic associations was 
selected for downstream and on-going AMD genomic discovery efforts. This 
two-phase approach to developing research-grade case/control variables for AMD 
genomic studies capitalizes on established genetic associations resulting in 
high precision and optimized sample sizes, an approach that can be applied to 
other large-scale biobanks linked to EHRs for precision medicine research.

PMCID: PMC6568141
PMID: 31258967