1. Elife. 2019 Jul 3;8:e42695. doi: 10.7554/eLife.42695.

A composition-dependent molecular clutch between T cell signaling condensates 
and actin.

Ditlev JA(#)(1)(2), Vega AR(#)(3), Köster DV(#)(1)(4), Su X(1)(5), Tani T(6), 
Lakoduk AM(7), Vale RD(1)(5), Mayor S(1)(4), Jaqaman K(3)(8), Rosen MK(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Summer Institute, Marine Biological 
Laboratory, Woods Hole, United States.
(2)Department of Biophysics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of 
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, United States.
(3)Department of Biophysics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, United States.
(4)National Centre for Biological Sciences, Tata Institute for Fundamental 
Research, Bangalore, India.
(5)Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, United 
States.
(6)Eugene Bell Center for Regenerative Biology and Tissue Engineering, Marine 
Biological Laboratory, Woods Hole, United States.
(7)Department of Cell Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, United States.
(8)Lyda Hill Department of Bioinformatics, University of Texas Southwestern 
Medical Center, Dallas, United States.
(#)Contributed equally

During T cell activation, biomolecular condensates form at the immunological 
synapse (IS) through multivalency-driven phase separation of LAT, Grb2, Sos1, 
SLP-76, Nck, and WASP. These condensates move radially at the IS, traversing 
successive radially-oriented and concentric actin networks. To understand this 
movement, we biochemically reconstituted LAT condensates with actomyosin 
filaments. We found that basic regions of Nck and N-WASP/WASP promote 
association and co-movement of LAT condensates with actin, indicating conversion 
of weak individual affinities to high collective affinity upon phase separation. 
Condensates lacking these components were propelled differently, without strong 
actin adhesion. In cells, LAT condensates lost Nck as radial actin transitioned 
to the concentric network, and engineered condensates constitutively binding 
actin moved aberrantly. Our data show that Nck and WASP form a clutch between 
LAT condensates and actin in vitro and suggest that compositional changes may 
enable condensate movement by distinct actin networks in different regions of 
the IS.

© 2019, Ditlev et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.42695
PMCID: PMC6624021
PMID: 31268421 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: JD, AV, DK, XS, TT, AL, RV, SM, KJ, MR No 
competing interests declared