1. Front Neurol. 2019 Jun 13;10:619. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2019.00619. eCollection 
2019.

Limb-Girdle Muscular Dystrophies (LGMDs): The Clinical Application of NGS 
Analysis, a Family Case Report.

Strafella C(1)(2), Campoli G(1), Galota RM(1), Caputo V(1)(2), Pagliaroli G(1), 
Carboni S(1), Zampatti S(1), Peconi C(1), Mela J(1), Sancricca C(3)(4), Primiano 
G(3), Minozzi G(5), Servidei S(3), Cascella R(1)(6), Giardina E(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Genetics Laboratory Unione Italiana Lotta Distrofia Muscolare 
(UILDM), Santa Lucia Foundation, Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, Tor Vergata University, Rome, 
Italy.
(3)Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli IRCCS, UOC 
Neurofisiopatologia, Rome, Italy.
(4)Unione Italiana Lotta Distrofia Muscolare (UILDM), Sezione Laziale, Rome, 
Italy.
(5)Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Milan, Milan, Italy.
(6)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Catholic University Our Lady of Good 
Counsel, Tirana, Albania.

The diagnosis of LGMD2A (calpainopathy) can be challenging due to genetic 
heterogeneity and to high similarity with other LGMDs or neuromuscular 
disorders. In this setting, NGS panels are highly recommended to perform 
differential diagnosis, identify new causative mutations and enable 
genotype-phenotype correlations. In this manuscript, the case of a patient 
affected by LGMD2A is reported, for which the application of a defined custom 
designed NGS panel allowed to confirm the diagnosis of calpainopathy linked with 
two heterozygous variants in CAPN3, namely c.550delA and c.1813G>C. The first 
variant has been extensively described in relation to calpainopathy. The second 
variant c.1813G>C, instead, is novel and has been predicted to be probably 
damaging. In addition, NGS analysis on the proband revealed a heterozygous 
variant (c.550C>T) in the LMNA gene, which is associated with dilated 
cardiomyopathy. The variant is novel and has been predicted to be deleterious by 
subsequent bioinformatic analysis. Successively, segregation analysis was 
performed on family members. Interestingly, none of them showed neuromuscular 
symptoms but the mother was diagnosed with bradycardia and syncopal episodes and 
showed a positive family history for cardiomyopathy. The segregation analysis 
reported that the proband inherited the c.1813G>C (CAPN3) from the father who 
was a healthy carrier. The mother was positive for c.550delA (CAPN3) and 
c.550C>T (LMNA), suggesting thereby a possible genetic explanation for her 
cardiovascular problems. Segregation analysis, therefore, confirmed the 
inheritance pattern of the variants carried by the proband and highlighted a 
familiarity for cardiomyopathy which should not be neglected. The NGS analysis 
was further performed on the partner of the proband, to estimate the 
reproductive risk of the couple. The partner was negative to NGS screening, 
suggesting thereby a low risk to have an affected child with calpainopathy and 
50% probability to inherit the LMNA variant. This case report showed the 
clinical utility of the NGS panel in providing accurate LGMD2A diagnosis and 
identifying complex phenotypes originating from mutations in multiple genes. 
However, NGS results should always be accomplished by a dedicated genetic 
counseling, not only to evaluate the recurrence and reproductive risks but also 
to uncover unexpected findings which can be clinically significant.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2019.00619
PMCID: PMC6585112
PMID: 31263448