1. PLoS One. 2019 Jul 11;14(7):e0219715. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0219715. 
eCollection 2019.

A new toolkit for gene tagging in Candida albicans containing recyclable 
markers.

Dueñas-Santero E(1), Santos-Almeida A(1), Rojo-Dominguez P(2), Del Rey F(1), 
Correa-Bordes J(2), Vázquez de Aldana CR(1).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Biología Funcional y Genómica (IBFG), Consejo Superior de 
Investigaciones Científicas/Universidad de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain.
(2)Departamento de Ciencias Biomédicas, Universidad de Extremadura, Badajoz, 
Spain.

Gene manipulation and epitope tagging are essential tools for understanding the 
molecular function of specific genes. The opportunistic human pathogen Candida 
albicans is a diploid fungus that utilizes a non-canonical genetic code. Since 
selection markers available in this organism are scarce, several tools based on 
recyclable markers have been developed for gene disruption, such as the Clox 
system. This system relies on the Cre recombinase, which recycles selection 
markers flanked by loxP sites with high efficiency, facilitating single marker 
or multi-marker recycling. However, PCR-based modules for epitope tagging, such 
the pFA-modules, mainly use limited non-recyclable auxotrophic markers. To solve 
this problem, we have used a Gibson assembly strategy to construct a set of new 
plasmids where the auxotrophic markers of the pFA vectors were swapped with five 
recyclable marker modules of the Clox system, enhancing the versatility of the 
pFA plasmids. This new toolkit, named pFA-Clox, is composed of 36 new vectors 
for gene disruption and epitope tagging (GFP, 3xGFP, mCherry, 3xHA, 5xmyc and 
TAP). These plasmids contain the dominant NAT1 marker, as well as URA3, HIS1 and 
ARG4 cassettes, thereby permitting functional analysis of laboratory strains as 
well as clinical isolates of C. albicans. In summary, we have adapted the Clox 
system to the pFA-backbone vectors. Thus, the set of primers used for the 
amplification of previously published pFA modules can also be utilized in this 
new pFA-Clox system. Therefore, this new toolkit harbors the advantages of both 
systems, allowing accelerated gene modification strategies that could reduce 
time and costs in strain construction for C. albicans.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0219715
PMCID: PMC6622542
PMID: 31295309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.