1. BMC Plant Biol. 2019 Jul 10;19(1):301. doi: 10.1186/s12870-019-1912-x.

Metabolic and transcriptional analyses in response to potent inhibitors 
establish MEP pathway as major route for camptothecin biosynthesis in 
Nothapodytes nimmoniana (Graham) Mabb.

Rather GA(1), Sharma A(1), Jeelani SM(1), Misra P(1), Kaul V(2), Lattoo SK(3).

Author information:
(1)Plant Biotechnology Division, CSIR- Indian Institute of Integrative Medicine, 
Canal Road, Jammu Tawi, 180001, India.
(2)Department of Botany, University of Jammu, Jammu Tawi, 180006, India.
(3)Plant Biotechnology Division, CSIR- Indian Institute of Integrative Medicine, 
Canal Road, Jammu Tawi, 180001, India. sklattoo@iiim.ac.in.

BACKGROUND: Nothapodytes nimmoniana, a plant of pivotal medicinal significance 
is a source of potent anticancer monoterpene indole alkaloid (MIA) camptothecin 
(CPT). This compound owes its potency due to topoisomerase-I inhibitory 
activity. However, biosynthetic and regulatory aspects of CPT biosynthesis so 
far remain elusive. Production of CPT is also constrained due to unavailability 
of suitable in vitro experimental system. Contextually, there are two routes for 
the biosynthesis of MIAs: the mevalonate (MVA) pathway operating in cytosol and 
the methylerythritol phosphate (MEP) pathway in the plastids. Determination of 
relative precursor flux through either of these pathways may provide a new vista 
for manipulating the enhanced CPT production.
RESULTS: In present study, specific enzyme inhibitors of MVA (lovastatin) and 
MEP pathways (fosmidomycin) were used to perturb the metabolic flux in N. 
nimmoniana. Interaction of both these pathways was investigated at 
transcriptional level by using qRT-PCR and at metabolite level by evaluating 
secologanin, tryptamine and CPT contents. In fosmidomycin treated plants, highly 
significant reduction was observed in both secologanin and CPT accumulation in 
the range 40-57% and 64-71.5% respectively, while 4.61-7.69% increase was 
observed in tryptamine content as compared to control. Lovastatin treatment 
showed reduction in CPT (7-11%) and secologanin (7.5%) accumulation while 
tryptamine registered slight increase (3.84%) in comparison to control. These 
inhibitor mediated changes were reflected at transcriptional level via altering 
expression levels of deoxy-xylulose-5-phosphate reductoisomerase (DXR) and 
hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA reductase (HMG). Further, mRNA expression of four more 
genes downstream to DXR and HMG of MEP and MVA pathways respectively were also 
investigated. Expression analysis also included secologanin synthase (SLS) and 
strictosidine synthase (STR) of seco-iridoid pathway. Present investigation also 
entailed development of an efficient in vitro multiplication system as a 
precursor to pathway flux studies. Further, a robust Agrobacterium-mediated 
transformed hairy root protocol was also developed for its amenability for 
up-scaling as a future prospect.
CONCLUSIONS: Metabolic and transcriptional changes reveal differential efficacy 
of cytosolic and plastidial inhibitors in context to pathway flux perturbations 
on seco-iridoid end-product camptothecin. MEP pathway plausibly is the major 
precursor contributor towards CPT production. These empirical findings allude 
towards developing suitable biotechnological interventions for enhanced CPT 
production.

DOI: 10.1186/s12870-019-1912-x
PMCID: PMC6617690
PMID: 31291885 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.