1. Physiol Rep. 2019 Jul;7(13):e14157. doi: 10.14814/phy2.14157.

TRPM7 is involved in acid-induced necrotic cell death in a manner sensitive to 
progesterone in human cervical cancer cells.

Numata T(1), Sato-Numata K(2), Okada Y(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Fukuoka 
University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(2)Japan Society for the Promotion of Science, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Molecular Cell Physiology, Kyoto Prefectural University of 
Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.
(4)Department of Cell Physiology, National Institute for Physiological Sciences, 
Okazaki, Japan.

Because intravaginal pH is strongly acidic, it is important to investigate the 
effects of acidosis on cervical cancer cells. Recently, in response to strong 
acidosis, human cervical cancer HeLa cells were shown to exhibit necrosis after 
showing persistent cell swelling induced by Cl- influx. Since cation influx 
should be accompanied with Cl- influx to drive water inflow causing cell 
swelling, we here studied on the nature of acidotoxic cation conductance. The 
mRNA/protein expression was assessed by RT-PCR and Western blotting. Ionic 
currents were measured by patch-clamping techniques. Cell counting/viability and 
colorimetric assays were applied to assess proliferation rate and caspase 3/7 
activity, respectively. Cell volume and size were measured by electronic sizing 
and video-microscopic measurements, respectively. Acid exposure enhanced TRPM7 
activity endogenously expressed in HeLa cells and exogenously overexpressed in 
HEK293T cells. Gene silencing of TRPM7 abolished acid-induced cell swelling and 
necrosis but rather induced activation of apoptotic caspase 3/7 in HeLa cells. 
Overexpression with the pore charge-neutralizing D1054A mutant suppressed 
acid-enhanced cation currents, acid-induced cell swelling, and acidotoxic 
necrosis in HEK293T cells. Progesterone treatment was surprisingly found to 
suppress molecular and functional expression of TRPM7 and cell proliferation in 
HeLa cells. Furthermore, in the progesterone-treated cells, acid exposure did 
not induce persistent cell swelling followed by necrosis but induced persistent 
cell shrinkage and apoptotic cell death. These results indicate that in the 
human cervical cancer cells, TRPM7 is essentially involved in acidotoxic 
necrotic cell death, and progesterone inhibits TRPM7 expression thereby 
inhibiting acidotoxic necrosis by switching to apoptosis.

© 2019 The Authors. Physiological Reports published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. 
on behalf of The Physiological Society and the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.14814/phy2.14157
PMCID: PMC6640595
PMID: 31293101 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflicts of interest were 
disclosed.