1. Front Pediatr. 2019 Jun 27;7:257. doi: 10.3389/fped.2019.00257. eCollection 
2019.

Childhood IgA Vasculitis (Henoch Schonlein Purpura)-Advances and Knowledge Gaps.

Oni L(1)(2), Sampath S(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatric Nephrology, Alder Hey Children's NHS Foundation 
Trust Hospital, Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Institute of Translational 
Medicine, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Paediatric Rheumatology, Alder Hey Children's NHS Foundation 
Trust Hospital, Liverpool, United Kingdom.

Immunoglobulin A vasculitis (IgAV; formerly Henoch Schonlein Purpura) is the 
most common form of childhood vasculitis. It can occur in any age and peaks 
around 4-6 years old. It demonstrates seasonal variation implicating a role for 
environmental triggers and geographical variation. The diagnosis is made 
clinically and 95% of patients will present with a rash, together with any from 
a triad of other systems-gastrointestinal, musculoskeletal, and renal. Most 
cases of IgAV in children have an excellent outcome. Treatment may be required 
during the acute phase for gastrointestinal involvement and renal involvement, 
termed IgAV nephritis (previously HSP nephritis), is the most serious long-term 
manifestation accounting for ~1-2% of all childhood end stage kidney disease 
(ESKD). It therefore requires a period of renal monitoring conducted for 6-12 
months. Patients presenting with nephrotic and/or nephritic syndrome or whom 
develop significant persistent proteinuria should undergo a renal biopsy to 
evaluate the extent of renal inflammation and there are now international 
consensus guidelines that outline the indications for when to do this. At 
present there is no evidence to support the use of medications at the outset in 
all patients to prevent subsequent renal inflammation. Consensus management 
guidelines suggest using oral corticosteroids for milder disease, oral, or 
intravenous corticosteroids plus azathioprine or mycophenolate mofetil or 
intravenous cyclophosphamide for moderate disease and intravenous 
corticosteroids with cyclophosphamide for severe disease. Angiotensin system 
inhibitors act as adjunctive treatment for persisting proteinuria and frequently 
relapsing disease may necessitate the use of immunosuppressant agents. Renal 
outcomes in this disease have remained static over time and progress may be 
hindered due to many reasons, including the lack of reliable disease biomarkers 
and an absence of core outcome measures allowing for accurate comparison between 
studies. This review article summarizes the current evidence supporting the 
management of this condition highlighting recent findings and areas of unmet 
need. In order to improve the long term outcomes in this condition international 
research collaboration is urgently required.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2019.00257
PMCID: PMC6610473
PMID: 31316952