1. BMC Pharmacol Toxicol. 2019 Aug 5;20(1):47. doi: 10.1186/s40360-019-0326-6.

Differential role of dose and environment in initiating and intensifying 
neurotoxicity caused by MDMA in rats.

Shokry IM(1)(2), Shields CJ(1), Callanan JJ(2), Ma Z(1), Tao R(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Science, Charles E. Schmidt College of Medicine, 
Florida Atlantic University, 777 Glades Road, Boca Raton, FL, 33431, USA.
(2)Ross University School of Veterinary Medicine, Basseterre, Saint Kitts and 
Nevis.
(3)Department of Biomedical Science, Charles E. Schmidt College of Medicine, 
Florida Atlantic University, 777 Glades Road, Boca Raton, FL, 33431, USA. 
rtao@health.fau.edu.

BACKGROUND: MDMA causes serotonin (5-HT) syndrome immediately after 
administration and serotonergic injury in a few days or weeks. However, a 
serotonin syndrome is not always followed by serotonergic injury, indicating 
different mechanisms responsible for two adverse effects. The goal of present 
study was to determine causes for two adverse events and further test that dose 
and environment have a differential role in initiating and intensifying MDMA 
neurotoxicity.
METHODS: Initiation and intensification were examined by comparing neurotoxic 
effects of a high-dose (10 mg/kg × 3 at 2 h intervals) with a low-dose 
(2 mg/kg × 3) under controlled-environmental conditions. Initiation of a 
serotonin syndrome was estimated by measuring extracellular 5-HT, body-core 
temperature, electroencephalogram and MDMA concentrations in the cerebrospinal 
fluid, while intensification determined in rats examined under modified 
environment. Initiation and intensification of the serotonergic injury were 
assessed in rats by measuring tissue 5-HT content, SERT density and functional 
integrity of serotonergic retrograde transportation.
RESULTS: Both low- and high-dose could cause increases in extracellular 5-HT to 
elicit a serotonin syndrome at the same intensity. Modification of environmental 
conditions, which had no impact on MDMA-elicited increases in 5-HT levels, 
markedly intensified the syndrome intensity. Although either dose would cause 
the severe syndrome under modified environments, only the high-dose that 
resulted in high MDMA concentrations in the brain could cause serotonergic 
injury.
CONCLUSION: Our results reveal that extracellular 5-HT is the cause of a 
syndrome and activity of postsynaptic receptors critical for the course of 
syndrome intensification. Although the high-dose has the potential to initiate 
serotonergic injury due to high MDMA concentrations present in the brain, 
whether an injury is observed depends upon the drug environment via the levels 
of reactive oxygen species generated. This suggests that brain MDMA 
concentration is the determinant in the injury initiation while reactive oxygen 
species generation associated with the injury intensification. It is concluded 
that the two adverse events utilize distinctly different mediating molecules 
during the toxic initiation and intensification.

DOI: 10.1186/s40360-019-0326-6
PMCID: PMC6683525
PMID: 31383036 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.