1. Eur J Endocrinol. 2019 Oct;181(4):451-459. doi: 10.1530/EJE-19-0296.

Associations between subcutaneous fat density and systemic inflammation differ 
by HIV serostatus and are independent of fat quantity.

Lake JE(1), Debroy P(1), Ng D(2), Erlandson KM(3), Kingsley LA(4), Palella 
FJ(5), Budoff MJ(6), Post WS(2), Brown TT(2).

Author information:
(1)University of Texas Health Sciences Center, Houston, Texas, USA.
(2)Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(3)University of Colorado, Aurora, Colorado, USA.
(4)University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.
(5)Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(6)Torrance Los Angeles Biomedical Research Institute, Torrence, California, 
USA.

OBJECTIVES: Adipose tissue (AT) density measurement may provide information 
about AT quality among people living with HIV. We assessed AT density and 
evaluated relationships between AT density and immunometabolic biomarker 
concentrations in men with HIV.
DESIGN: Cross-sectional analysis of men enrolled in the Multicenter AIDS Cohort 
Study.
METHODS: Abdominal visceral adipose tissue (VAT) and subcutaneous adipose tissue 
(SAT) density (Hounsfield units, HU; less negative = more dense) were quantified 
from computed tomography (CT) scans. Multivariate linear regression models 
described relationships between abdominal AT density and circulating biomarker 
concentrations.
RESULTS: HIV+ men had denser SAT (-95 vs -98 HU HIV-, P < 0.001), whereas VAT 
density was equivalent by HIV serostatus men (382 HIV-, 462 HIV+). Historical 
thymidine analog nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor (tNRTI) use was 
associated with denser SAT but not VAT. In adjusted models, a 1 s.d. greater SAT 
or VAT density was associated with higher levels of adiponectin, leptin, HOMA-IR 
and triglyceride:HDL cholesterol ratio and lower hs-CRP concentrations in HIV- 
men. Conversely, in HIV+ men, each s.d. greater SAT density was not associated 
with metabolic parameter improvements and was significantly (P < 0.05) 
associated with higher systemic inflammation. Trends toward higher inflammatory 
biomarker concentrations per 1 s.d. greater VAT density were also observed among 
HIV+ men.
CONCLUSIONS: Among men living with HIV, greater SAT density was associated with 
greater systemic inflammation independent of SAT area. AT density measurement 
provides additional insight into AT density beyond measurement of AT quantity 
alone, and may have implications for metabolic disease risk.

DOI: 10.1530/EJE-19-0296
PMCID: PMC6992471
PMID: 31430720 [Indexed for MEDLINE]