1. J Headache Pain. 2019 Aug 29;20(1):91. doi: 10.1186/s10194-019-1043-7.

Animal models of migraine and experimental techniques used to examine trigeminal 
sensory processing.

Harriott AM(1)(2), Strother LC(3), Vila-Pueyo M(3), Holland PR(4).

Author information:
(1)Neurovascular Research Lab, Department of Radiology, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Charlestown, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Headache Group, Department of Basic and Clinical Neuroscience, Institute of 
Psychology, Psychiatry and Neuroscience, King's College London, James Black 
Centre, 125 Coldharbour Lane, London, SE5 9NU, UK.
(4)Headache Group, Department of Basic and Clinical Neuroscience, Institute of 
Psychology, Psychiatry and Neuroscience, King's College London, James Black 
Centre, 125 Coldharbour Lane, London, SE5 9NU, UK. Philip.holland@kcl.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Migraine is a common debilitating condition whose main attributes 
are severe recurrent headaches with accompanying sensitivity to light and sound, 
nausea and vomiting. Migraine-related pain is a major cause of its accompanying 
disability and can encumber almost every aspect of daily life.
MAIN BODY: Advancements in our understanding of the neurobiology of migraine 
headache have come in large from basic science research utilizing small animal 
models of migraine-related pain. In this current review, we aim to describe 
several commonly utilized preclinical models of migraine. We will discuss the 
diverse array of methodologies for triggering and measuring migraine-related 
pain phenotypes and highlight briefly specific advantages and limitations 
therein. Finally, we will address potential future challenges/opportunities to 
refine existing and develop novel preclinical models of migraine that move 
beyond migraine-related pain and expand into alternate migraine-related 
phenotypes.
CONCLUSION: Several well validated animal models of pain relevant for headache 
exist, the researcher should consider the advantages and limitations of each 
model before selecting the most appropriate to answer the specific research 
question. Further, we should continually strive to refine existing and generate 
new animal and non-animal models that have the ability to advance our 
understanding of head pain as well as non-pain symptoms of primary headache 
disorders.

DOI: 10.1186/s10194-019-1043-7
PMCID: PMC6734323
PMID: 31464579 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.