1. Am J Med Genet A. 2019 Nov;179(11):2190-2195. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61344. Epub 
2019 Aug 29.

Developmental and epileptic encephalopathy in two siblings with a novel, 
homozygous missense variant in SCN1B.

Darras N(1), Ha TK(2), Rego S(2), Martin PM(3), Barroso E(4), Slavotinek AM(2), 
Cilio MR(3)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of California San Francisco, San 
Francisco, California.
(2)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, University of 
California San Francisco, San Francisco, California.
(3)Institute for Human Genetics, University of California San Francisco, San 
Francisco, California.
(4)Department of Molecular Genetics, Instituto de Genética Médica y Molecular 
(INGEMM), IdiPAZ, Hospital Universitario la Paz, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid 
(UAM), Madrid, Spain.
(5)Division of Pediatric Epilepsy, Department of Neurology, University of 
California San Francisco, California, USA.
(6)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, University of 
Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.

Developmental and epileptic encephalopathies are genetic disorders in which both 
the developmental disability and the frequent epileptic activity are the effect 
of a specific gene variant. While heterozygous variants in SCN1B have been 
described in families with generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures plus, Type 
1, only three cases of homozygous, missense variants in SCN1B have been reported 
in association with autosomal recessive inheritance of a severe developmental 
and epileptic encephalopathy. We present two siblings who are homozygous for a 
novel, missense variant in SCN1B, c.265C>T, predicting p.Arg89Cys. The proband 
is an 11-year-old female with infantile-onset, fever-induced, intractable 
generalized tonic-clonic seizures, myoclonic seizures, and developmental slowing 
and autism spectrum disorder occurring later in the course of the disease. Her 
4-year-old brother had a similar epilepsy phenotype, but still displays normal 
development. This variant has not been previously reported in the homozygous 
state in control databases. The variant was predicted to be damaging and 
occurred in the vicinity of other epileptic encephalopathy-associated missense 
variants that are biallelic and located in the extracellular immunoglobulin loop 
domain of the protein, which mediates interaction of the beta-1 subunit with 
cellular adhesion molecules. Our report is the first set of siblings with 
homozygosity for the p.Arg89Cys variant in SCN1B and further implicates 
biallelic mutations in this gene as a cause of epileptic encephalopathy 
mimicking Dravet syndrome. Interestingly, the phenotype we observed was milder 
compared to that previously described in patients with recessive SCN1B 
mutations.

© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61344
PMID: 31465153 [Indexed for MEDLINE]