1. Mol Genet Genomic Med. 2019 Oct;7(10):e00965. doi: 10.1002/mgg3.965. Epub 2019
 Sep 2.

Inverted duplication, triplication and quintuplication through sequential 
breakage-fusion-bridge events induced by a terminal deletion at 5p in a case of 
spontaneous abortion.

Chai H(1), Grommisch B(1), DiAdamo A(1), Wen J(1), Hui P(2), Li P(1).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Cytogenetics Laboratory, Department of Genetics, Yale University 
School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, 
USA.

BACKGROUND: Integrated chromosome, fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and 
array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) analyses have been effective in 
defining unbalanced chromosomal rearrangements. Discordant chromosome and aCGH 
results are rarely reported.
METHODS: Routine cytogenomic analyses and literature review were performed in 
the study of a case from products of conception (POC).
RESULTS: Chromosome and FISH analysis revealed a mosaic pattern consisting of a 
primary aberration of an inverted duplication of 5p and derived secondary and 
tertiary aberrations from sequential triplication and quintuplication of 5p, 
respectively. The aCGH analysis detected only a 1.521 Mb terminal deletion at 
5p15.33 with no other pathogenic copy number variants in the genome. This mosaic 
karyotypic pattern likely resulted from chromosome instability induced by 
sequential breakage-fusion-bridge events during in vitro cell culture. A review 
of literature found heterogeneous distal deletion and inverted duplication of 5p 
in prenatal and pediatric cases.
CONCLUSION: This is the first case reported in POC with a unique mosaic pattern 
and discordant chromosome and aCGH results. Caution should be applied in 
reporting and interpreting these discordant results and further analysis for 
underlying mechanism should be considered.

© 2019 The Authors. Molecular Genetics & Genomic Medicine published by Wiley 
Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/mgg3.965
PMCID: PMC6785443
PMID: 31478360 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. 
There were no prestudy requirements on the patient's specimens and clinical 
indications and no poststudy interaction and intervention with the patients. 
This clinical report was a retrospective study and deemed exempted from 
Institutional Review Boards (IRB) approval and waiver of consent based on the 
policy of Yale University IRB.