1. Sci Rep. 2019 Aug 30;9(1):12608. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-48676-2.

The role of glycolysis and mitochondrial respiration in the formation and 
functioning of endothelial tip cells during angiogenesis.

Yetkin-Arik B(1)(2), Vogels IMC(1)(2), Nowak-Sliwinska P(3), Weiss A(3), 
Houtkooper RH(4), Van Noorden CJF(2)(5), Klaassen I(6)(7), Schlingemann 
RO(1)(8).

Author information:
(1)Ocular Angiogenesis Group, Department of Ophthalmology, Amsterdam 
Cardiovascular Sciences and Cancer Center Amsterdam, Amsterdam UMC, University 
of Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Medical Biology, Amsterdam Cardiovascular Sciences and Cancer 
Center Amsterdam, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Molecular Pharmacology Group, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Faculty of 
Sciences, University of Lausanne and University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.
(4)Laboratory Genetic Metabolic Diseases, Amsterdam Gastroenterology and 
Metabolism, Amsterdam Cardiovascular Sciences, Amsterdam UMC, University of 
Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Genetic Toxicology and Cancer Biology, National Institute of 
Biology, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(6)Ocular Angiogenesis Group, Department of Ophthalmology, Amsterdam 
Cardiovascular Sciences and Cancer Center Amsterdam, Amsterdam UMC, University 
of Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. i.klaassen@amc.uva.nl.
(7)Department of Medical Biology, Amsterdam Cardiovascular Sciences and Cancer 
Center Amsterdam, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. i.klaassen@amc.uva.nl.
(8)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Lausanne, Jules-Gonin Eye 
Hospital, Fondation Asile des Aveugles, Lausanne, Switzerland.

During sprouting angiogenesis, an individual endothelial tip cell grows out from 
a pre-existing vascular network and guides following and proliferating stalk 
cells to form a new vessel. Metabolic pathways such as glycolysis and 
mitochondrial respiration as the major sources of adenosine 5'-triphosphate 
(ATP) for energy production are differentially activated in these types of 
endothelial cells (ECs) during angiogenesis. Therefore, we studied energy 
metabolism during angiogenesis in more detail in tip cell and non-tip cell human 
umbilical vein ECs. Small interfering RNA was used to inhibit transcription of 
glycolytic enzymes PFKFB3 or LDHA and mitochondrial enzyme PDHA1 to test whether 
inhibition of these specific pathways affects tip cell differentiation and 
sprouting angiogenesis in vitro and in vivo. We show that glycolysis is 
essential for tip cell differentiation, whereas both glycolysis and 
mitochondrial respiration occur during proliferation of non-tip cells and in 
sprouting angiogenesis in vitro and in vivo. Finally, we demonstrate that 
inhibition of mitochondrial respiration causes adaptation of EC metabolism by 
increasing glycolysis and vice versa. In conclusion, our studies show a complex 
but flexible role of the different metabolic pathways to produce ATP in the 
regulation of tip cell and non-tip cell differentiation and functioning during 
sprouting angiogenesis.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-019-48676-2
PMCID: PMC6717205
PMID: 31471554 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.