1. PeerJ. 2019 Aug 22;7:e7484. doi: 10.7717/peerj.7484. eCollection 2019.

Phylogenomic analyses confirm a novel invasive North American Corbicula 
(Bivalvia: Cyrenidae) lineage.

Haponski AE(1), Ó Foighil D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology and Museum of Zoology, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

The genus Corbicula consists of estuarine or freshwater clams native to 
temperate/tropical regions of Asia, Africa, and Australia that collectively 
encompass both sexual species and clonal (androgenetic) lineages. The latter 
have become globally invasive in freshwater systems and they represent some of 
the most successful aquatic invasive lineages. Previous studies have documented 
four invasive clonal lineages, Forms A, B, C, and Rlc, with varying known 
distributions. Form A (R in Europe) occurs globally, Form B is found solely in 
North America, mainly the western United States, Form C (S in Europe) occurs 
both in European watersheds and in South America, and Rlc is known from Europe. 
A putative fifth invasive morph, Form D, was recently described in the New World 
from the Illinois River (Great Lakes watershed), where it occurs in sympatry 
with Forms A and B. An initial study showed Form D to be conchologically 
distinct: possessing rust-colored rays and white nacre with purple teeth. 
However, its genetic distinctiveness using standard molecular markers 
(mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase subunit I and nuclear ribosomal 28S RNA) was 
ambiguous. To resolve this issue, we performed a phylogenomic analysis using 
1,699-30,027 nuclear genomic loci collected via the next generation double 
digested restriction-site associated DNA sequencing method. Our results 
confirmed Form D to be a distinct invasive New World lineage with a population 
genomic profile consistent with clonality. A majority (7/9) of the phylogenomic 
analyses recovered the four New World invasive Corbicula lineages (Forms A, B, 
C, and D) as members of a clonal clade, sister to the non-clonal Lake Biwa 
(Japan) endemic, Corbicula sandai. The age of the clonal clade was estimated at 
1.49 million years (my; ± 0.401-2.955 my) whereas the estimated ages of the four 
invasive lineage crown clades ranged from 0.27 to 0.44 my. We recovered very 
little evidence of nuclear genomic admixture among the four invasive lineages in 
our study populations. In contrast, 2/6 C. sandai individuals displayed partial 
nuclear genomic Structure assignments with multiple invasive clonal lineages. 
These results provide new insights into the origin and maintenance of clonality 
in this complex system.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.7484
PMCID: PMC6708575
PMID: 31497390

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.