1. J Med Genet. 2020 Feb;57(2):96-103. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2019-106214. Epub 
2019 Sep 6.

Variant type is associated with disease characteristics in SDHB, SDHC and 
SDHD-linked phaeochromocytoma-paraganglioma.

Bayley JP(1), Bausch B(2), Rijken JA(3), van Hulsteijn LT(4), Jansen JC(5), 
Ascher D(6), Pires DEV(7), Hes FJ(8), Hensen EF(5), Corssmit EPM(4), Devilee 
P(9), Neumann HPH(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The 
Netherlands J.P.L.Bayley@lumc.nl.
(2)Department of Medicine II, University of Freiburg Faculty of Medicine, 
Freiburg, Germany.
(3)Department of Otorhinolaryngology - Head & Neck Surgery, Free University 
Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolic Diseases, Leiden University Medical 
Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 
The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of Melbourne 
Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia.
(7)Instituto René Rachou, Fundacao Oswaldo Cruz, Belo Horizonte, Brazil.
(8)Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, 
The Netherlands.
(9)Department of Pathology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The 
Netherlands.
(10)Section for Preventive Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, 
Albert-Ludwigs-University, Freiburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Pathogenic germline variants in subunits of succinate dehydrogenase 
(SDHB, SDHC and SDHD) are broadly associated with disease subtypes of 
phaeochromocytoma-paraganglioma (PPGL) syndrome. Our objective was to 
investigate the role of variant type (ie, missense vs truncating) in determining 
tumour phenotype.
METHODS: Three independent datasets comprising 950 PPGL and head and neck 
paraganglioma (HNPGL) patients were analysed for associations of variant type 
with tumour type and age-related tumour risk. All patients were carriers of 
pathogenic germline variants in the SDHB, SDHC or SDHD genes.
RESULTS: Truncating SDH variants were significantly over-represented in clinical 
cases compared with missense variants, and carriers of SDHD truncating variants 
had a significantly higher risk for PPGL (p<0.001), an earlier age of diagnosis 
(p<0.0001) and a greater risk for PPGL/HNPGL comorbidity compared with carriers 
of missense variants. Carriers of SDHB truncating variants displayed a trend 
towards increased risk of PPGL, and all three SDH genes showed a trend towards 
over-representation of missense variants in HNPGL cases. Overall, variant types 
conferred PPGL risk in the (highest-to-lowest) sequence SDHB truncating, SDHB 
missense, SDHD truncating and SDHD missense, with the opposite pattern apparent 
for HNPGL (p<0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: SDHD truncating variants represent a distinct group, with a 
clinical phenotype reminiscent of but not identical to SDHB. We propose that 
surveillance and counselling of carriers of SDHD should be tailored by variant 
type. The clinical impact of truncating SDHx variants is distinct from missense 
variants and suggests that residual SDH protein subunit function determines risk 
and site of disease.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2020. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2019-106214
PMID: 31492822 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.