1. Front Neural Circuits. 2019 Aug 23;13:56. doi: 10.3389/fncir.2019.00056. 
eCollection 2019.

Somatostatin-Expressing Interneurons Form Axonal Projections to the 
Contralateral Hippocampus.

Eyre MD(1), Bartos M(1).

Author information:
(1)Medical Faculty, Institute for Physiology I, Systemic and Cellular 
Neurophysiology, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.

Conscious memories are critically dependent upon bilateral hippocampal 
formation, and interhemispheric commissural projections made by mossy cells and 
CA3 pyramidal cells. GABAergic interneurons also make long-range axonal 
projections, but little is known regarding their commissural, inter-hippocampal 
connections. We used retrograde and adeno-associated viral tracing, 
immunofluorescence and electron microscopy, and in vitro optogenetics to assess 
contralateral projections of neurochemically defined interneuron classes. We 
found that contralateral-projecting interneurons were 24-fold less common 
compared to hilar mossy cells, and mostly consisted of somatostatin- and 
parvalbumin-expressing types. Somatostatin-expressing cells made denser 
contralateral axonal projections than parvalbumin-expressing cells, although 
this was typically 10-fold less than the ipsilateral projection density. 
Somatostatin-expressing cells displayed a topographic-like innervation according 
to the location of their somata, whereas parvalbumin-expressing cells mostly 
innervated CA1. In the dentate gyrus molecular layer, commissural interneuron 
post-synaptic targets were predominantly putative granule cell apical dendrites. 
In the hilus, varicosities in close vicinity to various interneuron subtypes, as 
well as mossy cells, were observed, but most contralateral axon varicosities had 
no adjacent immunolabeled structure. Due to the relative sparsity of the 
connection and the likely distal dendritic location of their synapses, 
commissural projections made by interneurons were found to be weak. We postulate 
that these projections may become functionally active upon intense network 
activity during tasks requiring increased memory processing.

DOI: 10.3389/fncir.2019.00056
PMCID: PMC6716454
PMID: 31507383 [Indexed for MEDLINE]