1. Elife. 2019 Sep 20;8:e48507. doi: 10.7554/eLife.48507.

Fgf-signaling is compartmentalized within the mesenchyme and controls 
proliferation during salamander limb development.

Purushothaman S(1), Elewa A(2), Seifert AW(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, United States.
(2)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, United States.

Erratum in
    Elife. 2021 Jul 09;10:e72022. doi: 10.7554/eLife.72022.

Although decades of studies have produced a generalized model for tetrapod limb 
development, urodeles deviate from anurans and amniotes in at least two key 
respects: their limbs exhibit preaxial skeletal differentiation and do not 
develop an apical ectodermal ridge (AER). Here, we investigated how Sonic 
hedgehog (Shh) and Fibroblast growth factor (Fgf) signaling regulate limb 
development in the axolotl. We found that Shh-expressing cells contributed to 
the most posterior digit, and that inhibiting Shh-signaling inhibited Fgf8 
expression, anteroposterior patterning, and distal cell proliferation. In 
addition to lack of a morphological AER, we found that salamander limbs also 
lack a molecular AER. We found that amniote and anuran AER-specific Fgfs and 
their cognate receptors were expressed entirely in the mesenchyme. Broad 
inhibition of Fgf-signaling demonstrated that this pathway regulates cell 
proliferation across all three limb axes, in contrast to anurans and amniotes 
where Fgf-signaling regulates cell survival and proximodistal patterning.

Plain Language Summary: Salamanders are a group of amphibians that are 
well-known for their ability to regenerate lost limbs and other body parts. At 
the turn of the twentieth century, researchers used salamander embryos as models 
to understand the basic concepts of how limbs develop in other four-limbed 
animals, including amphibians, mammals and birds, which are collectively known 
as “tetrapods”. However, the salamander’s amazing powers of regeneration made it 
difficult to carry out certain experiments, so researchers switched to using the 
embryos of other tetrapods – namely chickens and mice – instead. Studies in 
chickens, later confirmed in mice and frogs, established that there are two 
major signaling centers that control how the limbs of tetrapod embryos form and 
grow: a small group of cells known as the “zone of polarizing activity” within a 
structure called the “limb bud mesenchyme”; and an overlying, thin ridge of 
cells called the “apical ectodermal ridge”. Both of these centers release potent 
signaling molecules that act on cells in the limbs. The cells in the zone of 
polarizing activity produce a molecule often called Sonic hedgehog, or Shh for 
short. The apical ectodermal ridge produces another group of signals commonly 
known as fibroblast growth factors, or simply Fgfs. Several older studies 
reported that salamander embryos do not have an apical ectodermal ridge 
suggesting that these amphibian’s limbs may form differently to other tetrapods. 
Yet, contemporary models in developmental biology treated salamander limbs like 
those of chicks and mice. To address this apparent discrepancy, Purushothaman et 
al. studied how the forelimbs develop in a salamander known as the axolotl. The 
experiments showed that, along with lacking an apical ectodermal ridge, axolotls 
did not produce fibroblast growth factors normally found in this tissue. 
Instead, these factors were only found in the limb bud mesenchyme. Purushothaman 
et al. also found that fibroblast growth factors played a different role in 
axolotls than previously reported in chick, frog and mouse embryos. On the other 
hand, the pattern and function of Shh activity in the axolotl limb bud was 
similar to that previously observed in chicks and mice. These findings show that 
not all limbs develop in the same way and open up questions for evolutionary 
biologists regarding the evolution of limbs. Future studies that examine limb 
development in other animals that regenerate tissues, such as other amphibians 
and lungfish, will help answer these questions.

© 2019, Purushothaman et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.48507
PMCID: PMC6754229
PMID: 31538936 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: SP, AE, AS No competing interests declared