1. Int J Nanomedicine. 2019 Jul 31;14:6061-6071. doi: 10.2147/IJN.S211130. 
eCollection 2019.

Resveratrol solid lipid nanoparticles to trigger credible inhibition of 
doxorubicin cardiotoxicity.

Zhang L(1), Zhu K(1), Zeng H(2), Zhang J(1), Pu Y(3), Wang Z(4), Zhang T(3), 
Wang B(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmacy, Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, 
Shanghai, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, Putuo Hospital, Shanghai University of Traditional 
Chinese Medicine, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.
(3)Experiment Center for Teaching and Learning, Shanghai University of 
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.
(4)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Huashan Hospital, Shanghai Medical 
College, Fudan University, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.
(5)Center for Pharmaceutics Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.

Background: Doxorubicin (DOX), a broad-spectrum chemotherapy drug, is clinically 
employed to treat cancers especially for breast cancer and lung cancer. But its 
clinical applications are limited by the dose-dependent cardiac toxicity. 
Resveratrol (Res), a polyphenolic antitoxin, has been proved to be capable of 
improving the cardiomyocyte calcium cycling by up-regulating SIRT-1-mediated 
deacetylation to inhibit DOX-induced cardiotoxicity. Purpose: The objective of 
this study was to develop a solid lipid nanoparticle (SLN) loaded with Res to 
trigger inhibition of DOX-induced cardiotoxicity. Methods: Res-SLN was prepared 
by emulsification-diffusion method followed by sonication and optimized using 
central composite design/response surface method. The Res-SLN was further 
evaluated by dynamic light scattering, transmission electron microscopy for 
morphology and high performance liquid chromatography for drug loading and 
release profile. And the Res distribution in vivo was determined on rats while 
the effect of inhibit DOX-induced cardiotoxicity was investigated on mice. 
Results: Res-SLN with homogeneous particle size of 271.13 nm was successfully 
formulated and optimized. The prepared Res-SLN showed stable under storage and 
sustained release profile, improving the poor solubility of Res. Heart rate, 
ejection fractions and fractional shortening of Res-SLN treating mice were found 
higher than those on mice with cardiac toxicity induced by single high-dose 
intraperitoneal injection of DOX. And the degree of myocardial ultrastructural 
lesions on mice was also observed. Conclusion: Res-SLN has a certain therapeutic 
effect for protecting the myocardium and reducing DOX-induced cardiotoxicity in 
mice.

DOI: 10.2147/IJN.S211130
PMCID: PMC6681569
PMID: 31534336 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.