1. Transl Psychiatry. 2019 Sep 19;9(1):236. doi: 10.1038/s41398-019-0566-7.

Depression genetic risk score is associated with anhedonia-related markers 
across units of analysis.

Guffanti G(1)(2), Kumar P(1)(2), Admon R(3), Treadway MT(4)(5), Hall MH(1)(2), 
Mehta M(2), Douglas S(2), Arulpragasam AR(4), Pizzagalli DA(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
(2)McLean Hospital, Belmont, MA, 02478, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel.
(4)Department of Psychology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, 30322, USA.
(5)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Emory University, Atlanta, 
GA, 30322, USA.
(6)Department of Psychiatry, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 02115, USA. 
dap@mclean.harvard.edu.
(7)McLean Hospital, Belmont, MA, 02478, USA. dap@mclean.harvard.edu.

Investigations of pathophysiological mechanisms implicated in vulnerability to 
depression have been negatively impacted by the significant heterogeneity 
characteristic of psychiatric syndromes. Such challenges are also reflected in 
numerous null findings emerging from genome-wide association studies (GWAS) of 
depression. Bolstered by increasing sample sizes, recent GWAS studies have 
identified genetics variants linked to MDD. Among them, Okbay and colleagues 
(Nat. Genet. 2016 Jun;48(6):624-33) identified genetic variants associated with 
three well-validated depression-related phenotypes: subjective well-being, 
depressive symptoms, and neuroticism. Despite this progress, little is known 
about psychopathological and neurobiological mechanisms underlying such risk. To 
fill this gap, a genetic risk score (GRS) was computed from the Okbay's study 
for a sample of 88 psychiatrically healthy females. Across two sessions, 
participants underwent two well-validated psychosocial stressors, and performed 
two separate tasks probing reward learning both before and after stress. 
Analyses tested whether GRS scores predicted anhedonia-related phenotypes across 
three units of analyses: self-report (Snaith Hamilton Pleasure Scale), behavior 
(stress-induced changes in reward learning), and circuits (stress-induced 
changes in striatal reward prediction error; striatal volume). GRS scores were 
negatively associated with anhedonia-related phenotypes across all units of 
analyses but only circuit-level variables were significant. In addition, the 
amount of explained variance was systematically larger as variables were 
putatively closer to the effects of genes (self-report < behavior < neural 
circuitry). Collectively, findings implicate anhedonia-related phenotypes and 
neurobiological mechanisms in increased depression vulnerability, and highlight 
the value of focusing on fundamental dimensions of functioning across different 
units of analyses.

DOI: 10.1038/s41398-019-0566-7
PMCID: PMC6753161
PMID: 31537779 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Over the past 3 years, D.A.P. has received 
consulting fees from Akili Interactive Labs, BlackThorn Therapeutics, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Compass, Posit Science, and Takeda Pharmaceuticals and an honorarium 
from Alkermes for activities unrelated to the current review. Dr. Pizzagalli has 
a financial interest in BlackThorn Therapeutics, which has licensed the 
copyright to the Probabilistic Reward Task through Harvard University. Dr. 
Pizzagalli’s interests were reviewed and are managed by McLean Hospital and 
Partners HealthCare in accordance with their conflict of interest policies. In 
the past 3 years, Dr. Treadway has served as a paid consultant to BlackThorn 
Therapeutics, Avanir Pharmaceuticals, and NeuroCog Trials Inc. No funding from 
these entities was used to support the current work, and all views expressed are 
solely those of the authors. The remaining authors declare that they have no 
conflict of interest.