1. Front Microbiol. 2019 Aug 30;10:1965. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.01965.
eCollection  2019.

Type VI Secretion System in Pathogenic Escherichia coli: Structure, Role in 
Virulence, and Acquisition.

Navarro-Garcia F(1), Ruiz-Perez F(2), Cataldi Á(3), Larzábal M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Centro de Investigación y de Estudios Avanzados 
del IPN (CINVESTAV-IPN), Mexico City, Mexico.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of Virginia School of Medicine, 
Charlottesville, VA, United States.
(3)Laboratorio de Escherichia coli, Instituto de Agrobiotecnología y Biología 
Molecular (IABIMO) INTA-CONICET, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Bacterial pathogens utilize a myriad of mechanisms to invade mammalian hosts, 
damage tissue sites, and evade the immune system. One essential strategy of 
Gram-negative bacteria is the secretion of virulence factors through both inner 
and outer membranes to reach a potential target. Most secretion systems are 
harbored in mobile elements including transposons, plasmids, pathogenicity 
islands, and phages, and Escherichia coli is one of the more versatile bacteria 
adopting this genetic information by horizontal gene transfer. Additionally, E. 
coli is a bacterial species with members of the commensal intestinal microbiota 
and pathogens associated with numerous types of infections such as intestinal, 
urinary, and systemic in humans and other animals. T6SS cluster plasticity 
suggests evolutionarily divergent systems were acquired horizontally. T6SS is a 
secretion nanomachine that is extended through the bacterial double membrane; 
from this apparatus, substrates are conveyed straight from the cytoplasm of the 
bacterium into a target cell or to the extracellular space. This nanomachine 
consists of three main complexes: proteins in the inner membrane that are T4SS 
component-like, the baseplate complex, and the tail complex, which are formed by 
components evolutionarily related to contractile bacteriophage tails. Advances 
in the T6SS understanding include the functional and structural characterization 
of at least 13 subunits (so-called core components), which are thought to 
comprise the minimal apparatus. So far, the main role of T6SS is on bacterial 
competition by using it to kill neighboring non-immune bacteria for which 
antibacterial proteins are secreted directly into the periplasm of the bacterial 
target after cell-cell contact. Interestingly, a few T6SSs have been associated 
directly to pathogenesis, e.g., roles in biofilm formation and macrophage 
survival. Here, we focus on the advances on T6SS from the perspective of E. coli 
pathotypes with emphasis in the secretion apparatus architecture, the mechanisms 
of pathogenicity of effector proteins, and the events of lateral gene transfer 
that led to its spread.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.01965
PMCID: PMC6730261
PMID: 31543869