1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2019 Dec 2;47(21):e140. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkz806.

Next-generation forward genetic screens: using simulated data to improve the 
design of mapping-by-sequencing experiments in Arabidopsis.

Wilson-Sánchez D(1), Lup SD(1), Sarmiento-Mañús R(1), Ponce MR(1), Micol JL(1).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Bioingeniería, Universidad Miguel Hernández, Campus de Elche, 
03202 Elche, Spain.

Forward genetic screens have successfully identified many genes and continue to 
be powerful tools for dissecting biological processes in Arabidopsis and other 
model species. Next-generation sequencing technologies have revolutionized the 
time-consuming process of identifying the mutations that cause a phenotype of 
interest. However, due to the cost of such mapping-by-sequencing experiments, 
special attention should be paid to experimental design and technical decisions 
so that the read data allows to map the desired mutation. Here, we simulated 
different mapping-by-sequencing scenarios. We first evaluated which short-read 
technology was best suited for analyzing gene-rich genomic regions in 
Arabidopsis and determined the minimum sequencing depth required to confidently 
call single nucleotide variants. We also designed ways to discriminate 
mutagenesis-induced mutations from background Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms in 
mutants isolated in Arabidopsis non-reference lines. In addition, we simulated 
bulked segregant mapping populations for identifying point mutations and 
monitored how the size of the mapping population and the sequencing depth affect 
mapping precision. Finally, we provide the computational basis of a protocol 
that we already used to map T-DNA insertions with paired-end Illumina-like 
reads, using very low sequencing depths and pooling several mutants together; 
this approach can also be used with single-end reads as well as to map any other 
insertional mutagen. All these simulations proved useful for designing 
experiments that allowed us to map several mutations in Arabidopsis.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkz806
PMCID: PMC6868388
PMID: 31544937 [Indexed for MEDLINE]