1. Front Neurosci. 2019 Sep 10;13:951. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2019.00951. eCollection
 2019.

Cognitive, Emotional and Psychological Manifestations in Amyotrophic Lateral 
Sclerosis at Baseline and Overtime: A Review.

Benbrika S(1), Desgranges B(1), Eustache F(1), Viader F(1).

Author information:
(1)Neuropsychology and Imaging of Human Memory, Normandy University-PSL Research 
University-EPHE-INSERM U1077, Caen University Hospital, Caen, France.

It is now well recognized that, in addition to motor impairment, amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis (ALS) may cause extra-motor clinical signs and symptoms. These 
can include the alteration of certain cognitive functions, impaired social 
cognition, and changes in the perception and processing of emotions. Where these 
extra-motor manifestations occur in ALS, they usually do so from disease onset. 
In about 10% of cases, the cognitive and behavioral changes meet the diagnostic 
criteria for frontotemporal dementia. The timecourse of behavioral and cognitive 
involvement in ALS is unclear. Whereas longitudinal studies have failed to show 
cognitive decline over time, some cross-sectional studies have demonstrated 
poorer cognitive performances in the advanced stages of the disease. 
Neuroimaging studies show that in ALS, extra-motor signs and symptoms are 
associated with specific brain lesions, but little is known about how they 
change over time. Finally, patients with ALS appear less depressed than might be 
expected, given the prognosis. Moreover, many patients achieve satisfactory 
psychosocial adjustment throughout the course of the disease, regardless of 
their degree of motor disability. There are scant longitudinal data on 
extra-motor impairment in ALS, and to our knowledge, no systematic review on 
this subject has yet been published. Even so, a better understanding of 
patients' clinical trajectory is essential if they are to be provided with 
tailored care and given the best possible support. We therefore undertook to 
review the evidence for extra-motor changes and their time course in ALS, in 
both the cognitive, emotional and psychological domains, with a view to 
identifying mechanisms that may help these patients cope with their disease.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2019.00951
PMCID: PMC6746914
PMID: 31551700