1. mBio. 2019 Sep 24;10(5):e02202-19. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02202-19.

Population Genomics of GII.4 Noroviruses Reveal Complex Diversification and New 
Antigenic Sites Involved in the Emergence of Pandemic Strains.

Tohma K(#)(1), Lepore CJ(#)(1), Gao Y(1), Ford-Siltz LA(1), Parra GI(#)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Viral Products, Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, 
Maryland, USA.
(2)Division of Viral Products, Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, 
Maryland, USA gabriel.parra@fda.hhs.gov.
(#)Contributed equally

GII.4 noroviruses are a major cause of acute gastroenteritis. Their dominance 
has been partially explained by the continuous emergence of antigenically 
distinct variants. To gain insights into the mechanisms of viral emergence and 
population dynamics of GII.4 noroviruses, we performed large-scale genomics, 
structural, and mutational analyses of the viral capsid protein (VP1). GII.4 
noroviruses exhibited a periodic replacement of predominant variants with 
accumulation of amino acid substitutions. Genomic analyses revealed (i) a large 
proportion (87%) of conserved residues; (ii) variable residues that map on the 
previously determined antigenic sites; and (iii) variable residues that map 
outside the antigenic sites. Residues in the third pattern category formed 
motifs on the surface of VP1, which suggested extensions of previously predicted 
and new uncharacterized antigenic sites. The role of two motifs (C and G) in the 
antigenic makeup of the GII.4 capsid protein was confirmed with monoclonal 
antibodies and carbohydrate blocking assays. Amino acid profiles from antigenic 
sites (A, C, D, E, and G) correlated with the circulation patterns of GII.4 
variants, with three of them (A, C, and G) containing residues (352, 357, 368, 
and 378) linked with the diversifying selective pressure on the emergence of new 
GII.4 variants. Notably, the emergence of each variant was followed by 
stochastic diversification with minimal changes that did not progress toward the 
next variant. This report provides a methodological framework for antigenic 
characterization of viruses and expands our understanding of the dynamics of 
GII.4 noroviruses and could facilitate the design of cross-reactive 
vaccines.IMPORTANCE Noroviruses are an important cause of viral gastroenteritis 
around the world. An obstacle delaying the development of norovirus vaccines is 
inadequate understanding of the role of norovirus diversity in immunity. Using a 
population genomics approach, we identified new residues on the viral capsid 
protein (VP1) from GII.4 noroviruses, the predominant genotype, that appear to 
be involved in the emergence and antigenic topology of GII.4 variants. Careful 
monitoring of the substitutions in those residues involved in the 
diversification and emergence of new viruses could help in the early detection 
of future novel variants with pandemic potential. Therefore, this novel 
information on the antigenic diversification could facilitate GII.4 norovirus 
vaccine design.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02202-19
PMCID: PMC6759766
PMID: 31551337 [Indexed for MEDLINE]