1. Plants (Basel). 2019 Sep 27;8(10):381. doi: 10.3390/plants8100381.

The Biochemical Properties of Manganese in Plants.

Schmidt SB(1), Husted S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant and Environmental Sciences, Faculty of Science, 
University of Copenhagen, 1871 Frederiksberg C., Denmark. sisc@plen.ku.dk.
(2)Department of Plant and Environmental Sciences, Faculty of Science, 
University of Copenhagen, 1871 Frederiksberg C., Denmark. shu@plen.ku.dk.

Manganese (Mn) is an essential micronutrient with many functional roles in plant 
metabolism. Manganese acts as an activator and co-factor of hundreds of 
metalloenzymes in plants. Because of its ability to readily change oxidation 
state in biological systems, Mn plays and important role in a broad range of 
enzyme-catalyzed reactions, including redox reactions, phosphorylation, 
decarboxylation, and hydrolysis. Manganese(II) is the prevalent oxidation state 
of Mn in plants and exhibits fast ligand exchange kinetics, which means that Mn 
can often be substituted by other metal ions, such as Mg(II), which has similar 
ion characteristics and requirements to the ligand environment of the metal 
binding sites. Knowledge of the molecular mechanisms catalyzed by Mn and 
regulation of Mn insertion into the active site of Mn-dependent enzymes, in the 
presence of other metals, is gradually evolving. This review presents an 
overview of the chemistry and biochemistry of Mn in plants, including an updated 
list of known Mn-dependent enzymes, together with enzymes where Mn has been 
shown to exchange with other metal ions. Furthermore, the current knowledge of 
the structure and functional role of the three most well characterized 
Mn-containing metalloenzymes in plants; the oxygen evolving complex of 
photosystem II, Mn superoxide dismutase, and oxalate oxidase is summarized.

DOI: 10.3390/plants8100381
PMCID: PMC6843630
PMID: 31569811

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest.