1. Aging Cell. 2019 Dec;18(6):e13048. doi: 10.1111/acel.13048. Epub 2019 Sep 27.

The role of lipid metabolism in aging, lifespan regulation, and age-related 
disease.

Johnson AA(1), Stolzing A(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Nikon Instruments, Melville, NY, USA.
(2)BIOAGE Labs, Richmond, CA, USA.
(3)Loughborough University, Loughborough, UK.

An emerging body of data suggests that lipid metabolism has an important role to 
play in the aging process. Indeed, a plethora of dietary, pharmacological, 
genetic, and surgical lipid-related interventions extend lifespan in nematodes, 
fruit flies, mice, and rats. For example, the impairment of genes involved in 
ceramide and sphingolipid synthesis extends lifespan in both worms and flies. 
The overexpression of fatty acid amide hydrolase or lysosomal lipase prolongs 
life in Caenorhabditis elegans, while the overexpression of diacylglycerol 
lipase enhances longevity in both C. elegans and Drosophila melanogaster. The 
surgical removal of adipose tissue extends lifespan in rats, and increased 
expression of apolipoprotein D enhances survival in both flies and mice. Mouse 
lifespan can be additionally extended by the genetic deletion of diacylglycerol 
acyltransferase 1, treatment with the steroid 17-α-estradiol, or a ketogenic 
diet. Moreover, deletion of the phospholipase A2 receptor improves various 
healthspan parameters in a progeria mouse model. Genome-wide association studies 
have found several lipid-related variants to be associated with human aging. For 
example, the epsilon 2 and epsilon 4 alleles of apolipoprotein E are associated 
with extreme longevity and late-onset neurodegenerative disease, respectively. 
In humans, blood triglyceride levels tend to increase, while blood 
lysophosphatidylcholine levels tend to decrease with age. Specific sphingolipid 
and phospholipid blood profiles have also been shown to change with age and are 
associated with exceptional human longevity. These data suggest that 
lipid-related interventions may improve human healthspan and that blood lipids 
likely represent a rich source of human aging biomarkers.

© 2019 The Authors. Aging Cell published by the Anatomical Society and John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/acel.13048
PMCID: PMC6826135
PMID: 31560163 [Indexed for MEDLINE]