1. Int J Nanomedicine. 2019 Sep 11;14:7399-7417. doi: 10.2147/IJN.S213499. 
eCollection 2019.

Effects of functionalized silver nanoparticles on aggregation of human blood 
platelets.

Hajtuch J(1), Hante N(2), Tomczyk E(3), Wojcik M(3), Radomski MW(4), 
Santos-Martinez MJ(2), Inkielewicz-Stepniak I(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Chemistry, Medical University of Gdansk, Gdansk, 
Poland.
(2)School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Trinity College Dublin, 
Dublin 2, Ireland.
(3)Faculty of Chemistry, University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.
(4)Department of Anatomy, Physiology and Pharmacology, University of 
Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Canada.

PURPOSE: We studied the effects of silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) on human blood 
platelet function. We hypothesized that AgNPs, a known antimicrobial agent, can 
be used as blood-compatible, "ideal material'' in medical devices or as a drug 
delivery system. Therefore, the aim of the current study was to investigate if 
functionalized AgNPs affect platelet function and platelets as well as 
endothelial cell viability in vitro.
METHODS: AgNPs, functionalized with reduced glutathione (GSH), polyethylene 
glycol (PEG) and lipoic acid (LA) were synthesized. Quartz crystal microbalance 
with dissipation was used to measure the effect of AgNPs on platelet 
aggregation. Platelet aggregation was measured by changes in frequency and 
dissipation, and the presence of platelets on the sensor surface was confirmed 
and imaged by phase contrast microscopy. Flow cytometry was used to detect 
surface abundance of platelet receptors. Lactate dehydrogenase test was used to 
assess the potential cytotoxicity of AgNPs on human blood platelets, endothelial 
cells, and fibroblasts. Commercially available ELISA tests were used to measure 
the levels of thromboxane B2 and metalloproteinases (MMP-1, MMP-2) released by 
platelets as markers of platelet activation.
RESULTS: 2 nm AgNPs-GSH, 3.7 nm AgNPs-PEG both at 50 and 100 µg/mL, and 2.5 nm 
AgNPs-LA at 100 µg/mL reduced platelet aggregation, inhibited collagen-mediated 
increase in total P-selectin and GPIIb/IIIa, TXB2 formation, MMP-1, and MMP-2 
release. The tested AgNPs concentrations were not cytotoxic as they did not 
affect, platelet, endothelial cell, or fibroblast viability.
CONCLUSION: All tested functionalized AgNPs inhibited platelet aggregation at 
nontoxic concentrations. Therefore, functionalized AgNPs can be used as an 
antiplatelet agent or in design and manufacturing of blood-facing medical 
devices, such as vascular grafts, stents, heart valves, and catheters.

© 2019 Hajtuch et al.

DOI: 10.2147/IJN.S213499
PMCID: PMC6750026
PMID: 31571858 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.