1. Front Genet. 2019 Sep 19;10:863. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2019.00863. eCollection 
2019.

Elimination of Reference Mapping Bias Reveals Robust Immune Related 
Allele-Specific Expression in Crossbred Sheep.

Salavati M(1), Bush SJ(1), Palma-Vera S(2), McCulloch MEB(1), Hume DA(3), Clark 
EL(1).

Author information:
(1)The Roslin Institute and Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies, 
University of Edinburgh, Easter Bush, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(2)Leibniz Institute for Farm Animal Biology (FBN), Institute for Reproductive 
Biology, Dummerstorf, Germany.
(3)Mater Research Institute-University of Queensland, Translational Research 
Institute, Woolloongabba, QLD, Australia.

Pervasive allelic variation at both gene and single nucleotide level (SNV) 
between individuals is commonly associated with complex traits in humans and 
animals. Allele-specific expression (ASE) analysis, using RNA-Seq, can provide a 
detailed annotation of allelic imbalance and infer the existence of cis-acting 
transcriptional regulation. However, variant detection in RNA-Seq data is 
compromised by biased mapping of reads to the reference DNA sequence. In this 
manuscript, we describe an unbiased standardized computational pipeline for 
allele-specific expression analysis using RNA-Seq data, which we have adapted 
and developed using tools available under open license. The analysis pipeline we 
present is designed to minimize reference bias while providing accurate 
profiling of allele-specific expression across tissues and cell types. Using 
this methodology, we were able to profile pervasive allelic imbalance across 
tissues and cell types, at both the gene and SNV level, in Texel×Scottish 
Blackface sheep, using the sheep gene expression atlas data set. ASE profiles 
were pervasive in each sheep and across all tissue types investigated. However, 
ASE profiles shared across tissues were limited, and instead, they tended to be 
highly tissue-specific. These tissue-specific ASE profiles may underlie the 
expression of economically important traits and could be utilized as weighted 
SNVs, for example, to improve the accuracy of genomic selection in breeding 
programs for sheep. An additional benefit of the pipeline is that it does not 
require parental genotypes and can therefore be applied to other RNA-Seq data 
sets for livestock, including those available on the Functional Annotation of 
Animal Genomes (FAANG) data portal. This study is the first global 
characterization of moderate to extreme ASE in tissues and cell types from 
sheep. We have applied a robust methodology for ASE profiling to provide both a 
novel analysis of the multi-dimensional sheep gene expression atlas data set and 
a foundation for identifying the regulatory and expressed elements of the genome 
that are driving complex traits in livestock.

Copyright © 2019 Salavati, Bush, Palma-Vera, McCulloch, Hume and Clark.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2019.00863
PMCID: PMC6761296
PMID: 31608110