1. Heart Rhythm. 2020 Mar;17(3):503-511. doi: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2019.10.016. Epub 
2019 Oct 14.

Calmodulin kinase II regulates atrial myocyte late sodium current, calcium 
handling, and atrial arrhythmia.

Greer-Short A(1), Musa H(2), Alsina KM(3), Ni L(3), Word TA(3), Reynolds JO(3), 
Gratz D(1), Lane C(1), El-Refaey M(2), Unudurthi S(1), Skaf M(2), Li N(4), 
Fedorov VV(4), Wehrens XHT(3), Mohler PJ(5), Hund TJ(6).

Author information:
(1)The Frick Center for Heart Failure and Arrhythmia, Dorothy M. Davis Heart and 
Lung Research Institute, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, 
Columbus, Ohio; Department of Biomedical Engineering, College of Engineering, 
The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio.
(2)The Frick Center for Heart Failure and Arrhythmia, Dorothy M. Davis Heart and 
Lung Research Institute, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, 
Columbus, Ohio.
(3)Cardiovascular Research Institute, Departments of Molecular Physiology & 
Biophysics, Medicine (Cardiology), Pediatrics (Cardiology), and Neuroscience, 
Center for Space Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas.
(4)The Frick Center for Heart Failure and Arrhythmia, Dorothy M. Davis Heart and 
Lung Research Institute, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, 
Columbus, Ohio; Department of Physiology & Cell Biology, The Ohio State 
University College of Medicine, Columbus, Ohio.
(5)The Frick Center for Heart Failure and Arrhythmia, Dorothy M. Davis Heart and 
Lung Research Institute, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, 
Columbus, Ohio; Department of Physiology & Cell Biology, The Ohio State 
University College of Medicine, Columbus, Ohio; Department of Internal Medicine, 
The Ohio State University College of Medicine, Columbus, Ohio.
(6)The Frick Center for Heart Failure and Arrhythmia, Dorothy M. Davis Heart and 
Lung Research Institute, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, 
Columbus, Ohio; Department of Biomedical Engineering, College of Engineering, 
The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio; Department of Internal Medicine, The 
Ohio State University College of Medicine, Columbus, Ohio. Electronic address: 
Thomas.Hund@osumc.edu.

BACKGROUND: Atrial fibrillation (AF) is the most common type of arrhythmia. 
Abnormal atrial myocyte Ca2+ handling promotes aberrant membrane excitability 
and remodeling that are important for atrial arrhythmogenesis. The sequence of 
molecular events leading to loss of normal atrial myocyte Ca2+ homeostasis is 
not established. Late Na+ current (INa,L) is increased in atrial myocytes from 
AF patients together with an increase in activity of Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent 
kinase II (CaMKII).
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to determine whether CaMKII-dependent 
phosphorylation at Ser571 on NaV1.5 increases atrial INa,L, leading to aberrant 
atrial Ca2+ cycling, altered electrophysiology, and increased AF risk.
METHODS: Atrial myocyte electrophysiology, Ca2+ handling, and arrhythmia 
susceptibility were studied in wild-type and Scn5a knock-in mice expressing 
phosphomimetic (S571E) or phosphoresistant (S571A) NaV1.5 at Ser571.
RESULTS: Atrial myocytes from S571E but not S571A mice displayed an increase in 
INa,L and action potential duration, and with adrenergic stress have increased 
delayed afterdepolarizations. Frequency of Ca2+ sparks and waves was increased 
in S571E atrial myocytes compared to wild type. S571E mice showed an increase in 
atrial events induced by adrenergic stress and AF inducibility in vivo. Isolated 
S571E atria were more susceptible to spontaneous atrial events, which were 
abrogated by inhibiting sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ release, CaMKII, or the 
Na+/Ca2+ exchanger. Expression of phospho-NaV1.5 at Ser571 and 
autophosphorylated CaMKII were increased in atrial samples from human AF 
patients.
CONCLUSION: This study identified CaMKII-dependent regulation of NaV1.5 as an 
important upstream event in Ca2+ handling defects and abnormal impulse 
generation in the setting of AF.

Copyright © 2019 Heart Rhythm Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2019.10.016
PMCID: PMC7056561
PMID: 31622781 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: X.H.T.W. is a 
founding partner of Elex Biotech, a start-up company that developed drug 
molecules that target ryanodine receptors for the treatment of cardiac 
arrhythmia disorders.