1. BMC Cancer. 2019 Oct 23;19(1):991. doi: 10.1186/s12885-019-6244-6.

The prognostic impact of GSTM1/GSTP1 genetic variants in bladder Cancer.

Albarakati N(1), Khayyat D(2), Dallol A(3), Al-Maghrabi J(4)(5), Nedjadi T(6).

Author information:
(1)King Abdullah International Medical Research Center, King Saud bin Abdulaziz 
University for Health Sciences, Ministry of the National Guard - Health Affairs, 
Jeddah, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
(2)King Fahd Medical Research Center, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi 
Arabia.
(3)Centre of Excellence in Genomic Medicine Research and Medical Laboratory 
Technology Department, Faculty of Applied Medical Sciences, King Abdulaziz 
University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Department of Pathology, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(5)King Faisal Specialist Hospital & Research Center, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(6)King Abdullah International Medical Research Center, King Saud bin Abdulaziz 
University for Health Sciences, Ministry of the National Guard - Health Affairs, 
Jeddah, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. nedjadita@ngha.med.sa.

BACKGROUND: The glutathione S-transferases (GSTs) are a superfamily of phase II 
detoxifying enzymes that inactivates a wide variety of potential carcinogens 
through glutathione conjugation. Polymorphic changes in the GST genes have been 
reported to be associated with increased susceptibility to cancer development 
and anticancer drug resistance. In this study, we investigated the association 
between genetic variants in GSTM1 and GSTP1 and patients' clinicopathological 
parameters. The prognostic values of such associations were evaluated among 
bladder cancer patients.
METHODS: Genotyping of GSTM1 and GSTP1 in bladder cancer patients was assessed 
using polymerase chain reaction followed by DNA sequencing. Overall survival was 
estimated using the Kaplan-Meier method and multiple logistic regression and 
correlation analysis were performed.
RESULTS: The GSTM1 null genotype was significantly associated with poor overall 
survival compared with the wild-type GSTM1 genotype. There was a trend towards 
better overall survival in patients with wild-type GSTP1 allele (AA) compared 
with GSTP1 (AG/GG) genotype. Interestingly, Kaplan-meier survival curve for 
GSTM1 null patients adjusted for sub-cohort with amplified HER2 gene showed poor 
survival compared with the GSTM1 null/ non-amplified HER2 gene. Also the same 
population when adjusted with HER2 protein expression, data showed poor survival 
for patients harboring GSTM1 null/high HER2 protein expression compared with low 
protein expression.
CONCLUSION: This study focuses on the impact of GSTM1 null genotype on bladder 
cancer patients' outcome. Further investigations are required to delineate the 
underlying mechanisms of combined GSTM-/- and HER2 status in bladder cancer.

DOI: 10.1186/s12885-019-6244-6
PMCID: PMC6813104
PMID: 31646988 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.