1. mBio. 2019 Oct 22;10(5):e02294-19. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02294-19.

Attenuation of Live-Attenuated Yellow Fever 17D Vaccine Virus Is Localized to a 
High-Fidelity Replication Complex.

Davis EH(#)(1), Beck AS(#)(1), Strother AE(1), Thompson JK(2), Widen SG(2), 
Higgs S(3), Wood TG(2), Barrett ADT(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, 
Texas, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of Texas 
Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA.
(3)Biosecurity Research Institute, Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas, 
USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, 
Texas, USA abarrett@utmb.edu.
(5)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, The University of Texas Medical 
Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA.
(6)Sealy Institute for Vaccine Sciences, The University of Texas Medical Branch, 
Galveston, Texas, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

The molecular basis of attenuation for live-attenuated vaccines is poorly 
understood. The yellow fever (YF) 17D vaccine virus was derived from the 
wild-type, parental strain Asibi virus by serial passage in chicken tissue and 
has proven to be a very safe and efficacious vaccine. We have previously shown 
that wild-type Asibi is a typical RNA virus with high genetic diversity, while 
the 17D vaccine virus has very little genetic diversity. To investigate this 
further, we treated Asibi and 17D viruses with ribavirin, a GTP analog with 
strong antiviral activity that increases levels of mutations in the viral 
genome. As expected, ribavirin treatment introduced mutations into the Asibi 
virus genome at a very high frequency and decreased viral infectivity while, in 
contrast, the 17D vaccine virus was resistant to ribavirin, as treatment with 
the antiviral introduced very few mutations into the genome, and viral 
infectivity was not lost. The results were confirmed for another YF wild-type 
parental and vaccine pair, a wild-type French viscerotropic virus and French 
neurotropic vaccine. Using recombinant Asibi and 17D viruses, ribavirin 
sensitivity was located to viral nonstructural genes. Thus, two live-attenuated 
YF vaccine viruses are genetically stable even under intense mutagenic pressure, 
suggesting that attenuation of live-attenuated YF vaccines is due, at least in 
part, to fidelity of the replication complex resulting in high genetic 
stability.IMPORTANCE Live-attenuated viral vaccines are highly safe and 
efficacious but represent complex and often multigenic attenuation mechanisms. 
Most of these vaccines have been generated empirically by serial passaging of a 
wild-type (WT) virus in cell culture. One of the safest and most effective 
live-attenuated vaccines is yellow fever (YF) virus strain 17D, which has been 
used for over 80 years to control YF disease. The availability of the WT 
parental strain of 17D, Asibi virus, and large quantities of clinical data 
showing the effectiveness of the 17D vaccine make this WT parent/vaccine pair an 
excellent model for investigating RNA virus attenuation. Here, we investigate a 
mechanism of 17D attenuation and show that the vaccine virus is resistant to the 
antiviral compound ribavirin. The findings suggest that attenuation is in part 
due to a low probability of reversion or mutation of the vaccine virus genome to 
WT, thus maintaining a stable genotype despite external pressures.

Copyright © 2019 Davis et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02294-19
PMCID: PMC6805994
PMID: 31641088 [Indexed for MEDLINE]