1. Gene. 2020 Feb 5;726:144226. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2019.144226. Epub 2019 Oct
26.

A tetranucleotide deletion in the ANK1 gene causes hereditary spherocytosis; a 
case of misdiagnosis.

Zhu F(1), Liang M(2), Xu L(2), Peng Z(3), Cai D(2), Wei X(2), Lin L(4), Shang 
X(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Southern 
Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China; Southern Med Univ, Nanfang 
Hosp, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Southern 
Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, 
Guangzhou, China; Nanfang-Chunfu Children's Institute of Hematology, Taixin 
Hospital of DongGuan, GuangDong, China.
(4)Prenatal Diagnosis Center, Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region Women and 
Children Care Hospital, Nanning, China.
(5)Department of Medical Genetics, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Southern 
Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China; Guangdong Genetics Testing 
Engineering Research Center, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China; Guangdong Provincial 
Key Laboratory of Single Cell Technology and Application, Guangzhou, China. 
Electronic address: shangrabbit@163.com.

Hereditary spherocytosis is a congenital red blood cell disorder. Typical 
clinical manifestations include anemia, jaundice and splenomegaly, which overlap 
with the thalassemia phenotype. Therefore, in high prevalence thalassemia 
regions, hereditary spherocytosis cases are often misdiagnosed. Here, a case 
once diagnosed as thalassemia, based on preliminary clinical examinations, 
underwent genetic testing in our laboratory, where analysis of globin gene 
mutations proved negative. We conducted both clinical and genetic analyses on 
the patient and his family. We collected clinical data, performed erythrocyte 
membrane protein analysis by SDS-PAGE and sequenced the ANK1 gene. We also 
investigated pathogenic mechanisms through cDNA sequencing and literature 
studies. From patient clinical data, we diagnosed the patient with moderate to 
severe hereditary spherocytosis, rather than thalassemia. SDS-PAGE data showed 
that Ankyrin protein expression was reduced. Sequencing of genomic DNA 
identified a frameshift mutation (ANK1:c.2394_2397del CAGT). cDNA sequencing 
showed that the expression of a mutant allele was significantly decreased. Our 
study corrected a clinical misdiagnosis and confirmed the diagnosis of 
hereditary spherocytosis in this patient. Identification of such causative 
mutations is important for accurate downstream patient therapy and is critically 
important for the prevention/detection of another affected birth. Additionally, 
the disruption of mRNA transcribed from the mutant allele resulted in a 
significant reduction in Ankyrin expression and was speculatively considered the 
pathogenic mechanism behind this mutation.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2019.144226
PMID: 31669644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]