1. Front Cell Neurosci. 2019 Oct 17;13:467. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2019.00467. 
eCollection 2019.

Automated Live-Cell Imaging of Synapses in Rat and Human Neuronal Cultures.

Green MV(1), Pengo T(2), Raybuck JD(1), Naqvi T(3), McMullan HM(1), Hawkinson 
JE(3), Marron Fernandez de Velasco E(1), Muntean BS(4), Martemyanov KA(4), 
Satterfield R(5), Young SM Jr(6)(7), Thayer SA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Minnesota Medical School, 
Minneapolis, MN, United States.
(2)Informatics Institute, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, United 
States.
(3)Institute for Therapeutics Discovery and Development, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, United States.
(4)Department of Neuroscience, Scripps Research Institute, Jupiter, FL, United 
States.
(5)Max Planck Florida Institute for Neuroscience, Jupiter, FL, United States.
(6)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Iowa Neuroscience Institute, 
University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, United States.
(7)Department of Otolaryngology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, United 
States.

Synapse loss and dendritic damage correlate with cognitive decline in many 
neurodegenerative diseases, underlie neurodevelopmental disorders, and are 
associated with environmental and drug-induced CNS toxicities. However, 
screening assays designed to measure loss of synaptic connections between live 
cells are lacking. Here, we describe the design and validation of automated 
synaptic imaging assay (ASIA), an efficient approach to label, image, and 
analyze synapses between live neurons. Using viral transduction to express 
fluorescent proteins that label synapses and an automated computer-controlled 
microscope, we developed a method to identify agents that regulate synapse 
number. ASIA is compatible with both confocal and wide-field microscopy; 
wide-field image acquisition is faster but requires a deconvolution step in the 
analysis. Both types of images feed into batch processing analysis software that 
can be run on ImageJ, CellProfiler, and MetaMorph platforms. Primary analysis 
endpoints are the number of structural synapses and cell viability. Thus, overt 
cell death is differentiated from subtle changes in synapse density, an 
important distinction when studying neurodegenerative processes. In rat 
hippocampal cultures treated for 24 h with 100 μM 2-bromopalmitic acid (2-BP), a 
compound that prevents clustering of postsynaptic density 95 (PSD95), ASIA 
reliably detected loss of postsynaptic density 95-enhanced green fluorescent 
protein (PSD95-eGFP)-labeled synapses in the absence of cell death. In contrast, 
treatment with 100 μM glutamate produced synapse loss and significant cell 
death, determined from morphological changes in a binary image created from 
co-expressed mCherry. Treatment with 3 mM lithium for 24 h significantly 
increased the number of fluorescent puncta, showing that ASIA also detects 
synaptogenesis. Proof of concept studies show that cell-specific promoters 
enable the selective study of inhibitory or principal neurons and that 
alternative reporter constructs enable quantification of GABAergic or 
glutamatergic synapses. ASIA can also be used to study synapse loss between 
human induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived cortical neurons. Significant 
synapse loss in the absence of cell death was detected in the iPSC-derived 
neuronal cultures treated with either 100 μM 2-BP or 100 μM glutamate for 24 h, 
while 300 μM glutamate produced synapse loss and cell death. ASIA shows promise 
for identifying agents that evoke synaptic toxicities and screening for 
compounds that prevent or reverse synapse loss.

Copyright © 2019 Green, Pengo, Raybuck, Naqvi, McMullan, Hawkinson, Marron 
Fernandez de Velasco, Muntean, Martemyanov, Satterfield, Young and Thayer.

DOI: 10.3389/fncel.2019.00467
PMCID: PMC6811609
PMID: 31680875