1. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2020 Jan;40(1):175-188. doi: 
10.1161/ATVBAHA.119.313440. Epub 2019 Nov 7.

S-Nitrosylation of Plastin-3 Exacerbates Thoracic Aortic Dissection Formation 
via Endothelial Barrier Dysfunction.

Pan L(1), Lin Z(1), Tang X(1), Tian J(1), Zheng Q(1), Jing J(2), Xie L(1), Chen 
H(1), Lu Q(2), Wang H(3), Li Q(4), Han Y(5), Ji Y(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular and Cerebrovascular Medicine, State 
Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Key Laboratory of Targeted Intervention 
of Cardiovascular Disease, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cardiovascular 
Disease Translational Medicine, Nanjing Medical University, China (L.P., Z.L., 
X.T., J.T., Q.Z., L.X., H.C., Y.J.).
(2)Department of Cardiovascular Center, The Second Affiliated Hospital of 
Nanjing Medical University, China (J.J., Q.L.).
(3)Center for Metabolic Disease Research, Department of Pharmacology, Temple 
University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA (H.W.).
(4)Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular and Cerebrovascular Medicine, School of 
Pharmacy, Nanjing Medical University, China (Q.L.).
(5)Department of Geriatrics, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical 
University, China (Y.H.).

OBJECTIVE: Thoracic aortic dissection (TAD) is a fatal disease that leads to 
aortic rupture and sudden death. However, little is known about the effect and 
molecular mechanism of S-nitrosylation (SNO) modifications in TAD formation. 
Approach and Results: SNO levels were higher in aortic tissues from TAD patients 
than in those from healthy controls, and PLS3 (plastin-3) SNO was identified by 
liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry analysis. Furthermore, tail vein 
administration of endothelial-specific adeno-associated viruses of mutant 
PLS3-C566A (denitrosylated form) suppressed the development of TAD in mice, but 
the wild-type PLS3 (S-nitrosylated form) virus did not. Mechanistically, Ang II 
(angiotensin II)-induced PLS3 SNO enhanced the association of PLS3 with both 
plectin and cofilin via an iNOS (inducible nitric oxide synthase)-dependent 
pathway in endothelial cells. The formation of PLS3/plectin/cofilin complex 
promoted cell migration and tube formation but weakened adherens junction 
formation in Ang II-treated endothelial cells. Interestingly, denitrosylated 
form of PLS3 partially mitigated Ang II-induced PLS3/plectin/cofilin complex 
formation and cell junction disruption. Additionally, the inhibition of iNOS 
attenuated PLS3 SNO and the association of PLS3 with plectin and cofilin, 
thereby modulating endothelial barrier function.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data indicate that protein SNO modification in endothelial 
cells modulates the progression of aortic aneurysm and dissection. The 
iNOS-mediated SNO of PLS3 at the Cys566 site promoted its interaction with 
cofilin and plectin, thus contributing to endothelial barrier disruption and 
pathological angiogenesis in TAD.

DOI: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.119.313440
PMID: 31694393 [Indexed for MEDLINE]