1. Diagnostics (Basel). 2019 Nov 7;9(4):177. doi: 10.3390/diagnostics9040177.

A Proteomic Study of Atherosclerotic Plaques in Men with Coronary 
Atherosclerosis.

Stakhneva EM(1), Meshcheryakova IA(2), Demidov EA(2), Starostin KV(2), Sadovski 
EV(1), Peltek SE(2), Voevoda MI(1), Chernyavskii AM(3), Volkov AM(3), Ragino 
YI(1).

Author information:
(1)Research Institute of Internal and Preventive Medicine - Branch of the 
Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Siberian Branch of Russian Academy of 
Sciences, 630089 Novosibirsk, Russia.
(2)Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Siberian Branch of Russian Academy of 
Sciences, 630090 Novosibirsk, Russia.
(3)The Federal State Budgetary Institution "National Medical Research Center 
named academician E.N. Meshalkin" of the Ministry of Health of the Russian 
Federation, 630055 Novosibirsk, Russia.

BACKGROUND: To study the changes in protein composition of atherosclerotic 
plaques at different stages of their development in coronary atherosclerosis 
using proteomics.
METHODS: The object of research consisted of homogenates of atherosclerotic 
plaques from coronary arteries at different stages of development, obtained from 
15 patients. Plaque proteins were separated by two-dimensional electrophoresis. 
The resultant protein spots were identified by the matrix-assisted laser 
desorption ionization method with peptide mass mapping.
RESULTS: Groups of differentially expressed proteins, in which the amounts of 
proteins differed more than twofold (p < 0.05), were identified in pools of 
homogenates of atherosclerotic plaques at three stages of development. The 
amounts of the following proteins were increased in stable atherosclerotic 
plaques at the stage of lipidosis and fibrosis: vimentin, tropomyosin β-chain, 
actin, keratin, tubulin β-chain, microfibril-associated glycoprotein 4, serum 
amyloid P-component, and annexin 5. In plaques at the stage of fibrosis and 
calcification, the amounts of mimecan and fibrinogen were increased. In unstable 
atherosclerotic plaque of the necrotic-dystrophic type, the amounts of human 
serum albumin, mimecan, fibrinogen, serum amyloid P-component and annexin were 
increased.
CONCLUSION: This proteomic study identifies the proteins present in 
atherosclerotic plaques of coronary arteries by comparing their proteomes at 
three different stages of plaque development during coronary atherosclerosis.

DOI: 10.3390/diagnostics9040177
PMCID: PMC6963888
PMID: 31703357

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.