1. Iran J Microbiol. 2019 Aug;11(4):337-344.

Rheumatoid arthritis mediator CD18 expression by Staphylococcus aureus 
superantigen C in rats.

Banaei M(1)(2), Alishiri GH(3)(4), Ataee RA(1)(5), Mahalati AH(2).

Author information:
(1)Applied Microbiology Research Center, Baqiyatallah University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Biology, Central Tehran Branch, Islamic Azad University, 
Tehran, Iran.
(3)Department of Rheumatology, School of Medicine, Baqiyatallah University of 
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Chemical Injuries Research Center, Baqiyatallah University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(5)Department of Medical Microbiology, School of Medicine, Baqiyatallah 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Microbial superantigens have been reported in the 
blood and synovial fluid of rheumatoid arthritis patients, raising the question 
of whether the presence of these superantigens could provoke the induction of 
inflammatory biomarkers expression or not. The purpose of this study was to 
examine the Staphylococcus aureus superantigen C on CD18 expression.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The superantigen C was purified by ultrafiltration. 
Immunoblotting was performed using a specific antibody. Also, 50 micrograms of 
superantigens (toxin) were injected intraperitoneally and intra-articularly into 
separate rat groups. Blood was collected and RNA extracted. Then, the cDNA was 
synthesized. The expression of CD18 marker was evaluated using RT-real-time PCR, 
and the results were descriptively analyzed.
RESULTS: The results of this study revealed that 50 μg of toxin, injected 
intra-articularly and intraperitoneally, showed the surplus expression of the 
marker CD18 in the blood of rats after 20 days. By this method, the expression 
of the marker CD18 was significantly different between rats that received the 
superantigen intra-articularly and intraperitoneally (2.10; 2.3 and 3.3 folds) 
and the controls (P≤ 0.05).
CONCLUSION: The results indicated that the presence of Staphylococcal of 
superantigen C in the body of rats has enhanced the expression of the CD18 
inflammatory marker more than 3 times. This valuable finding is an introduction 
to further research and could provide new methods to prevent and control 
inflammatory diseases, including rheumatoid arthritis.

Copyright© 2019 Iranian Neuroscience Society.

PMCID: PMC6829107
PMID: 31719966