1. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2020 May;72(5):802-814. doi: 10.1002/art.41173. Epub 2020
 Mar 23.

Differential DNA Methylation of Networked Signaling, Transcriptional, Innate and 
Adaptive Immunity, and Osteoclastogenesis Genes and Pathways in Gout.

Wang Z(1), Zhao Y(1), Phipps-Green A(2), Liu-Bryan R(3), Ceponis A(1), Boyle 
DL(1), Wang J(1), Merriman TR(2), Wang W(1), Terkeltaub R(3).

Author information:
(1)University of California, San Diego.
(2)University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand.
(3)University of California, San Diego and San Diego VAMC.

OBJECTIVE: In gout, autoinflammatory responses to urate crystals promote acute 
arthritis flares, but the pathogeneses of tophi, chronic synovitis, and erosion 
are less well understood. Defining the pathways of epigenomic immunity training 
can reveal novel pathogenetic factors and biomarkers. The present study was 
undertaken to seminally probe differential DNA methylation patterns utilizing 
epigenome-wide analyses in patients with gout.
METHODS: Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were obtained from a San 
Diego cohort of patients with gout (n = 16) and individually matched healthy 
controls (n = 14). PBMC methylome data were processed with ChAMP package in R. 
ENCODE data and Taiji data analysis software were used to analyze transcription 
factor (TF)-gene networks. As an independent validation cohort, whole blood DNA 
samples from New Zealand Māori subjects (n = 13 patients with gout, n = 16 
control subjects without gout) were analyzed.
RESULTS: Differentially methylated loci clearly separated gout patients from 
controls, as determined by hierarchical clustering and principal components 
analyses. IL23R, which mediates granuloma formation and cell invasion, was 
identified as one of the multiple differentially methylated gout risk genes. 
Epigenome-wide analyses revealed differential methylome pathway enrichment for B 
and T cell receptor signaling, Th17 cell differentiation and interleukin-17 
signaling, convergent longevity regulation, circadian entrainment, and 
AMP-activated protein kinase signaling, which are pathways that impact 
inflammation via insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor, phosphatidylinositol 
3-kinase/Akt, NF-κB, mechanistic target of rapamycin signaling, and autophagy. 
The gout cohorts overlapped for 37 (52.9%) of the 70 TFs with hypomethylated 
sequence enrichment and for 30 (78.9%) of the 38 enriched KEGG pathways 
identified via TFs. Evidence of shared differentially methylated gout TF-gene 
networks, including the NF-κB activation-limiting TFs MEF2C and NFATC2, pointed 
to osteoclast differentiation as the most strongly weighted differentially 
methylated pathway that overlapped in both gout cohorts.
CONCLUSION: These findings of differential DNA methylation of networked 
signaling, transcriptional, innate and adaptive immunity, and osteoclastogenesis 
genes and pathways suggest that they could serve as novel therapeutic targets in 
the management of flares, tophi, chronic synovitis, and bone erosion in patients 
with gout.

© 2019, American College of Rheumatology. This article has been contributed to 
by US Government employees and their work is in the public domain in the USA.

DOI: 10.1002/art.41173
PMCID: PMC7323903
PMID: 31738005 [Indexed for MEDLINE]