1. PLoS One. 2019 Nov 18;14(11):e0225132. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0225132. 
eCollection 2019.

Phosphorylation-dependent activity-based conformational changes in P21-activated 
kinase family members and screening of novel ATP competitive inhibitors.

Gul M(1), Fakhar M(1), Najumuddin(1), Rashid S(1).

Author information:
(1)National Center for Bioinformatics, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad, 
Pakistan.

P21-activated kinases (PAKs) are serine/threonine protein kinases that are 
subdivided into two groups on the basis of their domain architecture: group-I 
(PAK1-3) and group-II (PAK4-6). PAKs are considered as attractive drug targets 
that play vital role in cell proliferation, survival, motility, angiogenesis and 
cytoskeletal dynamics. In current study, molecular dynamics simulation-based 
comparative residual contributions and differential transitions were monitored 
in both active and inactive states of human PAK homologs for therapeutic 
intervention. Due to their involvement in cancer, infectious diseases, and 
neurological disorders, it is inevitable to develop novel therapeutic strategies 
that specifically target PAKs on the basis of their activity pattern. In order 
to isolate novel inhibitors that are able to bind at the active sites of PAK1 
and PAK4, high throughput structure-based virtual screening was performed. 
Multiple lead compounds were proposed on the basis of their binding potential 
and targeting region either phosphorylated (active) or unphosphorylated PAK 
isoform (inactive). Thus, ATP-competitive inhibitors may prove ideal therapeutic 
choice against PAK family members. The detailed conformational readjustements 
occurring in the PAKs upon phosphorylation-dephosphorylation events may serve as 
starting point for devising novel drug molecules that are able to target on 
activity basis. Overall, the observations of current study may add valuable 
contribution in the inventory of novel inhibitors that may serve as attractive 
lead compounds for targeting PAK family members on the basis of activity-based 
conformational changes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0225132
PMCID: PMC6860928
PMID: 31738805 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.