1. Front Physiol. 2019 Oct 17;10:1329. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2019.01329. eCollection
 2019.

Blood Rheology: Key Parameters, Impact on Blood Flow, Role in Sickle Cell 
Disease and Effects of Exercise.

Nader E(1)(2), Skinner S(1)(2), Romana M(2)(3)(4), Fort R(1)(2)(5), Lemonne 
N(6), Guillot N(7), Gauthier A(1)(2)(8), Antoine-Jonville S(9), Renoux 
C(1)(2)(10), Hardy-Dessources MD(2)(3)(4), Stauffer E(1)(2)(11), Joly 
P(1)(2)(10), Bertrand Y(8), Connes P(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory LIBM EA7424, Team "Vascular Biology and Red Blood Cell", 
University of Lyon 1, Lyon, France.
(2)Laboratory of Excellence GR-Ex, Paris, France.
(3)Biologie Intégrée du Globule Rouge, Université de Paris, UMR_S1134, BIGR, 
INSERM, F-75015, Paris, France.
(4)Biologie Intégrée du Globule Rouge, The Université des Antilles, UMR_S1134, 
BIGR, F- 97157, Pointe-a-Pitre, France.
(5)Département de Médecine, Hôpital Edouard Herriot, Hospices Civils de Lyon, 
Lyon, France.
(6)Unité Transversale de la Drépanocytose, Hôpital de Pointe-a-Pitre, Hôpital 
Ricou, Pointe-a-Pitre, France.
(7)Laboratoire Carmen INSERM 1060, INSA Lyon, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, 
Université de Lyon, Villeurbanne, France.
(8)d'Hématologie et d'Oncologie Pédiatrique, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, 
France.
(9)Laboratoire ACTES EA 3596, The Université des Antilles, Pointe-a-Pitre, 
France.
(10)Laboratoire de Biochimie et de Biologie Moleìculaire, UF de Biochimie des 
Pathologies Eìrythrocytaires, Centre de Biologie et de Pathologie Est, Hospices 
Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France.
(11)Centre de Médecine du Sommeil et des Maladies Respiratoires, Hospices Civils 
de Lyon, Hôpital de la Croix Rousse, Lyon, France.

Blood viscosity is an important determinant of local flow characteristics, which 
exhibits shear thinning behavior: it decreases exponentially with increasing 
shear rates. Both hematocrit and plasma viscosity influence blood viscosity. The 
shear thinning property of blood is mainly attributed to red blood cell (RBC) 
rheological properties. RBC aggregation occurs at low shear rates, and increases 
blood viscosity and depends on both cellular (RBC aggregability) and plasma 
factors. Blood flow in the microcirculation is highly dependent on the ability 
of RBC to deform, but RBC deformability also affects blood flow in the 
macrocirculation since a loss of deformability causes a rise in blood viscosity. 
Indeed, any changes in one or several of these parameters may affect blood 
viscosity differently. Poiseuille's Law predicts that any increase in blood 
viscosity should cause a rise in vascular resistance. However, blood viscosity, 
through its effects on wall shear stress, is a key modulator of nitric oxide 
(NO) production by the endothelial NO-synthase. Indeed, any increase in blood 
viscosity should promote vasodilation. This is the case in healthy individuals 
when vascular function is intact and able to adapt to blood rheological strains. 
However, in sickle cell disease (SCD) vascular function is impaired. In this 
context, any increase in blood viscosity can promote vaso-occlusive like events. 
We previously showed that sickle cell patients with high blood viscosity usually 
have more frequent vaso-occlusive crises than those with low blood viscosity. 
However, while the deformability of RBC decreases during acute vaso-occlusive 
events in SCD, patients with the highest RBC deformability at steady-state have 
a higher risk of developing frequent painful vaso-occlusive crises. This paradox 
seems to be due to the fact that in SCD RBC with the highest deformability are 
also the most adherent, which would trigger vaso-occlusion. While acute, intense 
exercise may increase blood viscosity in healthy individuals, recent works 
conducted in sickle cell patients have shown that light cycling exercise did not 
cause dramatic changes in blood rheology. Moreover, regular physical exercise 
has been shown to decrease blood viscosity in sickle cell mice, which could be 
beneficial for adequate blood flow and tissue perfusion.

Copyright © 2019 Nader, Skinner, Romana, Fort, Lemonne, Guillot, Gauthier, 
Antoine-Jonville, Renoux, Hardy-Dessources, Stauffer, Joly, Bertrand and Connes.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2019.01329
PMCID: PMC6842957
PMID: 31749708