1. PLoS Biol. 2019 Nov 21;17(11):e3000495. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3000495. 
eCollection 2019 Nov.

Local vulnerability and global connectivity jointly shape neurodegenerative 
disease propagation.

Zheng YQ(1), Zhang Y(1)(2), Yau Y(1), Zeighami Y(1), Larcher K(1), Misic B(1), 
Dagher A(1).

Author information:
(1)McConnell Brain Imaging Centre, Montréal Neurological Institute, McGill 
University, Montréal, Quebec, Canada.
(2)Centre de Recherche de I'Institut Universitaire de Gériatrie de Montréal, 
Montréal, Canada.

It is becoming increasingly clear that brain network organization shapes the 
course and expression of neurodegenerative diseases. Parkinson disease (PD) is 
marked by progressive spread of atrophy from the midbrain to subcortical 
structures and, eventually, to the cerebral cortex. Recent discoveries suggest 
that the neurodegenerative process involves the misfolding and prion-like 
propagation of endogenous α-synuclein via axonal projections. However, the 
mechanisms that translate local "synucleinopathy" to large-scale network 
dysfunction and atrophy remain unknown. Here, we use an agent-based epidemic 
spreading model to integrate structural connectivity, functional connectivity, 
and gene expression and to predict sequential volume loss due to 
neurodegeneration. The dynamic model replicates the spatial and temporal 
patterning of empirical atrophy in PD and implicates the substantia nigra as the 
disease epicenter. We reveal a significant role for both connectome topology and 
geometry in shaping the distribution of atrophy. The model also demonstrates 
that SNCA and GBA transcription influence α-synuclein concentration and local 
regional vulnerability. Functional coactivation further amplifies the course set 
by connectome architecture and gene expression. Altogether, these results 
support the theory that the progression of PD is a multifactorial process that 
depends on both cell-to-cell spreading of misfolded proteins and regional 
vulnerability.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3000495
PMCID: PMC6894889
PMID: 31751329 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.