1. PLoS Biol. 2019 Nov 21;17(11):e3000528. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3000528. 
eCollection 2019 Nov.

Single-cell transcriptomics of the naked mole-rat reveals unexpected features of 
mammalian immunity.

Hilton HG(1), Rubinstein ND(1), Janki P(1), Ireland AT(1), Bernstein N(1), Fong 
NL(1), Wright KM(1), Smith M(1), Finkle D(1), Martin-McNulty B(1), Roy M(1), 
Imai DM(2), Jojic V(1), Buffenstein R(1).

Author information:
(1)Calico Life Sciences LLC, South San Francisco, California, United States of 
America.
(2)Comparative Pathology Laboratory, School of Veterinary Medicine, University 
of California, Davis, Davis, California, United States of America.

The immune system comprises a complex network of specialized cells that protects 
against infection, eliminates cancerous cells, and regulates tissue repair, thus 
serving a critical role in homeostasis, health span, and life span. The 
subterranean-dwelling naked mole-rat (NM-R; Heterocephalus glaber) exhibits 
prolonged life span relative to its body size, is unusually cancer resistant, 
and manifests few physiological or molecular changes with advancing age. We 
therefore hypothesized that the immune system of NM-Rs evolved unique features 
that confer enhanced cancer immunosurveillance and prevent the age-associated 
decline in homeostasis. Using single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) we mapped 
the immune system of the NM-R and compared it to that of the short-lived, 
cancer-prone mouse. In contrast to the mouse, we find that the NM-R immune 
system is characterized by a high myeloid-to-lymphoid cell ratio that includes a 
novel, lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-responsive, granulocyte cell subset. 
Surprisingly, we also find that NM-Rs lack canonical natural killer (NK) cells. 
Our comparative genomics analyses support this finding, showing that the NM-R 
genome lacks an expanded gene family that controls NK cell function in several 
other species. Furthermore, we reconstructed the evolutionary history that 
likely led to this genomic state. The NM-R thus challenges our current 
understanding of mammalian immunity, favoring an atypical, myeloid-biased mode 
of innate immunosurveillance, which may contribute to its remarkable health 
span.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3000528
PMCID: PMC6894886
PMID: 31751331 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: I have read the journal's policy and the authors 
of this manuscript have the following competing interests: NDR, ATI, NB, NLF, 
KMW, MS, BM-M, MR, VJ, RB, HGH, PJ, and DF were employees of Calico Life 
Sciences at the time that the study was undertaken.