1. EBioMedicine. 2019 Dec;50:55-66. doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2019.11.012. Epub 2019
Nov  21.

Aberrant expression of embryonic mesendoderm factor MESP1 promotes 
tumorigenesis.

Tandon N(1), Goller K(1), Wang F(2), Soibam B(3), Gagea M(4), Jain AK(5), 
Schwartz RJ(1), Liu Y(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Houston, Houston, TX, 
United States.
(2)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Houston, Houston, TX, 
United States; Department of Oncology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an 
Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi Province, China.
(3)Computer Science and Engineering Technology, University of Houston-Downtown, 
Houston, TX, United States.
(4)Department of Veterinary Medicine and Surgery, The University of Texas MD 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, United States.
(5)Center for Cancer Epigenetics, Department of Epigenetics and Molecular 
Carcinogenesis, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, 
United States.
(6)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Houston, Houston, TX, 
United States. Electronic address: yliu54@uh.edu.

BACKGROUND: Mesoderm Posterior 1 (MESP1) belongs to the family of basic 
helix-loop-helix transcription factors. It is a master regulator of mesendoderm 
development, leading to formation of organs such as heart and lung. However, its 
role in adult pathophysiology remains unknown. Here, we report for the first 
time a previously-unknown association of MESP1 with non-small cell lung cancer 
(NSCLC).
METHODS: MESP1 mRNA and protein levels were measured in NSCLC-derived cells by 
qPCR and immunoblotting respectively. Colony formation assay, colorimetric cell 
proliferation assay and soft agar colony formation assays were used to assess 
the effects of MESP1 knockdown and overexpression in vitro. RNA-sequencing and 
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-qPCR were used to determine direct target 
genes of MESP1. Subcutaneous injection of MESP1-depleted NSCLC cells in 
immuno-compromised mice was done to study the effects of MESP1 mediated tumor 
formation in vivo.
FINDINGS: We found that MESP1 expression correlates with poor prognosis in NSCLC 
patients, and is critical for proliferation and survival of NSCLC-derived cells, 
thus implicating MESP1 as a lung cancer oncogene. Ectopic MESP1 expression 
cooperates with loss of tumor suppressor ARF to transform murine fibroblasts. 
Xenografts from MESP1-depleted cells showed decreased tumor growth in vivo. 
Global transcriptome analysis revealed a MESP1 DNA-binding-dependent gene 
signature associated with various hallmarks of cancer, suggesting that 
transcription activity of MESP1 is most likely responsible for its oncogenic 
abilities.
INTERPRETATION: Our study demonstrates MESP1 as a previously-unknown 
lineage-survival oncogene in NSCLC which may serve as a potential prognostic 
marker and therapeutic target for lung cancer in the future.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2019.11.012
PMCID: PMC6921370
PMID: 31761621 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.