1. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2019 Nov 28;11(1):94. doi: 10.1186/s13195-019-0545-5.

Plasma levels of soluble TREM2 and neurofilament light chain in TREM2 rare 
variant carriers.

Ashton NJ(1)(2)(3)(4), Suárez-Calvet M(5)(6)(7), Heslegrave A(8)(9), Hye 
A(10)(11), Razquin C(12)(13)(14), Pastor P(15)(16), Sanchez-Valle R(17), 
Molinuevo JL(6)(18), Visser PJ(19)(20), Blennow K(5)(21), Hodges AK(10)(11), 
Zetterberg H(5)(8)(9)(21).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry, Institute of Neuroscience & 
Physiology, The Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of Gothenburg, Mölndal, 
Sweden. nicholas.ashton@gu.se.
(2)Wallenberg Centre for Molecular and Translational Medicine, University of 
Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden. nicholas.ashton@gu.se.
(3)Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King's College London, 
London, UK. nicholas.ashton@gu.se.
(4)NIHR Biomedical Research Centre for Mental Health & Biomedical Research Unit 
for Dementia at South London & Maudsley NHS Foundation, London, UK. 
nicholas.ashton@gu.se.
(5)Department of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry, Institute of Neuroscience & 
Physiology, The Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of Gothenburg, Mölndal, 
Sweden.
(6)Barcelonaβeta Brain Research Center (BBRC), Pasqual Maragall Foundation, 
Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
(7)Department of Neurology, Hospital del Mar, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
(8)Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, 
UK.
(9)UK Dementia Research Institute at UCL, London, UK.
(10)Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King's College London, 
London, UK.
(11)NIHR Biomedical Research Centre for Mental Health & Biomedical Research Unit 
for Dementia at South London & Maudsley NHS Foundation, London, UK.
(12)Department of Preventive Medicine and Public Health, University of Navarra, 
Pamplona, Spain.
(13)Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.
(14)CIBER and Fisiopatología de la Obesidad y Nutrición (CIBERobn), Instituto de 
Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
(15)Fundació Docència i Recerca Mútua Terrassa, University Hospital Mútua de 
Terrassa, Terrassa, 08221, Barcelona, Spain.
(16)Movement Disorders Unit, Department of Neurology, University Hospital Mútua 
de Terrassa, Terrassa, 08222, Barcelona, Spain.
(17)Alzheimer's Disease and Other Cognitive Disorders Unit, Neurology Service, 
Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain.
(18)August Pi i Sunyer Biomedical Research Institute (IDIBAPS), Barcelona, 
Spain.
(19)Alzheimer Center Amsterdam, Department of Neurology, Amsterdam Neuroscience, 
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(20)Alzheimer Center Limburg, School for Mental Health and Neuroscience, 
Maastricht University, Maastricht, the Netherlands.
(21)Clinical Neurochemistry Laboratory, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, 
Mölndal, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Results from recent clinical studies suggest that cerebrospinal 
fluid (CSF) biomarkers that are indicative of Alzheimer's disease (AD) can be 
replicated in blood, e.g. amyloid-beta peptides (Aβ42 and Aβ40) and 
neurofilament light chain (NFL). Such data proposes that blood is a rich source 
of potential biomarkers reflecting central nervous system pathophysiology and 
should be fully explored for biomarkers that show promise in CSF. Recently, 
soluble fragments of the triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2 
(sTREM2) protein in CSF have been reported to be increased in prodromal AD and 
also in individuals with TREM2 rare genetic variants that increase the 
likelihood of developing dementia.
METHODS: In this study, we measured the levels of plasma sTREM2 and plasma NFL 
using the MesoScale Discovery and single molecule array platforms, respectively, 
in 48 confirmed TREM2 rare variant carriers and 49 non-carriers.
RESULTS: Our results indicate that there are no changes in plasma sTREM2 and NFL 
concentrations between TREM2 rare variant carriers and non-carriers. 
Furthermore, plasma sTREM2 is not different between healthy controls, mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI) or AD.
CONCLUSION: Concentrations of plasma sTREM2 do not mimic the recent changes 
found in CSF sTREM2.

DOI: 10.1186/s13195-019-0545-5
PMCID: PMC6883551
PMID: 31779670 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: KB has served as a consultant or at advisory 
boards for Alector, Alzheon, CogRx, Biogen, Lilly, Novartis and Roche 
Diagnostics, and is a co-founder of Brain Biomarker Solutions in Gothenburg AB, 
a GU Venture-based platform company at the University of Gothenburg, all 
unrelated to the work presented in this paper. HZ has served at scientific 
advisory boards for Roche Diagnostics, Wave, Samumed and CogRx; has given 
lectures in symposia sponsored by Alzecure and Biogen; and is a co-founder of 
Brain Biomarker Solutions in Gothenburg AB, a GU Venture-based platform company 
at the University of Gothenburg. The other authors declare that they have no 
competing interests.