1. Front Chem. 2019 Nov 8;7:754. doi: 10.3389/fchem.2019.00754. eCollection 2019.

Enhanced Fluorescence of N-Acetyl-β-D-Glucosaminidase Activity by ZnO Quantum 
Dots for Early Stage Mastitis Evaluation.

Nirala NR(1), Shtenberg G(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Agricultural Engineering, ARO, The Volcani Center, Bet Dagan, 
Israel.

Recurrent mastitis events are the major cause of annual revenue losses in the 
dairy sector resulting in decreased milk yield, escalading treatment costs and 
increased health risk of the entire herd. Upon udder inflammation, several 
biomarkers are proportionally secreted to its severity onto the blood 
circulation and consequently into milk (upon breached blood-milk barrier). 
N-acetyl-β-D-glucosaminidase activity is widely used mastitis indicator in milk, 
offering simple means of differentiation between healthy quarters from those 
with subclinical or clinical severity. Herein, we demonstrate fluorescence 
signal amplification concept for sensitive clinical status discrimination. 
Tetraethyl orthosilicate coated zinc oxide quantum dots were employed within the 
conventional N-acetyl-β-D-glucosaminidase activity assay. Under the experimental 
conditions, a profound non-radiative energy transfer occurred between quantum 
nanomaterials onto enzymatic fluorescent products resulting in intensified 
emission of the latter, over 11-folds, in comparison to nanoparticle-free assay. 
Overall, the fluorescence intensities were proportionally related to zinc oxide 
quantum dots surface coverage and concentration, SCC values and influenced by 
the causing bacteria (i.e., Streptococcus dysgalactiae and Coagulase-negative 
Staphylococci). Finally, the presented proof-of-concept offers an efficient, 
simple, cost-effective fluorescence signal amplification for early stage 
mastitis identification, offering means to diagnose the severity of the 
associated diseases and hence deducing on animals' clinical status.

Copyright © 2019 Nirala and Shtenberg.

DOI: 10.3389/fchem.2019.00754
PMCID: PMC6856209
PMID: 31788469