1. Mol Cell. 2020 Jan 2;77(1):51-66.e8. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2019.10.018. Epub 
2019 Nov 26.

Native Chromatin Proteomics Reveals a Role for Specific Nucleoporins in 
Heterochromatin Organization and Maintenance.

Iglesias N(1), Paulo JA(2), Tatarakis A(1), Wang X(1), Edwards AL(3), Bhanu 
NV(4), Garcia BA(4), Haas W(5), Gygi SP(2), Moazed D(6).

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center and Department of Medicine, 
Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, MA, USA.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Epigenetics Program, Perelman 
School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(5)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA; 
Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center and Department of Medicine, Harvard 
Medical School, Charlestown, MA, USA.
(6)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA. Electronic address: danesh@hms.harvard.edu.

Spatially and functionally distinct domains of heterochromatin and euchromatin 
play important roles in the maintenance of chromosome stability and regulation 
of gene expression, but a comprehensive knowledge of their composition is 
lacking. Here, we develop a strategy for the isolation of native 
Schizosaccharomyces pombe heterochromatin and euchromatin fragments and analyze 
their composition by using quantitative mass spectrometry. The shared and 
euchromatin-specific proteomes contain proteins involved in DNA and chromatin 
metabolism and in transcription, respectively. The heterochromatin-specific 
proteome includes all proteins with known roles in heterochromatin formation 
and, in addition, is enriched for subsets of nucleoporins and inner nuclear 
membrane (INM) proteins, which associate with different chromatin domains. While 
the INM proteins are required for the integrity of the nucleolus, containing 
ribosomal DNA repeats, the nucleoporins are required for aggregation of 
heterochromatic foci and epigenetic inheritance. The results provide a 
comprehensive picture of heterochromatin-associated proteins and suggest a role 
for specific nucleoporins in heterochromatin function.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2019.10.018
PMCID: PMC7224636
PMID: 31784357 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.