1. Hum Mutat. 2020 Feb;41(2):363-374. doi: 10.1002/humu.23943. Epub 2019 Nov 28.

SCN1A variants from bench to bedside-improved clinical prediction from 
functional characterization.

Brunklaus A(1)(2), Schorge S(3)(4), Smith AD(5), Ghanty I(1)(2), Stewart K(6), 
Gardiner S(6), Du J(7), Pérez-Palma E(7), Symonds JD(1)(2), Collier AC(5), Lal 
D(7)(8)(9)(10)(11), Zuberi SM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)The Paediatric Neurosciences Research Group, Royal Hospital for Children, 
Glasgow, UK.
(2)School of Medicine, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK.
(3)Department of Clinical and Experimental Epilepsy, Institute of Neurology, 
University College London, London, UK.
(4)School of Pharmacy, University College London, London, UK.
(5)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, The University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(6)West of Scotland Genetic Services, Level 2B, Laboratory Medicine, Queen 
Elizabeth University Hospital, Glasgow, UK.
(7)Cologne Center for Genomics, University Hospital Cologne, University of 
Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(8)Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts.
(9)Analytic and Translational Genetics Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Boston, Massachusetts.
(10)Epilepsy Center, Neurological Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio.
(11)Genomic Medicine Institute, Lerner Research Institute Cleveland Clinic, 
Cleveland, Ohio.

Variants in the SCN1A gene are associated with a wide range of disorders 
including genetic epilepsy with febrile seizures plus (GEFS+), familial 
hemiplegic migraine (FHM), and the severe childhood epilepsy Dravet syndrome 
(DS). Predicting disease outcomes based on variant type remains challenging. 
Despite thousands of SCN1A variants being reported, only a minority has been 
functionally assessed. We review the functional SCN1A work performed to date, 
critically appraise electrophysiological measurements, compare this to in silico 
predictions, and relate our findings to the clinical phenotype. Our results 
show, regardless of the underlying phenotype, that conventional in silico 
software correctly predicted benign from pathogenic variants in nearly 90%, 
however was unable to differentiate within the disease spectrum (DS vs. GEFS+ 
vs. FHM). In contrast, patch-clamp data from mammalian expression systems 
revealed functional differences among missense variants allowing discrimination 
between disease severities. Those presenting with milder phenotypes retained a 
degree of channel function measured as residual whole-cell current, whereas 
those without any whole-cell current were often associated with DS (p = .024). 
These findings demonstrate that electrophysiological data from mammalian 
expression systems can serve as useful disease biomarker when evaluating SCN1A 
variants, particularly in view of new and emerging treatment options in DS.

© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.23943
PMID: 31782251 [Indexed for MEDLINE]