1. Genome Med. 2019 Nov 29;11(1):77. doi: 10.1186/s13073-019-0683-1.

Comparative analysis of functional assay evidence use by ClinGen Variant 
Curation Expert Panels.

Kanavy DM(1), McNulty SM(1), Jairath MK(1), Brnich SE(1), Bizon C(2), Powell 
BC(1), Berg JS(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, School of Medicine, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(2)Renaissance Computing Institute, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 
Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(3)Department of Genetics, School of Medicine, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA. jonathan_berg@med.unc.edu.

BACKGROUND: The 2015 American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) 
and the Association for Molecular Pathology (AMP) guidelines for clinical 
sequence variant interpretation state that "well-established" functional studies 
can be used as evidence in variant classification. These guidelines articulated 
key attributes of functional data, including that assays should reflect the 
biological environment and be analytically sound; however, details of how to 
evaluate these attributes were left to expert judgment. The Clinical Genome 
Resource (ClinGen) designates Variant Curation Expert Panels (VCEPs) in specific 
disease areas to make gene-centric specifications to the ACMG/AMP guidelines, 
including more specific definitions of appropriate functional assays. We set out 
to evaluate the existing VCEP guidelines for functional assays.
METHODS: We evaluated the functional criteria (PS3/BS3) of six VCEPs (CDH1, 
Hearing Loss, Inherited Cardiomyopathy-MYH7, PAH, PTEN, RASopathy). We then 
established criteria for evaluating functional studies based on disease 
mechanism, general class of assay, and the characteristics of specific assay 
instances described in the primary literature. Using these criteria, we 
extensively curated assay instances cited by each VCEP in their pilot variant 
classification to analyze VCEP recommendations and their use in the 
interpretation of functional studies.
RESULTS: Unsurprisingly, our analysis highlighted the breadth of VCEP-approved 
assays, reflecting the diversity of disease mechanisms among VCEPs. We also 
noted substantial variability between VCEPs in the method used to select these 
assays and in the approach used to specify strength modifications, as well as 
differences in suggested validation parameters. Importantly, we observed 
discrepancies between the parameters VCEPs specified as required for approved 
assay instances and the fulfillment of these requirements in the individual 
assays cited in pilot variant interpretation.
CONCLUSIONS: Interpretation of the intricacies of functional assays often 
requires expert-level knowledge of the gene and disease, and current VCEP 
recommendations for functional assay evidence are a useful tool to improve the 
accessibility of functional data by providing a starting point for curators to 
identify approved functional assays and key metrics. However, our analysis 
suggests that further guidance is needed to standardize this process and ensure 
consistency in the application of functional evidence.

DOI: 10.1186/s13073-019-0683-1
PMCID: PMC6884856
PMID: 31783775 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.