1. Metallomics. 2020 Feb 1;12(2):218-240. doi: 10.1039/c9mt00218a. Epub 2019 Dec
4.

Intestinal response to dietary manganese depletion in Drosophila.

Vásquez-Procopio J(1), Osorio B, Cortés-Martínez L, Hernández-Hernández F, 
Medina-Contreras O, Ríos-Castro E, Comjean A, Li F, Hu Y, Mohr S, Perrimon N, 
Missirlis F.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Fisiología, Biofísica y Neurociencias, Centro de 
Investigación y de Estudios Avanzados, Av. IPN 2508, Mexico City, 07360, Mexico. 
fanis@fisio.cinvestav.mx.

Manganese is considered essential for animal growth. Manganese ions serve as 
cofactors to three mitochondrial enzymes: superoxide dismutase (Sod2), arginase 
and glutamine synthase, and to glycosyltransferases residing in the Golgi. In 
Drosophila melanogaster, manganese has also been implicated in the formation of 
ceramide phosphoethanolamine, the insect's sphingomyelin analogue, a structural 
component of cellular membranes. Manganese overload leads to neurodegeneration 
and toxicity in both humans and Drosophila. Here, we report specific absorption 
and accumulation of manganese during the first week of adulthood in flies, which 
correlates with an increase in Sod2 activity during the same period. To test the 
requirement of dietary manganese for this accumulation, we generated a 
Drosophila model of manganese deficiency. Due to the lack of manganese-specific 
chelators, we used chemically defined media to grow the flies and deplete them 
of the metal. Dietary manganese depletion reduced Sod2 activity. We then 
examined gene and protein expression changes in the intestines of manganese 
depleted flies. We found adaptive responses to the presumed loss of known 
manganese-dependent enzymatic activities: less glutamine synthase activity 
(amination of glutamate to glutamine) was compensated by 50% reduction in 
glutaminase (deamination of glutamine to glutamate); less glycosyltransferase 
activity, predicted to reduce protein glycosylation, was compensated by 30% 
reduction in lysosomal mannosidases (protein deglycosylating enzymes); less 
ceramide phosphoethanolamine synthase activity was compensated by 30% reduction 
in the Drosophila sphingomyeline phospodiesterase, which could catabolize 
ceramide phosphoethanolamine in flies. Reduced Sod2 activity, predicted to cause 
superoxide-dependent iron-sulphur cluster damage, resulted in cellular iron 
misregulation.

DOI: 10.1039/c9mt00218a
PMID: 31799578 [Indexed for MEDLINE]