1. Int J Epidemiol. 2020 Aug 1;49(4):1173-1184. doi: 10.1093/ije/dyz240.

Effects of body mass index on relationship status, social contact and 
socio-economic position: Mendelian randomization and within-sibling study in UK 
Biobank.

Howe LD(1), Kanayalal R(2), Harrison S(1), Beaumont RN(2), Davies AR(3), 
Frayling TM(2), Davies NM(1), Hughes A(1), Jones SE(2), Sassi F(4), Wood AR(2), 
Tyrrell J(2).

Author information:
(1)MRC Integrative Epidemiology Unit at the University of Bristol, Population 
Health Sciences, Bristol Medical School, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK.
(2)Genetics of Complex Traits, University of Exeter Medical School, RILD Level 
3, Royal Devon & Exeter Hospital, Exeter, UK.
(3)Research and Evaluation Division, Public Health Wales, 2 Capital Quarter, 
Cardiff, UK.
(4)Centre for Health Economics and Policy Innovation, Imperial College Business 
School, London, UK.

Comment in
    doi: 10.1093/ije/dyaa160.

BACKGROUND: We assessed whether body mass index (BMI) affects social and 
socio-economic outcomes.
METHODS: We used Mendelian randomization (MR), non-linear MR and non-genetic and 
MR within-sibling analyses, to estimate relationships of BMI with six 
socio-economic and four social outcomes in 378 244 people of European ancestry 
in UK Biobank.
RESULTS: In MR of minimally related individuals, higher BMI was related to 
higher deprivation, lower income, fewer years of education, lower odds of 
degree-level education and skilled employment. Non-linear MR suggested both low 
(bottom decile, <22 kg/m2) and high (top seven deciles, >24.6 kg/m2) BMI, 
increased deprivation and reduced income. Non-genetic within-sibling analysis 
supported an effect of BMI on socio-economic position (SEP); precision in 
within-sibling MR was too low to draw inference about effects of BMI on SEP. 
There was some evidence of pleiotropy, with MR Egger suggesting limited effects 
of BMI on deprivation, although precision of these estimates is also low. 
Non-linear MR suggested that low BMI (bottom three deciles, <23.5 kg/m2) reduces 
the odds of cohabiting with a partner or spouse in men, whereas high BMI (top 
two deciles, >30.7 kg/m2) reduces the odds of cohabitation in women. Both 
non-genetic and MR within-sibling analyses supported this sex-specific effect of 
BMI on cohabitation. In men only, higher BMI was related to lower participation 
in leisure and social activities. There was little evidence that BMI affects 
visits from friends and family or having someone to confide in.
CONCLUSIONS: BMI may affect social and socio-economic outcomes, with both high 
and low BMI being detrimental for SEP, although larger within-family MR studies 
may help to test the robustness of MR results in unrelated individuals. 
Triangulation of evidence across MR and within-family analyses supports evidence 
of a sex-specific effect of BMI on cohabitation.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
International Epidemiological Association.

DOI: 10.1093/ije/dyz240
PMCID: PMC7750981
PMID: 31800047 [Indexed for MEDLINE]