1. Rapid Commun Mass Spectrom. 2020 Sep;34 Suppl 4:e8672. doi: 10.1002/rcm.8672. 
Epub 2020 Feb 18.

Differential adsorption of analyte and deuterated analogue onto the rotor seal 
of the injector in high-performance liquid chromatography/electrospray 
ionisation mass spectrometry.

Lord GA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Sciences, University of Suffolk, Waterfront Building, 
Ipswich, IP4 1QJ, UK.

Quantitation of analytes by liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry (LC/MS) is 
now very widely used, usually with an appropriate internal standard, but this 
does not guarantee problem-free analyses. Investigation of a problem that arose 
during method development is described, where it was surmised that differential 
adsorption onto the high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) injector of 
the analyte (Rac GTPase inhibitor NSC23766) and its deuterated analogue, as 
internal standard, was taking place.
METHODS: Samples were injected onto the HPLC system via either a Valco C14W.1 
internal sample injector or a Rheodyne 7125 injector, both with dissimilar 
Vespel rotor seals, and linked to a quadrupole time-of-flight (QTOF) mass 
spectrometer. Alternatively, samples were infused directly into the mass 
spectrometer via a syringe-driver. Electrospray ionisation in positive mode was 
used in both cases.
RESULTS: Experiments demonstrated significant differential adsorption of the 
analyte (RAC inhibitor, NSC23766) and its tri-deuterated internal standard onto 
the Vespel rotor seal, with the latter seeming to be preferentially adsorbed. 
The deuterated analogue also showed lower electrospray sensitivity, as 
demonstrated by syringe infusion of a mixture of the compounds, compared with 
their separate infusion at the same concentration.
CONCLUSIONS: This study has demonstrated the problem of differential adsorption 
onto HPLC Vespel rotor seals, and that the use of a stable-isotope-labelled 
analogue as internal standard does not guarantee the constancy of the 
analyte/internal response ratio in quantitative methods. The partial solution 
was to work at much higher concentration where adsorption, whilst still 
apparent, was relatively insignificant.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/rcm.8672
PMID: 31800127