1. Future Sci OA. 2019 Nov 18;5(10):FSO427. doi: 10.2144/fsoa-2019-0083.

Development of an in vivo model to study clonal lineage relationships in 
hematopoietic cells using Brainbow2.1/Confetti mice.

de Roo JJ(1), Vloemans SA(1), Vrolijk H(2), de Haas EF(1), Staal FJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunohematology & Blood Transfusion, Leiden University Medical 
Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Cell & Chemical Biology, Leiden University Medical Center, 
Leiden, The Netherlands.

Hematopoietic stem cells maintain the homeostasis of all blood cell progeny 
during development and repopulation-demanding events. To study the lineage 
relationships during hematopoiesis, increasingly complex cell tracing models are 
being developed. In this study, we describe adaptations to the original 
R26R-Confetti mouse model, which subsequently offers a relatively easy approach 
to study low complexity clonality during hematopoiesis, with special focus on B 
and T lymphocyte development. This protocol employs spatiotemporal Cre 
expression controlled by gammaretroviral transduction for efficient fluorescent 
protein cell marking. Transplantation of fluorescently marked Lin- 
cKit+ hematopoietic progenitor cells into Rag1-/- mice, resulted in the 
visualization of differentially contributing stem cell clones to various 
lineages. Our methodology is useful to study questions in fundamental and 
preclinical hematopoietic research and in vivo B- and T-cell development.

© 2019 Frank JT Staal.

DOI: 10.2144/fsoa-2019-0083
PMCID: PMC6900974
PMID: 31827896

Conflict of interest statement: Financial & competing interests disclosure This 
work was supported in part by a grant from Leiden University for the profiling 
Area Regenerative and Vascular Medicine to develop novel mouse models. The 
authors have no other relevant affiliations or financial involvement with any 
organization or entity with a financial interest in or financial conflict with 
the subject matter or materials discussed in the manuscript apart from those 
disclosed. No writing assistance was utilized in the production of this 
manuscript.