1. Hepatol Commun. 2019 Oct 14;3(12):1642-1655. doi: 10.1002/hep4.1430.
eCollection  2019 Dec.

Activation of WNT/Beta-Catenin Signaling and Regulation of the Farnesoid X 
Receptor/Beta-Catenin Complex After Murine Bile Duct Ligation.

Zhang R(1), Nakao T(2), Luo J(3), Xue Y(1), Cornuet P(1), Oertel M(1), Kosar 
K(1), Singh S(1), Nejak-Bowen K(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology University of Pittsburgh Pittsburgh PA.
(2)Department of Drug Discovery Medicine Kyoto Prefectural University of 
Medicine Kyoto Japan.
(3)Department of Surgery University of Pittsburgh Pittsburgh PA.
(4)Pittsburgh Liver Research Center University of Pittsburgh Pittsburgh PA.

We have recently shown that loss of β-catenin prevents the development of 
cholestatic liver injury and fibrosis after bile duct ligation (BDL) due to loss 
of the inhibitory farnesoid X receptor (FXR)/β-catenin complex, which results in 
decreased hepatic bile acids (BAs) through activation of FXR. To further 
understand the role of Wnt/β-catenin signaling in regulating BA metabolism and 
cholestasis, we performed BDL on mice in which hepatocyte Wnt signaling is 
deficient but β-catenin is intact (low-density lipoprotein receptor-related 
protein [LRP]5/6 knockout [DKO]) as well as mice that have enhanced hepatocyte 
β-catenin expression (serine 45 mutated to aspartic acid [S45D] transgenic [TG] 
mice). Despite decreased biliary injury after BDL, hepatic injury, fibrosis, and 
inflammation were comparable in DKO and wild-type (WT) mice. Notably, the 
FXR/β-catenin complex was maintained in DKO livers after BDL, coincident with 
significantly elevated hepatic BA levels. Similarly, TG mice did not display 
accelerated injury or increased mortality despite overexpression of β-catenin. 
There was no augmentation of FXR/β-catenin association in TG livers; this 
resulted in equivalent hepatic BAs in WT and TG mice after BDL. Finally, we 
analyzed the effect of BDL on β-catenin activity and identified an increase in 
periportal cytoplasmic stabilization and association with T-cell factor 4 that 
correlated with increased expression of distinct downstream target genes. 
Conclusion: Localization of β-catenin and expression of Wnt-regulated genes were 
altered in liver after BDL; however, neither elimination of Wnt/β-catenin 
signaling nor overexpression of β-catenin in hepatocytes significantly impacted 
the phenotype or progression of BA-driven cholestatic injury.

© 2019 The Authors. Hepatology Communications published by Wiley Periodicals, 
Inc., on behalf of the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/hep4.1430
PMCID: PMC6887668
PMID: 31832572