1. Eur J Pediatr. 2020 Jan;179(1):39-50. doi: 10.1007/s00431-019-03521-6. Epub
2019  Dec 16.

Neonatal cardiac hypertrophy: the role of hyperinsulinism-a review of 
literature.

Paauw ND(1), Stegeman R(2)(3), de Vroede MAMJ(4), Termote JUM(3), Freund MW(5), 
Breur JMPJ(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Wilhelmina Children's Hospital Birth Center, 
University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Wilhelmina Children's Hospital, 
University Medical Center Utrecht, PO Box 85090, 3508, AB, Utrecht, The 
Netherlands.
(3)Department of Neonatology, Wilhelmina Children's Hospital Birth Center, 
University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Wilhelmina Children's Hospital, 
University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Klinikum Oldenburg, University of 
Oldenburg, Oldenburg, Germany.
(6)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Wilhelmina Children's Hospital, 
University Medical Center Utrecht, PO Box 85090, 3508, AB, Utrecht, The 
Netherlands. h.breur@umcutrecht.nl.

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) in neonates is a rare and heterogeneous 
disorder which is characterized by hypertrophy of heart with histological and 
functional disruption of the myocardial structure/composition. The prognosis of 
HCM depends on the underlying diagnosis. In this review, we emphasize the 
importance to consider hyperinsulinism in the differential diagnosis of HCM, as 
hyperinsulinism is widely associated with cardiac hypertrophy (CH) which cannot 
be distinguished from HCM on echocardiographic examination. We supply an 
overview of the incidence and treatment strategies of neonatal CH in a broad 
spectrum of hyperinsulinemic diseases. Reviewing the literature, we found that 
CH is reported in 13 to 44% of infants of diabetic mothers, in approximately 40% 
of infants with congenital hyperinsulinism, in 61% of infants with leprechaunism 
and in 48 to 61% of the patients with congenital generalized lipodystrophy. The 
correct diagnosis is of importance since there is a large variation in prognoses 
and there are various strategies to treat CH in hyperinsulinemic 
diseases.Conclusion: The relationship between CH and hyperinsulism has 
implications for clinical practice as it might help to establish the correct 
diagnosis in neonates with cardiac hypertrophy which has both prognostic and 
therapeutic consequences. In addition, CH should be recognized as a potential 
comorbidity which might necessitate treatment in all neonates with known 
hyperinsulinism.What is Known:• Hyperinsulinism is currently not acknowledged as 
a cause of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) in textbooks and recent Pediatric 
Cardiomyopathy Registry publications.What is New:• This article presents an 
overview of the literature of hyperinsulinism in neonates and infants showing 
that hyperinsulinism is associated with cardiac hypertrophy (CH) in a broad 
range of hyperinsulinemic diseases.• As CH cannot be distinguished from HCM on 
echocardiographic examination, we emphasize the importance to consider 
hyperinsulinism in the differential diagnosis of HCM/CH as establishing the 
correct diagnosis has both prognostic and therapeutic consequences.

DOI: 10.1007/s00431-019-03521-6
PMCID: PMC6942572
PMID: 31840185 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.