1. BMC Genomics. 2019 Dec 17;20(1):988. doi: 10.1186/s12864-019-6351-4.

Comparative transcriptomic analysis of surf clams (Paphia undulate) infected 
with two strains of Vibrio spp. reveals the identity of key immune genes 
involved in host defense.

Yu M(1), Zheng L(1), Wang X(1), Wu M(1), Qi M(1), Fu W(2), Zhang Y(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Food Science, Foshan Polytechnic, Foshan, 528137, China.
(2)Zhejiang Marine Development Research Institute, Zhoushan, 316100, People's 
Republic of China.
(3)CAS Key Laboratory of Tropical Marine Bio-resources and Ecology, Guangdong 
Provincial Key Laboratory of Applied Marine Biology, South China Sea Institute 
of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Science, 164 West Xingang Road, Guangzhou, 
510301, China. yzhang@scsio.ac.cn.
(4)Innovation Academy of South China Sea Ecology and Environmental Engineering 
(ISEE), Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100864, China. yzhang@scsio.ac.cn.

BACKGROUND: Vibrio spp. is the major infection-producing marine bacteria in 
commercially important bivalve Paphia undulata. The host resistance is the major 
determining factor for the development of pathogenesis. To explore defense 
mechanisms, researchers have focused primarily on the study of differential 
expression of individual or specific groups of host immune genes during 
pathogen-challenge.
RESULTS: We compared the expression profile in the surf clams infected with 
avirulent V. alginolyticus and virulent V. parahaemolyticus to mark the possible 
molecular mechanisms of pathogenesis. Comparison of the differentially expressed 
genes between the two groups of Vibrio-infected clams revealed that the number 
of down-regulate genes in V. parahaemolyticus injected clams (1433) were 
significantly higher than the other group (169). Based on Gene Ontology 
classification, a large proportion of these down-regulate genes were found to be 
associated with cellular and molecular mechanisms for pathogen recognition, and 
immunity development thereby explaining the low survival rate for the V. 
parahaemolyticus-treated clams and suggesting a higher virulence of this 
bacterium towards the surf clams. Quantitative real-time PCR of 24 candidate 
genes related to immunity involving the JAK-STAT signaling pathway, 
complementary cascade, cytokine signaling pathway, oxidative stress, 
phagocytosis and apoptosis down regulated under V. parahaemolyticus infection, 
indicating compromised host defense. Furthermore, we could demonstrate a central 
role of JAK-STAT pathway in bacterial clearance. dsRNA mediated depletion of a 
clam STAT homolog gene results in dramatic increase in the infection by V. 
alginolyticus, a mildly pathogenic strain under control conditions.
CONCLUSIONS: The difference in gene expression profiles in surf clams treated 
with two Vibrio species with a differential pathogenicity to P. undulate and 
downstream molecular analysis could enlighten on the probable molecular 
mechanisms of the Vibrio pathogenesis and the virulence of V. parahaemolyticus 
in surf clams, which also benefits to develop new strategies for disease control 
in surf calm aquaculture.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-019-6351-4
PMCID: PMC6915886
PMID: 31847806 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.