1. Int J Cardiol. 2020 Mar 1;302:124-130. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2019.12.002. Epub
 2019 Dec 6.

RNA sequencing-based transcriptome profiling of cardiac tissue implicates novel 
putative disease mechanisms in FLNC-associated arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy.

Hall CL(1), Gurha P(2), Sabater-Molina M(3), Asimaki A(4), Futema M(1), Lovering 
RC(5), Suárez MP(6), Aguilera B(6), Molina P(7), Zorio E(8), Coarfa C(9), 
Robertson MJ(9), Cheedipudi SM(2), Ng KE(10), Delaney P(10), Hernández JP(11), 
Pastor F(12), Gimeno JR(13), McKenna WJ(1), Marian AJ(2), Syrris P(14).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Heart Muscle Disease, Institute of Cardiovascular Science, 
University College London, London, UK.
(2)Center for Cardiovascular Genetics, Institute of Molecular Medicine, 
University of Texas Health Sciences Center at Houston, USA.
(3)Laboratorio de Cardiogenética, Instituto Murciano de Investigación 
Biosanitaria and Universidad de Murcia, Murcia, Spain.
(4)Cardiology Clinical Academic Group, Molecular and Clinical Sciences Research 
Institute, St Georges University of London, London, UK.
(5)Functional Gene Annotation Group, Pre-clinical and Fundamental Science, 
Institute of Cardiovascular Science, University College London, London, UK.
(6)Instituto Nacional de Toxicologia y Ciencias Forenses de Madrid (INTCF), 
Madrid, Spain.
(7)Department of Pathology at the Instituto de Medicina Legal y Ciencias 
Forenses de Valencia (IMLCF-Valencia), Histology Unit at the Universitat de 
València, and Research Group on Inherited Heart Diseases, Sudden Death and 
Mechanisms of Disease (CaFaMuSMe) from the Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria 
(IIS) La Fe, Valencia, Spain.
(8)Cardiology Department at Hospital Universitario y Politécnico La Fe and 
Research Group on Inherited Heart Diseases, Sudden Death and Mechanisms of 
Disease (CaFaMuSMe) from the Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria (IIS) La Fe, 
Valencia, Spain; Center for Biomedical Network Research on Cardiovascular 
Diseases (CIBERCV), Madrid, Spain.
(9)Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.
(10)William Harvey Heart Centre, Queen Mary University of London, London, UK.
(11)Instituto de Medicina Legal de Murcia (IML-Murcia), Murcia, Spain.
(12)Servicio de Anatomía Patológica del Hospital Reina Sofía, Murcia, Spain.
(13)Servicio de Cardiologia del Hospital Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca and 
Departamento de Medicina Interna de la Universidad de Murcia, Murcia, Spain; 
Center for Biomedical Network Research on Cardiovascular Diseases (CIBERCV), 
Madrid, Spain.
(14)Centre for Heart Muscle Disease, Institute of Cardiovascular Science, 
University College London, London, UK. Electronic address: p.syrris@ucl.ac.uk.

Arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy (ACM) encompasses a group of inherited 
cardiomyopathies including arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy 
(ARVC) whose molecular disease mechanism is associated with dysregulation of the 
canonical WNT signalling pathway. Recent evidence indicates that ARVC and ACM 
caused by pathogenic variants in the FLNC gene encoding filamin C, a major 
cardiac structural protein, may have different molecular mechanisms of 
pathogenesis. We sought to identify dysregulated biological pathways in 
FLNC-associated ACM. RNA was extracted from seven paraffin-embedded left 
ventricular tissue samples from deceased ACM patients carrying FLNC variants and 
sequenced. Transcript levels of 623 genes were upregulated and 486 genes were 
reduced in ACM in comparison to control samples. The cell adhesion pathway and 
ILK signalling were among the prominent dysregulated pathways in ACM. Consistent 
with these findings, transcript levels of cell adhesion genes JAM2, NEO1, VCAM1 
and PTPRC were upregulated in ACM samples. Moreover, several actin-associated 
genes, including FLNC, VCL, PARVB and MYL7, were suppressed, suggesting 
dysregulation of the actin cytoskeleton. Analysis of the transcriptome for 
dysregulated biological pathways predicted activation of inflammation and 
apoptosis and suppression of oxidative phosphorylation and MTORC1 signalling in 
ACM. Our data suggests dysregulated cell adhesion and ILK signalling as novel 
putative pathogenic mechanisms of ACM caused by FLNC variants which are distinct 
from the postulated disease mechanism of classic ARVC caused by desmosomal gene 
mutations. This knowledge could help in the design of future gene therapy 
strategies which would target specific components of these pathways and 
potentially lead to novel treatments for ACM.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2019.12.002
PMCID: PMC6940594
PMID: 31843279 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest None.