1. Eur J Med Genet. 2020 Apr;63(4):103827. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2019.103827. Epub 
2019 Dec 16.

Identification and functional characterization of KLF5 as a novel disease gene 
responsible for familial dilated cardiomyopathy.

Di RM(1), Yang CX(1), Zhao CM(2), Yuan F(3), Qiao Q(1), Gu JN(1), Li XM(1), Xu 
YJ(4), Yang YQ(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, The Fifth People's Hospital of Shanghai, Fudan 
University, Shanghai, China; Center for Complex Cardiac Arrhythmias of Minhang 
District, The Fifth People's Hospital of Shanghai, Fudan University, Shanghai, 
China.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji University School of 
Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(3)Department of Cardiology, Shanghai Tongren Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(4)Department of Cardiology, The Fifth People's Hospital of Shanghai, Fudan 
University, Shanghai, China; Center for Complex Cardiac Arrhythmias of Minhang 
District, The Fifth People's Hospital of Shanghai, Fudan University, Shanghai, 
China; Cardiovascular Research Laboratory, The Fifth People's Hospital of 
Shanghai, Fudan University, Shanghai, China. Electronic address: 
xuyingjia@5thhospital.com.
(5)Department of Cardiology, The Fifth People's Hospital of Shanghai, Fudan 
University, Shanghai, China; Center for Complex Cardiac Arrhythmias of Minhang 
District, The Fifth People's Hospital of Shanghai, Fudan University, Shanghai, 
China; Cardiovascular Research Laboratory, The Fifth People's Hospital of 
Shanghai, Fudan University, Shanghai, China; Central Laboratory, The Fifth 
People's Hospital of Shanghai, Fudan University, Shanghai, China. Electronic 
address: yangyiqing@5thhospital.com.

As a prevalent primary myocardial disease, dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) 
represents the most common cause of heart failure in the young and the most 
frequent indication for cardiac transplantation. Aggregating evidence highlights 
the genetic basis of DCM. However, due to substantial genetic heterogeneity, the 
genetic defects of DCM in most cases remain elusive. In the current 
investigation, the entire coding exons and splicing junctions of the KLF5 gene, 
which encodes a key transcription factor required for cardiac structural and 
functional remodeling, were sequenced in 234 probands affected with DCM, and a 
heterozygous KLF5 mutation, NM_001730.5: c.1100T > A; p.(Leu367*), was 
identified in a proband. Genetic analysis of the proband's family members 
revealed that the identified KLF5 mutation co-segregated with DCM in the family 
with complete penetrance. The nonsense mutation was neither detected in 506 
control individuals nor reported in such population-genetics databases as ExAC, 
dbSNP and gnomAD. Biological assays with a dual-luciferase reporter assay system 
demonstrated that the mutant KLF5 protein had no transcriptional activity when 
compared with its wild-type counterpart. Furthermore, the mutation abrogated the 
synergistic transactivation between KLF5 and NFKB1, another pivotal 
transcription factor that has been causally linked to DCM. The whole-exome 
sequencing analysis of the proband's family members revealed no other causative 
genes. The findings indicate KLF5 as a new gene contributing to DCM in humans, 
implying potential implications for the precision medicine of DCM.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2019.103827
PMID: 31857253 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare no conflict of interests.