1. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2019 Nov-Dec;37 Suppl 121(6):142-146. Epub 2019 Dec 9.

Phenotypic variability including Behçet's disease-like manifestations in DADA2 
patients due to a homozygous c.973-2A>G splice site mutation.

van Well GTJ(1), Kant B(2), van Nistelrooij A(3), Sirma Ekmekci S(4), Henriet 
SV(5), Hoppenreijs E(6), van Deuren M(7), van Montfrans J(8), Nierkens S(9), Gül 
A(10), van Gijn ME(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics and School for Nutrition and Translational Research 
in Metabolism, Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, The 
Netherlands.
(2)Department of Genetics, University Medical Centre Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Paediatrics, Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, 
The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Genetics, Institute for Experimental Medicine, Istanbul 
University, Turkey.
(5)Department of Paediatric Infectious Diseases and Immunology, Amalia 
Children's Hospital, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands.
(6)Department of Paediatric Rheumatology, Radboud University Medical Centre, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands.
(8)Department of Paediatric Immunology, University Medical Centre Utrecht, The 
Netherlands.
(9)Centre for Translational Immunology, University Medical Centre Utrecht, The 
Netherlands.
(10)Department of Internal Medicine, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul 
University, Turkey. agul@istanbul.edu.tr.
(11)Department of Genetics, University Medical Centre Groningen, The 
Netherlands. m.e.van.gijn@umcg.nl.

OBJECTIVES: To describe phenotypic and functional characteristics of patients 
with the homozygous c.973-2A>G splice site mutation in the adenosine deaminase 2 
(ADA2) gene (rs139750129), resulting in deficiency of ADA2 (DADA2).
METHODS: We present case synopses of six patients from three unrelated families. 
Clinical data were analysed and next-generation sequencing (NGS) was performed. 
We also tested for aberrant RNA splicing and measured ADA2 enzyme activity.
RESULTS: One family had common DADA2 symptoms, whereas Behçet's disease-like 
manifestations were observed in the other two families. We detected the 
homozygous c.973-2A>G splice site mutation in ADA2 in all patients tested. ADA2 
enzyme activity was significantly lower in patients than in healthy controls, 
but no correlation between ADA2 activity levels and disease severity was 
observed. Aberrant splicing was detected in a minority of mRNA transcripts, but 
the formation of other, undetected, aberrant splicing products could not be 
excluded. Patients were treated with TNF-α inhibitors to prevent recurrence of 
inflammatory findings including cerebral vasculitis-associated stroke.
CONCLUSIONS: We describe three families with the same homozygous splice site 
mutation in ADA2 and observed a novel combination of manifestations resembling 
Behçet's disease. This further expands the range of phenotypes caused by ADA2 
mutations, although no complete genotype-phenotype association could be 
determined. Even without active disease, the risk of stroke should be addressed 
in making decisions regarding treatment of DADA2 patients.

PMID: 31856934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]