1. Front Genet. 2019 Dec 5;10:1206. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2019.01206. eCollection 
2019.

The Landscape Genetic Signature of Pollination by Trapliners: Evidence From the 
Tropical Herb, Heliconia tortuosa.

Torres-Vanegas F(1), Hadley AS(1)(2), Kormann UG(3), Jones FA(4)(5), Betts 
MG(2), Wagner HH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Toronto, 
Mississauga, ON, Canada.
(2)Forest Biodiversity Research Network, Department of Forest Ecosystems and 
Society, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, United States.
(3)Swiss Ornithological Institute, Sempach, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Botany and Plant Pathology, Oregon State University, Corvallis, 
OR, United States.
(5)Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, Panama, Panama.

Animal-mediated pollination is essential for the maintenance of plant 
reproduction, especially in tropical ecosystems, where pollination networks have 
been thought to have highly generalized structures. However, accumulating 
evidence suggests that not all floral visitors provide equally effective 
pollination services, potentially reducing the number of realized pollinators 
and increasing the cryptic specialization of pollination networks. Thus, there 
is a need to understand how different functional groups of pollinators influence 
pollination success. Here, we examined whether patterns of contemporary 
pollen-mediated gene flow in Heliconia tortuosa are consistent with the foraging 
strategy of its territorial or traplining hummingbird pollinators. Territorial 
hummingbirds defend clumps of flowers and are expected to transfer pollen 
locally. In contrast, traplining hummingbirds forage across longer distances, 
thereby increasing pollen flow among forest fragments, and are thought to 
repeatedly visit particular plants. If trapliners indeed visit the same plants 
repeatedly along their regular routes, this could lead to a situation where 
neighboring plants sample genetically distinct pollen pools. To test this 
hypothesis, we genotyped 720 seeds and 71 mother plants from 18 forest fragments 
at 11 microsatellite loci. We performed TwoGener analysis to test pollen pool 
differentiation within sites (among neighboring plants within the same forest 
fragment: Φ SC ) and between sites (among forest fragments: Φ CT ). We found 
strong, statistically significant pollen pool differentiation among neighboring 
mother plants (Φ SC = 0.0506), and weaker, statistically significant 
differentiation among sites (Φ CT = 0.0285). We interpret this pattern of 
hierarchical pollen pool differentiation as the landscape genetic signature of 
the foraging strategy of traplining hummingbirds, where repeatable, 
long-distance, and high-fidelity routes transfer pollen among particular plants. 
Although H. tortuosa is also visited by territorial hummingbirds, our results 
suggest that these pollinators do not contribute substantially to successful 
pollination, highlighting differences in realized pollination efficiency. This 
cryptic reduction in the number of realized pollinators potentially increases 
the vulnerability of pollination success to the decline of populations of 
traplining hummingbirds, which have been shown to be sensitive to forest 
fragmentation. We conclude that maintaining habitat connectivity to sustain the 
foraging routes of trapliners may be essential for the maintenance of 
pollen-mediated gene flow in human-modified landscapes.

Copyright © 2019 Torres-Vanegas, Hadley, Kormann, Jones, Betts and Wagner.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2019.01206
PMCID: PMC6906188
PMID: 31867039