1. Front Behav Neurosci. 2019 Dec 5;13:246. doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2019.00246. 
eCollection 2019.

Lower Digit Ratio (2D:4D) Indicative of Excess Prenatal Androgen Is Associated 
With Increased Sociability and Greater Social Capital.

Buchholz VN(1)(2), Mühle C(1)(2); Cohort Study on Substance Use Risk Factors; 
Kornhuber J(1)(2), Lenz B(1)(2).

Collaborators: Gmel G, Mohler-Kuo M, Foster S, Marmet S, Studer J.

Author information:
(1)Addiction Medicine, Lausanne University Hospital CHUV, University of 
Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland; Addiction Switzerland, Lausanne, Switzerland; 
Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, ON, Canada; University of the 
West of England, Frenchay Campus, Bristol, United Kingdom 
(Gerhard.Gmel@chuv.ch). La Source, School of Nursing Sciences, HES-SO University 
of Applied Sciences and Arts of Western Switzerland, Lausanne, Switzerland 
(m.mohler-kuo@ecolelasource.ch). Institut für Epidemiologie, Biostatistik und 
Prävention, Hirschengraben, Zurich, Switzerland (simon.foster@kjpd.uzh.ch). 
Addiction Medicine, Lausanne University Hospital CHUV, University of Lausanne, 
Lausanne, Switzerland (simon.marmet@chuv.ch). Addiction Medicine, Lausanne 
University Hospital CHUV, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland 
(Joseph.Studer@chuv.ch).
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Friedrich-Alexander University 
Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), Erlangen, Germany.

Positive social interactions are crucial for human well-being. Elevated prenatal 
exposure to testosterone as indicated by a low second-to-fourth finger length 
ratio (2D:4D) relates to more aggressive/hostile behavior in men of low 2D:4D, 
especially in challenging situations. How much people enjoy interacting with 
others is determined by the personality trait sociability. Given its role in 
approach and avoidance behavior, sociability might also be influenced by 
prenatal sex hormones, but studies are inconclusive so far. Here, we 
investigated the association between 2D:4D and the personality trait sociability 
complemented by personal social capital and personal social network size, in a 
population-based cohort of 4998 men. Lower 2D:4D correlated significantly with 
higher trait sociability, bigger personal social capital, and larger personal 
social network size. These effects were consistent across both hands separately 
and their mean value. Furthermore, both factors of sociability (1) liking party 
and company of friends and (2) isolation intolerance, correlated significantly 
with the prenatal testosterone marker. The exploratory analysis revealed no link 
between 2D:4D and responses to the personality trait aggression items or items 
of anti-social-personality disorder. Our data suggest that prenatal androgen 
exposure organizes the brain with lasting effects on social behavior.

Copyright © 2019 Buchholz, Mühle, Cohort Study on Substance Use Risk Factors, 
Kornhuber and Lenz.

DOI: 10.3389/fnbeh.2019.00246
PMCID: PMC6906175
PMID: 31866841