1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2020 May 1;105(5):e1967-80. doi:
10.1210/clinem/dgz306.

Arterial Wall Inflammation and Increased Hematopoietic Activity in Patients With 
Primary Aldosteronism.

van der Heijden CDCC(1)(2), Smeets EMM(3), Aarntzen EHJG(3), Noz MP(1)(2), 
Monajemi H(4), Kersten S(1)(2)(5), Kaffa C(6), Hoischen A(1)(2)(5), Deinum 
J(1)(7), Joosten LAB(1)(2)(8), Netea MG(1)(2)(9), Riksen NP(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, 
the Netherlands.
(2)Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical 
Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(3)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, 
the Netherlands.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Rijnstate Hospital, Arnhem, the Netherlands.
(5)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, 
the Netherlands.
(6)Centre for Molecular and Biomolecular Informatics, Radboud Institute for 
Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the 
Netherlands.
(7)Department of Medicine, University Hospital Dresden, Technische Universität, 
Dresden, Germany.
(8)Department of Medical Genetics, Iuliu Hațieganu University of Medicine and 
Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
(9)Department for Genomics & Immunoregulation, Life and Medical Sciences 12 
Institute, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

CONTEXT: Primary aldosteronism (PA) confers an increased risk of cardiovascular 
disease (CVD), independent of blood pressure. Animal models have shown that 
aldosterone accelerates atherosclerosis through proinflammatory changes in 
innate immune cells; human data are scarce.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this article is to explore whether patients with PA 
have increased arterial wall inflammation, systemic inflammation, and 
reprogramming of monocytes.
DESIGN: A cross-sectional cohort study compared vascular inflammation on 
2'-deoxy-2'-(18F)fluoro-D-glucose; (18F-FDG) positron emission 
tomography-computed tomography, systemic inflammation, and monocyte phenotypes 
and transcriptome between PA patients and controls.
SETTING: This study took place at Radboudumc and Rijnstate Hospital, the 
Netherlands.
PATIENTS: Fifteen patients with PA and 15 age-, sex-, and blood pressure-matched 
controls with essential hypertension (EHT) participated.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES AND RESULTS: PA patients displayed a higher arterial 
18F-FDG uptake in the descending and abdominal aorta (P < .01, P < .05) and 
carotid and iliac arteries (both P < .01). In addition, bone marrow uptake was 
higher in PA patients (P < .05). Although PA patients had a higher 
monocyte-to-lymphocyte ratio (P < .05), systemic inflammatory markers, cytokine 
production capacity, and transcriptome of circulating monocytes did not differ. 
Monocyte-derived macrophages from PA patients expressed more TNFA; 
monocyte-derived macrophages of healthy donors cultured in PA serum displayed 
increased interleukin-6 and tumor necrosis factor-α production.
CONCLUSIONS: Because increased arterial wall inflammation is associated with 
accelerated atherogenesis and unstable plaques, this might importantly 
contribute to the increased CVD risk in PA patients. We did not observe 
inflammatory reprogramming of circulating monocytes. However, subtle 
inflammatory changes are present in the peripheral blood cell composition and 
monocyte transcriptome of PA patients, and in their monocyte-derived 
macrophages. Most likely, arterial inflammation in PA requires interaction 
between various cell types.

© Endocrine Society 2019.

DOI: 10.1210/clinem/dgz306
PMCID: PMC7105350
PMID: 31875423 [Indexed for MEDLINE]