1. BMC Public Health. 2019 Dec 30;19(1):1763. doi: 10.1186/s12889-019-8073-6.

Leveraging incentives to increase HIV testing uptake among men: qualitative 
insights from rural Uganda.

Ndyabakira A(1), Getahun M(2), Byamukama A(3), Emperador D(4), Kabageni S(3), 
Marson K(4), Kwarisiima D(3), Chamie G(4), Thirumurthy H(5)(6), Havlir D(4), 
Kamya MR(7), Camlin CS(2).

Author information:
(1)Infectious Diseases Research Collaboration, Kampala, Uganda. 
ndyabakira@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology & Reproductive Sciences, University of 
California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(3)Infectious Diseases Research Collaboration, Kampala, Uganda.
(4)Department of Medicine, Division of HIV, Infectious Diseases, and Global 
Medicine, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(5)Division of Health Policy, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(6)Center for Health Incentives and Behavioral Economics, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(7)School of Medicine, College of Health Sciences, Makerere University, Kampala, 
Uganda.

BACKGROUND: Few studies have explored how economic incentives influence 
behavioral outcomes. This study aimed to identify pathways of action of an 
incentives-based intervention to increase men's participation in HIV testing.
METHODS: The qualitative study was embedded in a randomized-controlled trial 
that compared effectiveness of gain-framed, loss-framed and lottery-based 
incentives to increase HIV testing among men. Following testing at a community 
health campaign, 60 in-depth interviews were conducted with men systematically 
sampled on the basis of age, incentive group, and campaign attendance. Data were 
coded deductively and inductively for thematic content analysis.
RESULTS: Incentives addressed men's structural, interpersonal and 
individual-level barriers to testing: offered at convenient locations, 
incentives offset costs of testing, in lost wages, which are exacerbated when 
livelihoods required mobility. Interpersonal barriers included anticipated 
stigma/fear of disclosure, social obligations, and negative peer influences. 
Providing incentives in public settings provided "social proof" that prizes 
could be won, and facilitated social support and positive norms by promoting 
testing with trusted others. Incentives had little influence when men appraised 
prize values to be low, disbelieved they would win a prize, or were already 
intrinsically motivated to test. Yet, incentives provided a behavioral 'cue to 
action' for many men who perceived themselves to be susceptible to HIV and 
perceived HIV disease to be severe, acting as secondary motivator for testing 
that "sweetened the deal".
CONCLUSION: Incentives can be an important 'lever' to promote men's healthy 
behaviors in resource-poor settings. HIV testing in convenient, public settings, 
when paired with incentives, provides multiple pathways to stimulate men's 
testing uptake.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Registered with ClinicalTrials.gov on 08/10/2016, ID: 
NCT02890459. The first participant was enrolled on 11th April 2016.

DOI: 10.1186/s12889-019-8073-6
PMCID: PMC6937741
PMID: 31888589 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.