1. Nutrients. 2020 Jan 1;12(1):119. doi: 10.3390/nu12010119.

Resveratrol and the Interaction between Gut Microbiota and Arterial Remodelling.

Man AWC(1), Li H(1), Xia N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Johannes Gutenberg University Medical Center, 
55131 Mainz, Germany.

Arterial remodelling refers to the alteration in the structure of blood vessel 
that contributes to the progression of hypertension and other cardiovascular 
complications. Arterial remodelling is orchestrated by the crosstalk between the 
endothelium and vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC). Vascular inflammation 
participates in arterial remodelling. Resveratrol is a natural polyphenol that 
possesses anti-oxidant and anti-inflammatory properties and has beneficial 
effects in both the endothelium and VSMC. Resveratrol has been studied for the 
protective effects in arterial remodelling and gut microbiota, respectively. Gut 
microbiota plays a critical role in the immune system and inflammatory 
processes. Gut microbiota may also regulate vascular remodelling in 
cardiovascular complications via affecting endothelium function and VSMC 
proliferation. Currently, there is new evidence showing that gut microbiota 
regulate the proliferation of VSMC and the formation of neointimal hyperplasia 
in response to injury. The change in population of the gut microbiota, as well 
as their metabolites (e.g., short-chain fatty acids) could critically contribute 
to VSMC proliferation, cell cycle progression, and migration. Recent studies 
have provided strong evidence that correlate the effects of resveratrol in 
arterial remodelling and gut microbiota. This review aims to summarize recent 
findings on the resveratrol effects on cardiovascular complications focusing on 
arterial remodelling and discuss the possible interactions of resveratrol and 
the gut microbiota that modulate arterial remodelling.

DOI: 10.3390/nu12010119
PMCID: PMC7019510
PMID: 31906281 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.