1. Genes Cells. 2020 Feb;25(2):124-138. doi: 10.1111/gtc.12746. Epub 2020 Feb 5.

Involvement of Rev1 in alkylating agent-induced loss of heterozygosity in 
Oryzias latipes.

Fujikawa Y(1)(2)(3), Ishikawa-Fujiwara T(1)(2), Kuo T(4), Shinkai N(5)(6)(7), 
Shoji T(5)(8), Kawasaki T(9), Kamei Y(10), Sakuraba Y(11), Sato A(12), Kinoshita 
M(13), Gondo Y(11), Yuba S(9), Tsujimura T(12), Sese J(4)(5)(8), Todo T(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Radioisotope Research Center, Institute for Radiation Research, Osaka 
University, Suita, Japan.
(2)Radiation Biology and Medical Genetics, Department of Genome Biology, 
Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka University, Suita, Japan.
(3)Japan Society for the Promotion of Science Research Fellow, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)RWBC-OIL, AIST, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Artificial Intelligence Research Center (AIRC), AIST, Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Cancer Translational Research Team, RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence 
Project, Tokyo, Japan.
(7)Division of Molecular Modification and Cancer Biology, National Cancer Center 
Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan.
(8)Humanome Lab., Inc., Tokyo, Japan.
(9)Functional Biomolecular Research Group, Biomedical Research Institute, 
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Ikeda, 
Japan.
(10)Spectrography and Bioimaging Facility, National Institute for Basic Biology, 
Okazaki, Japan.
(11)Genomic Sciences Center (GSC), RIKEN Yokohama Institute, Yokohama, Japan.
(12)Department of Pathology, Hyogo College of Medicine, Nishinomiya, Japan.
(13)Division of Applied Bioscience, Graduate School of Agriculture, Kyoto 
University, Kyoto, Japan.

Translesion synthesis (TLS) polymerases mediate DNA damage bypass during 
replication. The TLS polymerase Rev1 has two important functions in the TLS 
pathway, including dCMP transferase activity and acting as a scaffolding protein 
for other TLS polymerases at the C-terminus. Because of the former activity, 
Rev1 bypasses apurinic/apyrimidinic sites by incorporating dCMP, whereas the 
latter activity mediates assembly of multipolymerase complexes at the DNA 
lesions. We generated rev1 mutants lacking each of these two activities in 
Oryzias latipes (medaka) fish and analyzed cytotoxicity and mutagenicity in 
response to the alkylating agent diethylnitrosamine (DENA). Mutant lacking the 
C-terminus was highly sensitive to DENA cytotoxicity, whereas mutant with 
reduced dCMP transferase activity was slightly sensitive to DENA cytotoxicity, 
but exhibited a higher tumorigenic rate than wild-type fish. There was no 
significant difference in the frequency of DENA-induced mutations between mutant 
with reduced dCMP transferase activity and wild-type cultured cell. However, 
loss of heterozygosity (LOH) occurred frequently in cells with reduced dCMP 
transferase activity. LOH is a common genetic event in many cancer types and 
plays an important role on carcinogenesis. To our knowledge, this is the first 
report to identify the involvement of the catalytic activity of Rev1 in 
suppression of LOH.

© 2020 The Authors. Genes to Cells published by Molecular Biology Society of 
Japan and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/gtc.12746
PMCID: PMC7079036
PMID: 31917895 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.