1. Front Oncol. 2019 Dec 20;9:1408. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2019.01408. eCollection
2019.

Anakoinosis: Correcting Aberrant Homeostasis of Cancer Tissue-Going Beyond 
Apoptosis Induction.

Heudobler D(1), Lüke F(1), Vogelhuber M(1), Klobuch S(1), Pukrop T(1), Herr 
W(1), Gerner C(2), Pantziarka P(3)(4), Ghibelli L(5), Reichle A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine III, Hematology and Oncology, University 
Hospital Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany.
(2)Institut for Analytical Chemistry, Faculty Chemistry, University Vienna, 
Vienna, Austria.
(3)The George Pantziarka TP53 Trust, London, United Kingdom.
(4)Anticancer Fund, Brussels, Belgium.
(5)Department Biology, Università di Roma Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.

The current approach to systemic therapy for metastatic cancer is aimed 
predominantly at inducing apoptosis of cancer cells by blocking tumor-promoting 
signaling pathways or by eradicating cell compartments within the tumor. In 
contrast, a systems view of therapy primarily considers the communication 
protocols that exist at multiple levels within the tumor complex, and the role 
of key regulators of such systems. Such regulators may have far-reaching 
influence on tumor response to therapy and therefore patient survival. This 
implies that neoplasia may be considered as a cell non-autonomous disease. The 
multi-scale activity ranges from intra-tumor cell compartments, to the tumor, to 
the tumor-harboring organ to the organism. In contrast to molecularly targeted 
therapies, a systems approach that identifies the complex communications 
networks driving tumor growth offers the prospect of disrupting or "normalizing" 
such aberrant communicative behaviors and therefore attenuating tumor growth. 
Communicative reprogramming, a treatment strategy referred to as anakoinosis, 
requires novel therapeutic instruments, so-called master modifiers to deliver 
concerted tumor growth-attenuating action. The diversity of biological outcomes 
following pro-anakoinotic tumor therapy, such as differentiation, 
trans-differentiation, control of tumor-associated inflammation, etc. 
demonstrates that long-term tumor control may occur in multiple forms, inducing 
even continuous complete remission. Accordingly, pro-anakoinotic therapies 
dramatically extend the repertoire for achieving tumor control and may activate 
apoptosis pathways for controlling resistant metastatic tumor disease and 
hematologic neoplasia.

Copyright © 2019 Heudobler, Lüke, Vogelhuber, Klobuch, Pukrop, Herr, Gerner, 
Pantziarka, Ghibelli and Reichle.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2019.01408
PMCID: PMC6934003
PMID: 31921665