1. Cureus. 2019 Dec 12;11(12):e6369. doi: 10.7759/cureus.6369.

Psoriasis and Metabolic Syndrome: Comorbidities and Environmental and 
Therapeutic Implications.

Peralta C(1), Hamid P(2), Batool H(3), Al Achkar Z(4), Maximus P(1).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, California Institute of Behavioral Neuroscience and 
Psychology, Fairfield, USA.
(2)Neurology, California Institute of Behavioral Neurosciences and Psychology, 
Fairfield, USA.
(3)Internal Medicine, California Institute of Behavorial Neurosciences and 
Psychology, Fairfield, USA.
(4)Internal Medicine, California Institute of Behavioral Neuroscience and 
Pshycology, Fairfield, USA.

Psoriasis (PS) is an incessant, fiery skin sickness characterized by 
erythematous plaques with thick silvery scales, white or red patches of the 
skin, which encompasses several immunological, biomolecular, genetic, and 
environmental factors that may lead to further development of metabolic syndrome 
(MS) and vice versa. Metabolic syndrome is composed of multiple components (high 
blood pressure, abdominal obesity, glucose intolerance, and dyslipidemia) of 
risk factors that arise primarily from insulin resistance, mostly mediated by 
inflammatory cytokines, such as tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α), 
interleukin-6 (IL-6) together with leptin and adiponectin, which are molecules 
also found in PS. The incidence, severity, and poor prognosis of the psoriatic 
diseases could be influenced by cardiometabolic diseases, which are controllable 
or preventable with intense lifestyle modification such as diet, exercise, and 
weight control. We performed a far-reaching writing search of different 
databases as part of this review; 47 investigations were regarded as important 
based on our search. Fasting, proper weight management, and special diet 
modifications seemed to have a positive impact on the management of PS. This 
review agrees with previous literature that nutritionists and specialists of 
preventive medicine should play a central role in the evaluation and management 
of psoriatic patients. We recommended that the management of this disease should 
focus on the environmental factors first instead of the genetic and immunologic 
pathways.

Copyright © 2019, Peralta et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.6369
PMCID: PMC6957052
PMID: 31938651

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.