1. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2018 Mar 1;11(3):1667-1673. eCollection 2018.

Microsatellite instability and protein expression of MLH1 and MSH2 genes in 
young Mexican patients less than 50 years of age diagnosed with colorectal 
cancer.

Quintanilla-Guzman A(1), Luevano-Gonzalez A(2), Rangel-Gomez AN(3), 
Rojas-Martinez A(3)(4), Garza-Guajardo R(2), Barboza-Quintana O(2), 
Ancer-Rodriguez J(2), Rios-Ibarra CP(4), Ortiz-Lopez R(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Bioquimica y Medicina Molecular, Facultad de Medicina, 
Universidad Autonoma de Nuevo Leon Mexico.
(2)Servicio de Anatomia Patologica, Hospital Universitario, Universidad Autonoma 
de Nuevo Leon Mexico.
(3)Centro de Investigación y Desarrollo en Ciencias de la Salud, Universidad 
Autonoma de Nuevo Leon Mexico.
(4)Tecnologico de Monterrey, Escuela de Medicina y Ciencias de la Salud 
Monterrey, Mexico.

Diagnosis of colorectal cancer in patients under 45 years old should alert us to 
possible hereditary forms of this neoplasia. Most cases of hereditary colorectal 
cancer correspond to Lynch syndrome which is caused by mutations in DNA mismatch 
repair genes, particularly MLH1 and MSH2. The dysfunction is associated with 
microsatellite instability which occurs in 95% cases of this syndrome and in 15% 
of sporadic colorectal cancer. In sporadic colon tumors, downregulation of MLH1 
is observed in cases with the BRAF V600E variant, which induces hypermetylation 
of the MLH1 promoter. Mutation screening for hereditary cancer has impacted the 
diagnosis, genetic counseling, and early tumor detection in families affected by 
hereditary colorectal cancer syndromes but mutation screening technologies are 
seldom available in public health care centers in developing countries. This 
study aimed to describe immunohistochemistry and microsatellite instability 
abnormalities in tumor samples archived in a public hospital in Mexico. 
Paraffin-embedded samples of patients with colorectal cancer, diagnosed at under 
50 years old, were studied to analyze correlations among clinical variables, 
MLH1 and MSH2 protein expression (immunohistochemistry), microsatellite 
instability (fluorescent PCR-based assay), and BRAF V600E variant (real time 
PCR). Forty-seven tumor specimens from patients with TNM stage II and above were 
analyzed. Tumors were mainly located in the proximal colon segment and displayed 
histologic intestinal variety and infiltration to serosa. Twenty samples showed 
decreased expression of mismatch repair proteins and 10 of these presented 
microsatellite instability (7 high and 3 low instability patterns, 
respectively). There were no instances of BRAF V600E mutation found. Altered 
MLH1 or MSH2 expression was found in 42.5% of the samples and microsatellite 
instability was observed in 21.3% of the tumors. These results suggested that 
about a fifth of the patients were candidates for family assessment and genetic 
counseling.

IJCEP Copyright © 2018.

PMCID: PMC6958109
PMID: 31938267

Conflict of interest statement: None.