1. BMC Plant Biol. 2020 Jan 20;20(1):34. doi: 10.1186/s12870-020-2250-8.

Differential expression of IDA (INFLORESCENCE DEFICIENT IN ABSCISSION)-like 
genes in Nicotiana benthamiana during corolla abscission, stem growth and water 
stress.

Ventimilla D(1), Domingo C(1), González-Ibeas D(1), Talon M(1), Tadeo FR(2).

Author information:
(1)Centro de Genómica, Instituto Valenciano de Investigaciones Agrarias (IVIA), 
CV-315, Km 10,7 Moncada, E-46113, Valencia, Spain.
(2)Centro de Genómica, Instituto Valenciano de Investigaciones Agrarias (IVIA), 
CV-315, Km 10,7 Moncada, E-46113, Valencia, Spain. tadeo_fra@gva.es.

BACKGROUND: IDA (INFLORESCENCE DEFICIENT IN ABSCISSION)-like signaling peptides 
and the associated HAE (HAESA)-like family of receptor kinases were originally 
reported in the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana (Arabidopsis) to be deeply 
involved in the regulation of abscission. Actually, IDA peptides, as 
cell-to-cell communication elements, appear to be implicated in many 
developmental processes that rely on cell separation events, and even in the 
responses to abiotic stresses. However, the knowledge related to the molecular 
machinery regulating abscission in economically important crops is scarce. In 
this work, we determined the conservation and phylogeny of the IDA-like and 
HAE-like gene families in relevant species of the Solanaceae family and analyzed 
the expression of these genes in the allopolyploid Nicotiana benthamiana, in 
order to identify members involved in abscission, stem growth and in the 
response to drought conditions.
RESULTS: The phylogenetic relationships among the IDA-like members of the 
Solanaceae studied, grouped the two pairs of NbenIDA1 and NbenIDA2 protein 
homeologs with the Arabidopsis prepropeptides related to abscission. Analysis of 
promoter regions searching for regulatory elements showed that these two pairs 
of homeologs contained both hormonal and drought response elements, although 
NbenIDA2A lacked the hormonal regulatory elements. Expression analyses showed 
that the pair of NbenIDA1 homeologs were upregulated during corolla abscission. 
NbenIDA1 and NbenIDA2 pairs showed tissue differential expression under water 
stress conditions, since NbenIDA1 homeologs were highly expressed in stressed 
leaves while NbenIDA2 homeologs, especially NbenIDA2B, were highly expressed in 
stressed roots. In non-stressed active growing plants, nodes and internodes were 
the tissues with the highest expression levels of all members of the IDA-like 
family and their putative HAE-like receptors.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that the pair of NbenIDA1 homeologs are involved 
in the natural process of corolla abscission while both pairs of NbenIDA1 and 
NbenIDA2 homeologs are implicated in the response to water stress. The data also 
suggest that IDA peptides may be important during stem growth and development. 
These results provide additional evidence that the functional module formed by 
IDA peptides and its receptor kinases, as defined in Arabidopsis, may also be 
conserved in Solanaceae.

DOI: 10.1186/s12870-020-2250-8
PMCID: PMC6971993
PMID: 31959115 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.