1. J Virol. 2020 Mar 31;94(8):e01676-19. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01676-19. Print 2020
Mar  31.

An Alphaherpesvirus Exploits Antimicrobial β-Defensins To Initiate Respiratory 
Tract Infection.

Van Cleemput J(1)(2), Poelaert KCK(1)(3), Laval K(2), Vanderheijden N(1), 
Dhaenens M(4), Daled S(4), Boyen F(5), Pasmans F(5), Nauwynck HJ(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Virology, Parasitology and Immunology, Faculty of Veterinary 
Medicine, Ghent University, Merelbeke, Belgium.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey, 
USA.
(3)Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(4)Department of Pharmaceutics, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Ghent 
University, Ghent, Belgium.
(5)Department of Pathology, Bacteriology and Poultry Diseases, Faculty of 
Veterinary Medicine, Ghent University, Merelbeke, Belgium.
(6)Department of Virology, Parasitology and Immunology, Faculty of Veterinary 
Medicine, Ghent University, Merelbeke, Belgium hans.nauwynck@ugent.be.

β-Defensins protect the respiratory tract against the myriad of microbial 
pathogens entering the airways with each breath. However, this potentially 
hostile environment is known to serve as a portal of entry for herpesviruses. 
The lack of suitable respiratory model systems has precluded understanding of 
how herpesvirus virions overcome the abundant mucosal β-defensins during host 
invasion. We demonstrate how a central alphaherpesvirus, equine herpesvirus type 
1 (EHV1), actually exploits β-defensins to invade its host and initiate viral 
spread. The equine β-defensins (eBDs) eBD1, -2, and -3 were produced and 
secreted along the upper respiratory tract. Despite the marked antimicrobial 
action of eBD2 and -3 against many bacterial and viral pathogens, EHV1 virions 
were resistant to eBDs through the action of the viral glycoprotein M envelope 
protein. Pretreatment of EHV1 virions with eBD2 and -3 increased the subsequent 
infection of rabbit kidney (RK13) cells, which was dependent on viral N-linked 
glycans. eBD2 and -3 also caused the aggregation of EHV1 virions on the cell 
surface of RK13 cells. Pretreatment of primary equine respiratory epithelial 
cells (EREC) with eBD1, -2, and -3 resulted in increased EHV1 virion binding to 
and infection of these cells. EHV1-infected EREC, in turn, showed an increased 
production of eBD2 and -3 compared to that seen in mock- and influenza 
virus-infected EREC. In addition, these eBDs attracted leukocytes, which are 
essential for EHV1 dissemination and which serve as latent infection reservoirs. 
These novel mechanisms provide new insights into herpesvirus respiratory tract 
infection and pathogenesis.IMPORTANCE How herpesviruses circumvent mucosal 
defenses to promote infection of new hosts through the respiratory tract remains 
unknown due to a lack of host-specific model systems. We used the 
alphaherpesvirus equine herpesvirus type 1 (EHV1) and equine respiratory tissues 
to decipher this key event in general alphaherpesvirus pathogenesis. In contrast 
to several respiratory viruses and bacteria, EHV1 resisted potent antimicrobial 
equine β-defensins (eBDs) eBD2 and eBD3 by the action of glycoprotein M. 
Instead, eBD2 and -3 facilitated EHV1 particle aggregation and infection of 
rabbit kidney (RK13) cells. In addition, virion binding to and subsequent 
infection of respiratory epithelial cells were increased upon preincubation of 
these cells with eBD1, -2, and -3. Infected cells synthesized eBD2 and -3, 
promoting further host cell invasion by EHV1. Finally, eBD1, -2, and -3 
recruited leukocytes, which are well-known EHV1 dissemination and latency 
vessels. The exploitation of host innate defenses by herpesviruses during the 
early phase of host colonization indicates that highly specialized strategies 
have developed during host-pathogen coevolution.

Copyright © 2020 Van Cleemput et al.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01676-19
PMCID: PMC7108845
PMID: 31996426 [Indexed for MEDLINE]