1. Front Bioeng Biotechnol. 2020 Jan 10;7:442. doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2019.00442. 
eCollection 2019.

Mutagenesis-Based Characterization and Improvement of a Novel Inclusion Body 
Tag.

Jong WSP(1)(2), Ten Hagen-Jongman CM(2), Vikström D(3), Dontje W(4), Abdallah 
AM(5)(6), de Gier JW(7), Bitter W(2)(8), Luirink J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Abera Bioscience AB, Solna, Sweden.
(2)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Amsterdam Institute for Molecules 
Medicines and Systems (AIMMS), Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(3)Xbrane Biopharma AB, Solna, Sweden.
(4)Department of Clinical Immunology and Rheumatology, Amsterdam UMC, University 
of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(5)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, QU Health, Qatar 
University, Doha, Qatar.
(6)Bioscience Core Laboratory, King Abdullah University of Science and 
Technology (KAUST), Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(7)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Center for Biomembrane Research, 
Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden.
(8)Medical Microbiology and Infection Control, Cancer Center Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, Netherlands.

Whereas, bacterial inclusion bodies (IBs) for long were regarded as undesirable 
aggregates emerging during recombinant protein production, they currently 
receive attention as promising nanoparticulate biomaterials with diverse 
applications in biotechnology and biomedicine. We previously identified ssTorA, 
a signal sequence that normally directs protein export via the Tat pathway in E. 
coli, as a tag that induces the accumulation of fused proteins into IBs under 
overexpression conditions. Here, we used targeted mutagenesis to identify 
features and motifs being either critical or dispensable for IB formation. We 
found that IB formation is neither related to the function of ssTorA as a 
Tat-signal sequence nor is it a general feature of this family of signal 
sequences. IB formation was inhibited by co-overexpression of ssTorA binding 
chaperones TorD and DnaK and by amino acid substitutions that affect the 
propensity of ssTorA to form an α-helix. Systematic deletion experiments 
identified a minimal region of ssTorA required for IB formation in the center of 
the signal sequence. Unbiased genetic screening of a library of randomly 
mutagenized ssTorA sequences for reduced aggregation properties allowed us to 
pinpoint residues that are critical to sustain insoluble expression. Together, 
the data point to possible mechanisms for the aggregation of ssTorA fusions. 
Additionally, they led to the design of a tag with superior IB-formation 
properties compared to the original ssTorA sequence.

Copyright © 2020 Jong, ten Hagen-Jongman, Vikström, Dontje, Abdallah, de Gier, 
Bitter and Luirink.

DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2019.00442
PMCID: PMC6965018
PMID: 31998707