1. Neurooncol Adv. 2020 Jan-Dec;2(1):vdz062. doi: 10.1093/noajnl/vdz062. Epub
2020  Jan 1.

MCT4 regulates de novo pyrimidine biosynthesis in GBM in a lactate-independent 
manner.

Spina R(1)(2)(3), Voss DM(4), Yang X(5), Sohn JW(5), Vinkler R(5), Schraner 
J(5), Sloan A(4), Welford SM(6)(7), Avril N(8), Ames HM(1)(3), Woodworth 
GF(2)(3), Bar EE(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Maryland School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(3)Marlene and Stewart Greenebaum Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of 
Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(4)Department of Neurological Surgery, Case Western Reserve University School of 
Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(5)Department of Radiation Oncology, Case Western Reserve University School of 
Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(6)Department of Radiation Oncology, Miller School of Medicine, University of 
Miami, Miami, Florida, USA.
(7)Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, Miller School of Medicine, University 
of Miami, Miami, Florida, USA.
(8)Department of Radiology, Division of Nuclear Medicine, Case Western Reserve 
University School of Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.

BACKGROUND: Necrotic foci with surrounding hypoxic cellular pseudopalisades and 
microvascular hyperplasia are histological features found in glioblastoma (GBM). 
We have previously shown that monocarboxylate transporter 4 (MCT4) is highly 
expressed in necrotic/hypoxic regions in GBM and that increased levels of MCT4 
are associated with worse clinical outcomes.
METHODS: A combined transcriptomics and metabolomics analysis was performed to 
study the effects of MCT4 depletion in hypoxic GBM neurospheres. Stable and 
inducible MCT4-depletion systems were used to evaluate the effects of and 
underlining mechanisms associated with MCT4 depletion in vitro and in vivo, 
alone and in combination with radiation.
RESULTS: This study establishes that conditional depletion of MCT4 profoundly 
impairs self-renewal and reduces the frequency and tumorigenicity of aggressive, 
therapy-resistant, glioblastoma stem cells. Mechanistically, we observed that 
MCT4 depletion induces anaplerotic glutaminolysis and abrogates de novo 
pyrimidine biosynthesis. The latter results in a dramatic increase in DNA damage 
and apoptotic cell death, phenotypes that were readily rescued by pyrimidine 
nucleosides supplementation. Consequently, we found that MCT4 depletion promoted 
a significant prolongation of survival of animals bearing established orthotopic 
xenografts, an effect that was extended by adjuvant treatment with focused 
radiation.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings establish a novel role for MCT4 as a critical 
regulator of cellular deoxyribonucleotide levels and provide a new therapeutic 
direction related to MCT4 depletion in GBM.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press, the Society for 
Neuro-Oncology and the European Association of Neuro-Oncology.

DOI: 10.1093/noajnl/vdz062
PMCID: PMC6979491
PMID: 32002519