1. Front Aging Neurosci. 2019 Dec 17;11:350. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2019.00350. 
eCollection 2019.

Distinct Spontaneous Brain Activity Patterns in Different Biologically-Defined 
Alzheimer's Disease Cognitive Stage: A Preliminary Study.

Zeng Q(1), Luo X(1), Li K(1), Wang S(1), Zhang R(1), Hong H(1), Huang P(1), 
Jiaerken Y(1), Xu X(1), Xu J(1), Wang C(1), Zhou J(2), Zhang M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang 
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang 
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China.

Background: The National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer's Association (NIA-AA) has 
proposed a biological definition of Alzheimer's disease (AD): individuals with 
both abnormal amyloid and tau biomarkers (A+T+) would be defined as AD. It 
remains unclear why different cognitive status is present in subjects with 
biological AD. Resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging (rsfMRI) has 
provided an opportunity to reveal the brain activity patterns in a 
biologically-defined AD cohort. Accordingly, we aimed to investigate distinct 
brain activity patterns in subjects with existed AD pathology but in the 
different cognitive stages. Method: We selected individuals with AD pathology 
(A+T+) and healthy controls (HC, A-T-) based on the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) 
biomarkers. According to the cognitive stage, we divided the A+T+ cohort into 
three groups: (1) preclinical AD; (2) prodromal AD; and (3) AD with dementia 
(d-AD). We compared spontaneous brain activity measured by a fractional 
amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation (fALFF) approach among four groups. 
Results: The analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) results showed significant 
differences in fALFF in the posterior cingulate cortex/precuneus (PCC/PCu). 
Further, compared to HC, we found increased fALFF values in the right inferior 
frontal gyrus (IFG) in the preclinical AD stage, whereas prodromal AD patients 
showed reduced fALFF in the bilateral precuneus, right middle frontal gyrus 
(MFG), right precentral gyrus, and postcentral gyrus. Within the d-AD group, 
both hyperactivity (right fusiform gyrus, right parahippocampal gyrus 
(PHG)/hippocampus, and inferior temporal gyrus) and hypoactivity (bilateral 
precuneus, left posterior cingulate cortex, left cuneus and superior occipital 
gyrus) were detected. Conclusion: We found the distinct brain activity patterns 
in different cognitive stages among the subjects defined as AD biologically. Our 
findings may be helpful in understanding mechanisms leading to cognitive changes 
in the AD pathophysiological process.

Copyright © 2019 Zeng, Luo, Li, Wang, Zhang, Hong, Huang, Jiaerken, Xu, Xu, 
Wang, Zhou and Zhang for the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2019.00350
PMCID: PMC6980867
PMID: 32009939