1. Anatol J Cardiol. 2020 Jan;23(2):60-69. doi:
10.14744/AnatolJCardiol.2019.56068.

Increased cardiovascular risk associated with hyperlipoproteinemia (a) and the 
challenges of current and future therapeutic possibilities.

Fras Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Medicine, Centre for Preventive Cardiology, University Medical 
Centre Ljubljana; Medical Faculty, University of Ljubljana; Ljubljana-Slovenia.

Population, genetic, and clinical studies demonstrated a causative and 
continuous, from other plasma lipoproteins independent relationship between 
elevated plasma lipoprotein (a) [Lp(a)] concentration and the development of 
cardiovascular disease (CVD), mainly those related to athe-rosclerotic CVD, and 
calcific aortic stenosis. Currently, a strong international consensus is still 
lacking regarding the single value which would be commonly used to define 
hyperlipoproteinemia (a). Its prevalence in the general population is estimated 
to be in the range of 10%-35% in accordance with the most commonly used 
threshold levels (>30 or >50 mg/dL). Since elevated Lp(a) can be of special 
importance in patients with some genetic disorders, as well as in individuals 
with otherwise controlled major risk factors, the identification and 
establishment of the proper therapeutic interventions that would lower Lp(a) 
levels and lead to CVD risk reduction could be very important. The majority of 
the classical lipid-lowering agents (statins, ezetimibe, and fibrates), as well 
as nutraceuticals (CoQ10 and garlic), appear to have no significant effect on 
its plasma levels, whereas for the drugs with the demonstrated Lp(a)-lowering 
effects (aspirin, niacin, and estrogens), their clinical efficacy in reducing 
cardiovascular (CV) events has not been unequivocally proven yet. Both Lp(a) 
apheresis and proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 inhibitors can 
reduce the plasma Lp(a) by approximately 20%-30% on average, in parallel with 
much larger reduction of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (up to 70%), what 
puts us in a difficulty to conclude about the true contribution of lowered Lp(a) 
to the reduction of CV events. The most recent advancement in the field is the 
introduction of the novel apolipoprotein (a) [apo(a)] antisense oligonucleotide 
therapy targeting apo(a), which has already proven itself as being very 
effective in decreasing plasma Lp(a) (by even >90%), but should be further 
tested in clinical trials. The aim of this review was to present some of the 
most important accessible scientific data, as well as dilemmas related to the 
currently and potentially in the near future more widely available therapeutic 
options for the management of hyperlipoproteinemia (a).

DOI: 10.14744/AnatolJCardiol.2019.56068
PMCID: PMC7040869
PMID: 32011323 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: Dr. Fras reports grants 
and personal fees from Astra Zeneca, grants and personal fees from Sanofi, 
personal fees from Amgen, grants and personal fees from Krka Pharma, outside the 
submitted work.