1. Infect Drug Resist. 2020 Jan 7;13:1-10. doi: 10.2147/IDR.S234292. eCollection 
2020.

Species Diversity, Molecular Characterization, and Antimicrobial Susceptibility 
of Opportunistic Actinomycetes Isolated from Immunocompromised and Healthy 
Patients of Markazi Province of Iran.

Azadi D(1)(2), Motallebirad T(1), Ghaffari K(1), Shokri D(3), Rezaei F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Sciences, Khomein University of Medical Sciences, 
Khomein, Iran.
(2)Molecular Medicine Research Center, Faculty of Medicine, Arak University of 
Medical Sciences, Arak, Iran.
(3)Department of Biology and Microbiology, Shahid Ashrafi Isfahani University, 
Isfahan, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Actinomycetes widely exist in nature and these species cause 
infections in immunocompromised and healthy patients, although they are 
frequently found as members of the normal microbiota of humans and animals. 
These subsequent infections are often misdiagnosed as malignancy and 
tuberculosis. Due to this issue, the present study aimed to determine the 
presence and diversity of actinomycetes species causing infections in Iranian 
patients.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 79 clinical samples collected from five 
hospitals in Markazi province were analyzed for the existence of actinomycetes 
using standard protocols for isolation and characterization of the isolates. The 
conventional tests were used for preliminary identification, the PCR 
amplification of hsp65 gene, the specific region of the 16S rRNA, and sequence 
analyses of 16S rRNA were applied for the genus and species identification. MICs 
of the antimicrobial agent were determined by the broth microdilution method and 
interpreted according to the NCCLS guidelines.
RESULTS: A total of 17 (21.51%) actinomycetes isolates were recovered from 
clinical samples. In other analyzed samples, eight (10.12%) gram-positive, 12 
(15.18) gram-negative bacteria, and six (7.6) fungi isolates were recovered. The 
most prevalent actinomycetes species were M. fortuitum (17.64%), N. Mexicana and 
S. heliomycini (11.76% each), and 10 species, ie, N. farcinica, M. ﻿lehmannii, 
M. flavescens, Arthrobacter crystalopoetis, N. neocaledoniensis, M. phocaicum, 
M. abscessus, M. arupense, M. setense, and N. cyriacigeorgica made up the single 
isolates. Results of DST illustrated that all of the isolates were susceptible 
to Amikacin, Levofloxacin, Ofloxacin, and Ciprofloxacin, whereas all of them 
were resistant to Rifampicin and Doxycycline.
CONCLUSION: In conclusion, increasing isolation of actinomycetes found in 
various clinical cases merits special attention by health authorities in 
developing countries. In health centers, action should be taken to increase 
awareness of appropriate diagnostic criteria and management guidelines for 
actinomycetes diseases. Furthermore, an increase in the number as well as the 
quality of national and regional reference laboratories may facilitate more 
accurate diagnosis of actinomycetes diseases.

© 2020 Azadi et al.

DOI: 10.2147/IDR.S234292
PMCID: PMC6954848
PMID: 32021315

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.