1. Lung Cancer (Auckl). 2020 Jan 14;11:13-18. doi: 10.2147/LCTT.S224991. 
eCollection 2020.

Symptomatic CNS Radiation Necrosis Requiring Neurosurgical Resection During 
Treatment with Lorlatinib in ALK-Rearranged NSCLC: A Report of Two Cases.

Zhu VW(#)(1), Nagasaka M(#)(2)(3), Kubota T(4), Raval K(5), Robinette N(6), 
Armas O(7), Al-Holou W(8), Ou SI(1).

Author information:
(1)Chao Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, Division of Hematology/Oncology, 
Department of Medicine, University of California Irvine, Orange, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Oncology, Karmanos Cancer Institute/Wayne State University, 
Detroit, MI, USA.
(3)Department of Advanced Medical Innovations, St. Marianna University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Kawasaki, Japan.
(4)Department of Neurology, Sapporo Nishimaruyama Hospital, Sapporo, Japan.
(5)Department of Pathology, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA.
(6)Department of Oncology, Imaging Division, Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne 
State University, Detroit, MI, USA.
(7)Department of Pathology, Sharp Grossmont Hospital, La Mesa, CA, USA.
(8)Department of Neurosurgery, Karmanos Cancer Institute/Wayne State University, 
Detroit, MI, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Central nervous system (CNS) metastasis carries a significant morbidity and 
mortality in anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK)-rearranged non-small cell lung 
cancer (NSCLC). Next-generation ALK tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) are highly 
CNS-penetrant and have demonstrated remarkable intracranial activity across 
clinical studies, and yet radiation remains the mainstay of treatment modality 
against CNS metastasis. We have previously reported alectinib can induce CNS 
radiation necrosis even after a remote history of radiation (7 years 
post-radiation). Lorlatinib is another potent next-generation ALK TKI that can 
overcome many ALK resistance mutations and has been shown to have excellent 
activity in patients with baseline CNS metastasis. Here we report two 
ALK-rearranged NSCLC patients who developed radiation necrosis shortly after 
initiating lorlatinib following progression on the sequential treatment of 
crizotinib, alectinib, and brigatinib. In both cases, radiation necrosis is 
evidenced by serial MRI images and histological examination of the resected CNS 
metastasis that had previously been radiated. Our cases highlight the importance 
of recognizing CNS radiation necrosis that may mimic disease progression in 
ALK-rearranged NSCLC treated with and potentially precipated by next-generation 
ALK TKIs.

© 2020 Zhu et al.

DOI: 10.2147/LCTT.S224991
PMCID: PMC6970251
PMID: 32021525

Conflict of interest statement: VWZ has received honoraria from AstraZeneca, 
Biocept, Roche-Foundation Medicine, Roche/Genentech, Takeda, and consulting fees 
from TP Therapeutics, outside the submitted work. MN has received honoraria from 
AstraZeneca and Tempus, outside the submitted work. SIO has previously served on 
the Scientific Advisory Board of Turning Point Therapeutics with stock 
ownership; has received honoraria from AstraZeneca, Pfizer, Merck, Novartis, 
Roche-Foundation Medicine, Roche/Genentech, Spectrum, Takeda, outside the 
submitted work. The authors report no other conflicts of interest in this work.