1. Biol Psychiatry Cogn Neurosci Neuroimaging. 2020 Apr;5(4):461-467. doi: 
10.1016/j.bpsc.2019.12.007. Epub 2019 Dec 20.

Preliminary Report on the Effects of a Low Dose of LSD on Resting-State Amygdala 
Functional Connectivity.

Bershad AK(1), Preller KH(2), Lee R(3), Keedy S(3), Wren-Jarvis J(3), Bremmer 
MP(3), de Wit H(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, 
California.
(2)Pharmaco-Neuroimaging and Cognitive-Emotional Processing, Department of 
Psychiatry, Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, University Hospital for Psychiatry 
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Neuroscience, University of Chicago, 
Chicago, Illinois.
(4)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Neuroscience, University of Chicago, 
Chicago, Illinois. Electronic address: hdew@uchicago.edu.

BACKGROUND: The practice of "microdosing," or the use of repeated, very low 
doses of lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) to improve mood or cognition, has 
received considerable public attention, but empirical studies are lacking. 
Controlled studies are needed to investigate both the therapeutic potential and 
the neurobiological underpinnings of this pharmacologic treatment.
METHODS: The present study was designed to examine the effects of a single low 
dose of LSD (13 μg) versus placebo on resting-state functional connectivity and 
cerebral blood flow in healthy young adults. Twenty men and women, 18 to 35 
years old, participated in 2 functional magnetic resonance imaging scanning 
sessions in which they received placebo or LSD under double-blind conditions. 
During each session, the participants completed drug effect and mood 
questionnaires, and physiological measures were recorded. During expected peak 
drug effect, they underwent resting-state blood oxygen level-dependent and 
arterial spin labeling scans. Cerebral blood flow as well as amygdala and 
thalamic connectivity were analyzed.
RESULTS: LSD increased amygdala seed-based connectivity with the right angular 
gyrus, right middle frontal gyrus, and the cerebellum, and decreased amygdala 
connectivity with the left and right postcentral gyrus and the superior temporal 
gyrus. This low dose of LSD had weak and variable effects on mood, but its 
effects on positive mood were positively correlated with the increase in 
amygdala-middle frontal gyrus connectivity strength.
CONCLUSIONS: These preliminary findings show that a very low dose of LSD, which 
produces negligible subjective changes, alters brain connectivity in limbic 
circuits. Additional studies, especially with repeated dosing, will reveal 
whether these neural changes are related to the drug's purported antidepressant 
effect.

Copyright © 2019 Society of Biological Psychiatry. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bpsc.2019.12.007
PMCID: PMC7150630
PMID: 32033922 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure. HdW has received honoraria from 
Springer-Nature for editorial service, but reports no biomedical financial 
interests or potential conflicts of interest related to this work. All other 
authors report no biomedical financial interests or potential conflicts of 
interest.