1. Front Physiol. 2020 Jan 24;10:1602. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2019.01602. eCollection
 2019.

Effect of Acute and Chronic Aerobic Exercise on Immunological Markers: A 
Systematic Review.

Gonçalves CAM(1), Dantas PMS(1)(2), Dos Santos IK(1), Dantas M(2), da Silva 
DCP(1), Cabral BGAT(2), Guerra RO(1), Júnior GBC(1).

Author information:
(1)Graduate Program in Health Sciences, Federal University of Rio Grande Do 
Norte, Natal, Brazil.
(2)Graduate Program in Physical Education, Federal University of Rio Grande Do 
Norte, Natal, Brazil.

Introduction: The effects of aerobic exercise on the immune system are not yet 
fully defined in the scientific literature. This fact demonstrates the need to 
investigate its influence on existing immunological markers by classifying and 
quantifying their acute and chronic effects. Objective: To investigate the 
effects of acute and chronic aerobic exercise on inflammatory markers of healthy 
adults. Methods: This study is a systematic review according to PRISMA 
recommendations. The following databases were searched: MEDLINE (via PubMed), 
Science Direct, Scopus, Web of Science, SciELO, Bireme and Cochrane Library, and 
article references. The last search was performed in March 2019. We included 
randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and non-randomized controlled trials (NRCTs) 
investigating the acute and chronic effects of aerobic exercise on immune 
markers in healthy male and female adults aged 20 to 45 years, without 
restrictions in language or year of publication. Two authors independently 
analyzed the studies by reading the titles, abstracts, and full texts. Risk of 
Study bias was analyzed using Cochrane's Risk of Bias Tool. Outcomes: We 
included 15 studies in this systematic review, 13 of which were acute 
intervention and 2 were chronic, with 296 participants, 196 men and 100 women 
all being healthy individuals. It was observed that the acute intervention 
promotes changes in most immunological markers, while the chronic intervention 
interferes with a smaller proportion, this being in lymphocyte subpopulations. 
In the evaluation of quality, it was found that most studies did not present a 
high risk of bias in the evaluated aspects, but an unclear related risk of bias 
was observed, requiring a more careful analysis. Conclusion: Thus, it can be 
concluded that the evidence indicates that acute and chronic interventions may 
modify most immune markers, but aspects such as gender, contraceptive pill use 
in women, physical capacity of the investigated individuals, environment, and 
type and intensity of the exercises may interfere with these markers as well as 
the data analysis. Therefore, this review suggests that further research is 
needed to contribute to the confirmation and estimation of results.

Copyright © 2020 Gonçalves, Dantas, dos Santos, Dantas, da Silva, Cabral, Guerra 
and Júnior.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2019.01602
PMCID: PMC6993577
PMID: 32038286