1. Life Sci. 2020 Apr 15;247:117440. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2020.117440. Epub 2020
Feb  15.

Fibroblast growth factor-inducible 14 mediates macrophage infiltration in heart 
to promote pressure overload-induced cardiac dysfunction.

Unudurthi SD(1), Nassal DM(2), Patel NJ(2), Thomas E(2), Yu J(3), Pierson CG(2), 
Bansal SS(4), Mohler PJ(5), Hund TJ(6).

Author information:
(1)The Frick Center for Heart Failure and Arrhythmia, Dorothy M. Davis Heart and 
Lung Research Institute, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, 
Columbus, OH, USA; Department of Biomedical Engineering, College of Engineering, 
The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA. Electronic address: 
unudurthi.1@buckeyemail.osu.edu.
(2)The Frick Center for Heart Failure and Arrhythmia, Dorothy M. Davis Heart and 
Lung Research Institute, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, 
Columbus, OH, USA; Department of Biomedical Engineering, College of Engineering, 
The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA.
(3)Department of Biomedical Engineering, College of Engineering, The Ohio State 
University, Columbus, OH, USA.
(4)The Frick Center for Heart Failure and Arrhythmia, Dorothy M. Davis Heart and 
Lung Research Institute, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, 
Columbus, OH, USA; Department of Physiology & Cell Biology, USA.
(5)The Frick Center for Heart Failure and Arrhythmia, Dorothy M. Davis Heart and 
Lung Research Institute, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, 
Columbus, OH, USA; Department of Physiology & Cell Biology, USA; Department of 
Internal Medicine, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, 
OH, USA.
(6)The Frick Center for Heart Failure and Arrhythmia, Dorothy M. Davis Heart and 
Lung Research Institute, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, 
Columbus, OH, USA; Department of Biomedical Engineering, College of Engineering, 
The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA; Department of Internal Medicine, 
The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, OH, USA. Electronic 
address: Thomas.Hund@osumc.edu.

AIMS: Heart failure (HF) is characterized by compromised cardiac structure and 
function. Previous work has identified a link between upregulation of 
pro-inflammatory cytokines and HF. Tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-like weak inducer 
of apoptosis (TWEAK) is a pro-inflammatory cytokine, which binds to fibroblast 
growth factor inducible 14 (Fn14), a ubiquitously expressed cell-surface 
receptor. The objective of this study was to investigate the role of TWEAK/Fn14 
pathway in promoting cardiac inflammation under non ischemic stress conditions.
MAIN METHODS: Wild type (WT) and Fn14 knock out (Fn14-/-) mice were subjected to 
pressure overload [transaortic constriction (TAC)] for 1 or 6 weeks. A subset of 
WT TAC animals were treated with the Fn14 antagonist L524-0366. Cardiac function 
was measured by echocardiography. Cardiac fibrosis and macrophage infiltration 
were quantified using immunohistochemistry and flow cytometry, respectively. 
Cardiac fibroblasts were isolated for quantifying TWEAK-induced chemokine 
release.
KEY FINDINGS: Fn14-/- mice displayed improved cardiac function, reduced fibrosis 
and lower macrophage infiltration in heart compared to WT following TAC. 
L524-0366 mitigated maladaptive remodeling with TAC. TWEAK induced secretion of 
the pro-inflammatory chemokine, monocyte chemoattractant protein 1 from WT but 
not Fn14-/- fibroblasts in vitro, in part through activation of non-canonical 
NF-κB signaling. Finally, Fn14 expression was increased in mouse following TAC 
and in human failing hearts.
SIGNIFICANCE: Our findings support an important role for the TWEAK/Fn14 
promoting macrophage infiltration and fibrosis in heart under non-ischemic 
stress, with potential for therapeutic intervention to improve cardiac function 
in the setting of HF.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lfs.2020.117440
PMCID: PMC7433891
PMID: 32070706 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that there are no conflicts of interest.