1. Cell Death Dis. 2020 Feb 18;11(2):132. doi: 10.1038/s41419-020-2323-5.

Silencing lncRNA Lfar1 alleviates the classical activation and pyoptosis of 
macrophage in hepatic fibrosis.

Zhang K(#)(1), Shi Z(#)(1), Zhang M(1), Dong X(2), Zheng L(1), Li G(3), Han 
X(1), Yao Z(4), Han T(5), Hong W(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Histology and Embryology, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Cellular 
and Molecular Immunology, Key Laboratory of Immune Microenvironment and Disease 
of Ministry of Education, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Tianjin Medical 
University, Tianjin, China.
(2)Department of Pathology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Tianjin Medical 
University, Tianjin, China.
(3)The Third Central Clinical College of Tianjin Medical University, Department 
of Hepatology and Gastroenterology, Tianjin Third Central Hospital affiliated to 
Nankai University, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Artificial Cells, Artificial Cell 
Engineering Technology Research Center of Public Health Ministry, Tianjin, 
China.
(4)Department of Immunology, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular 
Immunology, Key Laboratory of Immune Microenvironment and Disease of Ministry of 
Education, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Tianjin Medical University, 
Tianjin, China.
(5)The Third Central Clinical College of Tianjin Medical University, Department 
of Hepatology and Gastroenterology, Tianjin Third Central Hospital affiliated to 
Nankai University, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Artificial Cells, Artificial Cell 
Engineering Technology Research Center of Public Health Ministry, Tianjin, 
China. hantaomd@126.com.
(6)Department of Histology and Embryology, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Cellular 
and Molecular Immunology, Key Laboratory of Immune Microenvironment and Disease 
of Ministry of Education, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Tianjin Medical 
University, Tianjin, China. hongwei@tmu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

Hepatic fibrosis is a common pathological consequence of a sustained wound 
healing response to continuous liver injury, characterized by increased 
production and accumulation of extracellular matrix. If unresolved, the fibrotic 
process results in organ failure, and eventually death after the development of 
cirrhosis. It has been suggested that macrophages play central role in the 
progression of hepatic fibrosis, which is related to inflammation and 
pyroptosis, a novel programmed and proinflammatory cell death. However, it 
remains far less clear if, or how, lncRNAs regulates the activation and 
pyroptosis of macrophage in hepatic fibrosis. In the present study, we 
demonstrated that the liver-enriched lncRNA Lfar1, which has been reported to 
promote hepatic fibrosis through inducing hepatic stellate cells activation and 
hepatocytes apoptosis, was dysregulated during proinflammatory M1 activation and 
pyroptosis of macrophage. Our study revealed that silencing lnc-Lfar1 by a 
lentivirus-shRNA alleviated CCl4- and BDL-induced proinflammatory M1 macrophage 
activation and NLRP3 inflammasome-mediated pyroptosis. Furthermore, the in vitro 
experiments demonstrated that lnc-Lfar1 knockdown significantly suppressed LPS- 
and IFN-γ-induced proinflammatory activation of macrophages, and inhibited 
LPS/ATP- and LPS/Nigericin-induced NLRP3 inflammasome-mediated pyroptosis. 
Mechanistically, lnc-Lfar1 regulated LPS- and IFN-γ-induced proinflammatory 
activation of macrophages through the NF-ĸB pathway. All these data supported 
our conclusion that lnc-Lfar1 plays a vital role in controlling the activation 
and pyroptosis of macrophage, thus providing a possible therapeutic target 
against inflammation-related disorders including hepatic fibrosis.

DOI: 10.1038/s41419-020-2323-5
PMCID: PMC7028920
PMID: 32071306 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.