1. Parasit Vectors. 2020 Feb 18;13(1):88. doi: 10.1186/s13071-020-3964-z.

Identification of proteins from the secretory/excretory products (SEPs) of the 
branchiuran ectoparasite Argulus foliaceus (Linnaeus, 1758) reveals unique 
secreted proteins amongst haematophagous ecdysozoa.

AmbuAli A(1)(2), Monaghan SJ(3), McLean K(4), Inglis NF(4), Bekaert M(3), Wehner 
S(3)(5), Bron JE(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Aquaculture, School of Natural Sciences, University of Stirling, 
Stirling, FK9 4LA, UK. hala@squ.edu.om.
(2)Department of Marine Science and Fisheries, College of Agricultural and 
Marine Sciences, Sultan Qaboos University, PO Box 34, 123, Al-Khoud, Sultanate 
of Oman. hala@squ.edu.om.
(3)Institute of Aquaculture, School of Natural Sciences, University of Stirling, 
Stirling, FK9 4LA, UK.
(4)Moredun Proteomics Facility, Moredun Research Institute, Pentland Science 
Park, Bush Loan, Penicuik, Midlothian, EH26 0PZ, UK.
(5)Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Kraepelinstr. 2-10, 80804, Munich, 
Germany.

BACKGROUND: It is hypothesised that being a blood-feeding ectoparasite, Argulus 
foliaceus (Linnaeus, 1758), uses similar mechanisms for digestion and host 
immune evasion to those used by other haematophagous ecdysozoa, including 
caligid copepods (e.g. sea louse). We recently described and characterised 
glands associated with the feeding appendages of A. foliaceus using histological 
techniques. The work described in the present study is the first undertaken with 
the objective of identifying and partially characterising the components 
secreted from these glands using a proteomic approach.
METHODS: Argulus foliaceus parasites were sampled from the skin of rainbow trout 
(Oncorhynchus mykiss), from Loch Fad on the Isle of Bute, Scotland, UK. The 
proteins from A. foliaceus secretory/excretory products (SEPs) were collected 
from the supernatant of artificial freshwater conditioned with active adult 
parasites (n = 5-9 per ml; n = 560 total). Proteins within the SEPs were 
identified and characterised using LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis. Data are available via 
ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD016226.
RESULTS: Data mining of a protein database translated from an A. foliaceus 
dataset using ProteinScape allowed identification of 27 predicted protein 
sequences from the A. foliaceus SEPs, each protein matching the criteria of 2 
peptides with at least 4 contiguous amino acids. Nine proteins had no matching 
sequence through OmicsBox (Blast2GO) analysis searches suggesting that Argulus 
spp. may additionally have unique proteins present in their SEPs. SignalP 5.0 
software, identified 13 proteins with a signal sequence suggestive of signal 
peptides and supportive of secreted proteins being identified. Notably, the 
functional characteristics of identified A. foliaceus proteins/domains have also 
been described from the salivary glands and saliva of other blood-feeding 
arthropods such as ticks. Identified proteins included: transporters, 
peroxidases, metalloproteases, proteases and serine protease inhibitors which 
are known to play roles in parasite immune evasion/induction (e.g. astacin), 
immunomodulation (e.g. serpin) and digestion (e.g. trypsin).
CONCLUSIONS: To our knowledge, the present study represents the first proteomic 
analysis undertaken for SEPs from any branchiuran fish louse. Here we reveal 
possible functional roles of A. foliaceus SEPs in digestion and 
immunomodulation, with a number of protein families shared with other 
haematophagous ectoparasites. A number of apparently unique secreted proteins 
were identified compared to other haematophagous ecdysozoa.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-020-3964-z
PMCID: PMC7029603
PMID: 32070416 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.