1. Andrology. 2020 Sep;8(5):1030-1037. doi: 10.1111/andr.12777. Epub 2020 Mar 20.

Does the FSHB c.-211G>T polymorphism impact Sertoli cell number and the 
spermatogenic potential in infertile patients?

Schubert M(1), Kaldewey S(1), Pérez Lanuza L(2), Krenz H(3), Dugas M(3), Berres 
S(2), Kliesch S(1), Wistuba J(2), Gromoll J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Surgical Andrology, Centre of Reproductive 
Medicine and Andrology, University of Münster, Münster, Germany.
(2)Institute of Reproductive and Regenerative Biology, Centre of Reproductive 
Medicine and Andrology, University of Münster, Münster, Germany.
(3)Institute of Medical Informatics-Informatics for Personalized Medicine, 
University of Münster, Münster, Germany.

BACKGROUND: A genetic variant within the FSHB gene can deviate FSH action on 
spermatogenesis. The c.-211G>T FSHB single nucleotide polymorphism impacts FSHB 
transcription and biosynthesis due to interference with the LHX3 transcription 
factor binding. This SNP was previously shown to be strongly associated with 
lowered testicular volume, reduced sperm counts, and decreased FSH levels in 
patients carrying one or two T-alleles.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the impact of the SNP FSHB c.-211G>T on Sertoli cell 
(SC) number, Sertoli cell workload (SCWL) and thereby spermatogenic potential.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Testicular biopsies of 31 azoospermic, homozygous T 
patients (26 non-obstructive azoospermia (NOA), and five obstructive azoospermia 
(OA)) were matched to patients with GG genotype. Marker proteins for SC (SOX9), 
spermatogonia (MAGE A4), and round spermatids (CREM) were used for 
semi-automatical quantification by immunofluorescence. SCWL (number of germ 
cells served by one SC) was determined and an unbiased clustering on the patient 
groups performed.
RESULTS: Quantification of SC number in NOA patients did not yield significant 
differences when stratified by FSHB genotype. SC numbers are also not 
significantly different between FSHB genotypes for the OA patient group and 
between NOA and OA groups. SCWL in the NOA patient cohort is significantly 
reduced when compared to the OA control patients; however, in neither group an 
effect of the genotype could be observed. The cluster analysis of the whole 
study cohort yielded two groups only, namely NOA and OA, and no clustering 
according to the FSHB genotype.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION: The FSHB c.-211G>T polymorphism does not affect SC 
numbers or SCWL, thereby in principle maintaining the spermatogenic potential. 
The previously observed clinical phenotype for the FSHB genotype might therefore 
be caused by a hypo-stimulated spermatogenesis and not due to a decreased SC 
number.

© 2020 The Authors. Andrology published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of 
American Society of Andrology and European Academy of Andrology.

DOI: 10.1111/andr.12777
PMID: 32096339 [Indexed for MEDLINE]