1. Gastroenterol Hepatol Bed Bench. 2019;12(Suppl1):S80-S86.

Contribution of NOTCH signaling pathway along with TNF-α in the intestinal 
inflammation of ulcerative colitis.

Ghorbaninejad M(1), Heydari R(1), Mohammadi P(1), Shahrokh S(1), Haghazali M(2), 
Khanabadi B(3), Meyfour A(3).

Author information:
(1)Basic and Molecular Epidemiology of Gastrointestinal Disorders Research 
Center, Research Institute for Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases, Shahid 
Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Rajaie Cardiovascular Medical and Research Center, Iran University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases Research Center, Research Institute for 
Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

AIM: The aim of this study was to determine gene expression levels of TNF-α, 
NOTCH1, and HES1 in patients with UC.
BACKGROUND: Intestinal inflammation and epithelial injury are the leading actors 
of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), causing an excessive expression of 
pro-inflammatory cytokines such as TNF-α. Also, target genes of NOTCH signaling 
are involved in the regulation of intestinal homeostasis. Previous studies have 
demonstrated that TNF-α increases in ulcerative colitis (UC) patients, but the 
relationship between TNF-α and NOTCH signaling pathway in UC etiopathology needs 
further study.
METHODS: Twelve active UC patients and twelve healthy controls were enrolled in 
this study. RNA was extracted and the mRNA expression levels of TNF-α, NOTCH1, 
and HES1 were examined using real-time PCR analyses. Further, transcriptome data 
deposited in Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database were analyzed to detect the 
differential expression of TNF superfamily and NOTCH1 gene in IBD patients. 
Finally, the interaction of TNF-α and NOTCH signaling was obtained from The 
SIGnaling Network Open Resource 2.0 (SIGNOR 2.0) database.
RESULTS: The transcription levels of TNF-α, NOTCH1, and HES1 genes were 
significantly elevated in UC patients compared with control (p < 0.05). In 
addition, GEO results confirmed our expression results. SIGNOR analysis showed 
that TNF-α interacts with NOTCH signaling components.
CONCLUSION: Based on our data, we observed that NOTCH1 and HES1 in co-operation 
of TNF-α, may play an important role in pathogenesis of UC. The members of NOTCH 
signaling pathway can be ideal candidates to target the therapy of IBD.

©2019 RIGLD.

PMCID: PMC7011072
PMID: 32099606

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.