1. Cancer Manag Res. 2020 Jan 30;12:675-686. doi: 10.2147/CMAR.S202965.
eCollection  2020.

Strategies for Increasing the Effectiveness of Aromatase Inhibitors in Locally 
Advanced Breast Cancer: An Evidence-Based Review on Current Options.

Grizzi G(1), Ghidini M(2), Botticelli A(3)(4), Tomasello G(5), Ghidini A(6), 
Grossi F(2), Fusco N(7)(8), Cabiddu M(9), Savio T(10), Petrelli F(9).

Author information:
(1)Oncology Unit, Oncology Department, ASST of Cremona, Cremona, Italy.
(2)Oncology Unit, Internal Medicine Department, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda 
Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy.
(3)Medical Oncology Department, Sant'Andrea Hospital, Rome, Italy.
(4)Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, "Sapienza" University of Rome, 
Rome, Italy.
(5)Oncology Unit, Niguarda Cancer Center, Grande Ospedale Metropolitano 
Niguarda, Milan, Italy.
(6)Medical Oncology Unit, Casa Di Cura Igea, Milan, Italy.
(7)Division of Pathology, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore 
Policlinico, Milan, Italy.
(8)Department of Biomedical, Surgical and Dental Sciences, University of Milan, 
Milan, Italy.
(9)Oncology Unit, Medical Sciences Department, ASST of Bergamo Ovest, Treviglio, 
Italy.
(10)Breast Unit, ASST of Bergamo Ovest, Treviglio, Italy.

Neoadjuvant hormonal therapy (NEO-HT) is a possible treatment option for breast 
cancer (BC) patient with estrogen receptor positive (ER+) and HER2 negative 
(HER2-) disease. The absence of solid data on the type of drugs to be used and 
duration of treatment as well as lack of clear evidence of effectiveness of 
NEO-HT compared to chemotherapy (CT) reserve its use for patients with old age 
or frail conditions. However, the low pathologic complete response rate (pCR) 
obtained with tamoxifen or aromatase inhibitors (AIs) alone does not make NEO-HT 
as a suitable option for the neoadjuvant treatment of HR+ HER2-. The use of the 
cyclin-dependent kinase 4 and 6 (CDK 4/6) inhibitors palbociclib, ribociclib and 
abemaciclib of the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitor everolimus and 
of the phosphoinositide 3 kinase (PI3K) inhibitor taselisib together with 
endocrine therapy (ET) has become a standard in advanced breast cancer, showing 
clinical effectiveness and significantly prolonging median progression-free 
survival compared to ET only. In the early phase disease, the use of ET together 
with CDK 4/6, mTOR and PI3K inhibitors is still investigational. Data from 
recent studies are promising even though less impressive than in metastatic 
setting. In this context, the use of genomic-transcriptomic tools (such as 
ONCOTYPE, PAM50) and the identification of novel biomarkers (ESR1, PI3Kca, 
PDGF-R) on tissue or with liquid biopsy could help to select patient prone to 
respond to endocrine-combined therapy and able to achieve pCR. With our review, 
we aimed at evaluating the current state of the art in the treatment of locally 
advanced breast cancer with NEO-HT.

© 2020 Grizzi et al.

DOI: 10.2147/CMAR.S202965
PMCID: PMC6996551
PMID: 32099464

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.