1. Transl Oncol. 2020 Mar;13(3):100745. doi: 10.1016/j.tranon.2020.100745. Epub 
2020 Feb 22.

Choosing The Right Animal Model for Renal Cancer Research.

Sobczuk P(1), Brodziak A(2), Khan MI(3), Chhabra S(4), Fiedorowicz M(5), 
Wełniak-Kamińska M(6), Synoradzki K(7), Bartnik E(8), Cudnoch-Jędrzejewska A(9), 
Czarnecka AM(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental and Clinical Physiology, Laboratory of Centre for 
Preclinical Research, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland; Maria 
Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology, Warsaw, 
Poland. Electronic address: pawel.sobczuk@interia.pl.
(2)Department of Experimental and Clinical Physiology, Laboratory of Centre for 
Preclinical Research, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland; Maria 
Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology, Warsaw, 
Poland. Electronic address: anbrodziak@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology - Head & Neck Surgery, Western University, 
London, Ontario, Canada. Electronic address: imrankhanbioinfo@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, CSIR-Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow, 
India. Electronic address: chhabrastuti@gmail.com.
(5)Department of Experimental Pharmacology, Mossakowski Medical Research Centre 
Polish Academy of Sciences, 5 Pawinskiego Str., Warsaw, Poland. Electronic 
address: mfiedorowicz@imdik.pan.pl.
(6)Department of Experimental Pharmacology, Mossakowski Medical Research Centre 
Polish Academy of Sciences, 5 Pawinskiego Str., Warsaw, Poland. Electronic 
address: marlenak@imdik.pan.pl.
(7)Department of Experimental Pharmacology, Mossakowski Medical Research Centre 
Polish Academy of Sciences, 5 Pawinskiego Str., Warsaw, Poland. Electronic 
address: ksynoradzki@imdik.pan.pl.
(8)Institute of Genetics and Biotechnology, Faculty of Biology, University of 
Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland. Electronic address: ewambartnik@gmail.com.
(9)Department of Experimental and Clinical Physiology, Laboratory of Centre for 
Preclinical Research, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland. Electronic 
address: agnieszka.cudnoch@wum.edu.pl.
(10)Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology, 
Warsaw, Poland; Department of Experimental Pharmacology, Mossakowski Medical 
Research Centre Polish Academy of Sciences, 5 Pawinskiego Str., Warsaw, Poland. 
Electronic address: amczarnecka@imdik.pan.pl.

The increase in the life expectancy of patients with renal cell carcinoma (RCC) 
in the last decade is due to changes that have occurred in the area of 
preclinical studies. Understanding cancer pathophysiology and the emergence of 
new therapeutic options, including immunotherapy, would not be possible without 
proper research. Before new approaches to disease treatment are developed and 
introduced into clinical practice they must be preceded by preclinical tests, in 
which animal studies play a significant role. This review describes the progress 
in animal model development in kidney cancer research starting from the oldest 
syngeneic or chemically-induced models, through genetically modified mice, 
finally to xenograft, especially patient-derived, avatar and humanized mouse 
models. As there are a number of subtypes of RCC, our aim is to help to choose 
the right animal model for a particular kidney cancer subtype. The data on 
genetic backgrounds, biochemical parameters, histology, different stages of 
carcinogenesis and metastasis in various animal models of RCC as well as their 
translational relevance are summarized. Moreover, we shed some light on imaging 
methods, which can help define tumor microstructure, assist in the analysis of 
its metabolic changes and track metastasis development.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tranon.2020.100745
PMCID: PMC7036425
PMID: 32092671