1. Diabetes Metab Syndr Obes. 2020 Feb 10;13:297-305. doi: 10.2147/DMSO.S229590. 
eCollection 2020.

Novel Application of the Traditional Lipid Ratios as Strong Risk Predictors of 
NASH.

Hegazy M(1), Saleh SA(2), Ezzat A(1), Behiry ME(1).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt.
(2)Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Ain-Shams University, Cairo, Egypt.

PURPOSE: Limited data are available regarding the role of triglycerides, 
cholesterol and lipoproteins ratios as risk factors for nonalcoholic fatty liver 
disease (NAFLD) progression. In the present study, the investigators aimed to 
investigate the value of cardiovascular risk ratios of triglycerides, 
cholesterol, and lipoproteins as predictors of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis 
(NASH) and the correlation of such ratios with disease severity.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This study included 131 overweight and obese patients with 
NAFLD who were divided into NASH, borderline NASH, and non-NASH fatty liver 
(NNFL) subgroups according to NAFLD activity score (NAS) in liver biopsy, and 60 
healthy participants as a control group. Lipid profile and lipid ratios 
including triglycerides/HDL (TGs/HDL), low-density lipoprotein/high-density 
lipoprotein (LDL/HDL) and total cholesterol/HDL (TC/HDL) ratios were measured.
RESULTS: Significantly higher triglycerides/HDL ratio was found in NASH and 
borderline NASH, while higher cholesterol/HDL ratio was found in borderline NASH 
in comparison to controls. There were positive correlations between TGs/HDL and 
steatosis, ballooning, inflammation, BMI, and NAS; between LDL/HDL and 
inflammation; and between cholesterol/HDL and BMI, steatosis, and NAS. The 
highest AUC was that of TG/HDL (0.744), at a cut-off point of 3, with 71.8% 
sensitivity and 76.8% specificity.
CONCLUSION: Triglycerides, cholesterol and lipoprotein ratios showed higher 
levels in NASH and correlated with NAFLD severity, and above these cut-off 
ratios, we can rule in the NASH cases which confer also the cardiovascular 
morbidities. Structured lipid ratios could serve as markers to screen NASH 
progression from simple steatosis cases and clarify the link of NASH with the 
cardiovascular risk prediction in overweight and obese patients.

© 2020 Hegazy et al.

DOI: 10.2147/DMSO.S229590
PMCID: PMC7021917
PMID: 32104026

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no funding and no conflicts 
of interest in this work.