1. J Clin Med. 2020 Mar 3;9(3):675. doi: 10.3390/jcm9030675.

Combining Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors with Anti-Angiogenic Agents.

Ciciola P(1), Cascetta P(1), Bianco C(2), Formisano L(1), Bianco R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine and Surgery, University of Naples "Federico 
II", 80131 Naples, Italy.
(2)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University of Catanzaro 
"Magna Graecia", 88100 Catanzaro, Italy.

Immunotherapy has recently emerged as a novel strategy for treating different 
types of solid tumors, with promising results. However, still a large fraction 
of patients do not primarily respond to such approaches, and even responders 
sooner or later develop resistance. Moreover, immunotherapy is a promising 
strategy for certain malignancies but not for others, with this discrepancy 
having been attributed to a more immunogenic microenvironment of some tumors. As 
abnormal and augmented tumor vessels often occur in cancerogenesis, 
anti-angiogenic drugs have already demonstrated their effectiveness both in 
preclinical and in clinical settings. By targeting abnormal formation of tumor 
vessels, anti-angiogenetic agents potentially result in an enhanced infiltration 
of immune effector cells. Moreover, crosstalks downstream of the immune 
checkpoint axis and vascular endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR) 
signaling may result in synergistic effects of combined treatment in tumor 
cells. In this review, we will describe and discuss the biological rationale of 
a combined therapy, underlying the modification in tumor microenvironment as 
well as in tumor cells after exposure to checkpoint inhibitors and 
anti-angiogenic drugs. Moreover, we will highlight this strategy as a possible 
way for overcoming drug resistance. By first discussing potential prognostic and 
predictive factors for combined treatment, we will then turn to clinical 
settings, focusing on clinical trials where this strategy is currently being 
investigated.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm9030675
PMCID: PMC7141336
PMID: 32138216

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.