1. Brain Res. 1988 Nov 22;474(1):100-11. doi: 10.1016/0006-8993(88)90673-7.

Protein chemical and immunocytochemical studies of meningovascular beta-amyloid 
protein in Alzheimer's disease and normal aging.

Joachim CL(1), Duffy LK, Morris JH, Selkoe DJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Neuroscience, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.

As a comparison to previous analyses of purified amyloid plaque cores from 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) brain, we performed protein chemical and 
immunocytochemical studies on amyloid filaments extracted from meningeal blood 
vessels of patients with Alzheimer's disease. Results were compared with those 
obtained from identically prepared fractions of aged normals without cerebral 
amyloid angiopathy or other microscopic findings of AD. The amyloid isolation 
method of Glenner and Wong was modified, including an extraction with sodium 
dodecyl sulfate (SDS). Gel electrophoresis of purified amyloid from AD meninges 
yielded bands centered at 4.2 kDa. Sequencing of the HPLC-purified amyloid 
protein from AD meninges confirmed the published beta-protein sequence for 
residues 1-30 and 35-40, with the exception of glutamic acid rather than 
glutamine at position 11. N-terminal heterogeneity was not prominent. No 
sequence beyond residue 40 was obtained. Proteins of similar but not identical 
mol. wt. were present in HPLC-purified fractions of normal meninges; neither the 
beta-protein sequence nor any other interpretable sequence was detected in such 
fractions. Two antisera raised against the purified AD meningovascular amyloid 
protein identified the 4.2 kDa band on Western blots of AD preparations; no 
protein band in this region was labeled in control preparations. The 4.2 kDa 
band in AD meningeal preparations was also lableled by an antiserum to synthetic 
beta-peptide but not by an antiserum to the carboxyl terminus of the 
beta-protein precursor. Both the AD meningovascular amyloid antisera selectively 
labeled amyloid in cortical and meningeal vessels and plaque cores; tangles, 
plaque neurites, and cells of normal CNS and numerous non-neural tissues were 
unstained. The antisera also labeled the occasional deposits of vascular amyloid 
and less frequent plaque core amyloid found in some aged individuals without AD. 
We conclude that (1) the meningovascular amyloid beta-protein of AD, whose 
sequence has been confirmed and extended to residue 40, was not 
immunocytochemically detectable in neurofibrillary tangles; (2) beta-protein 
could not be detected in meningeal preparations from aged controls who lack 
light microscopically visible meningovascular amyloid; and (3) the vascular and 
plaque core amyloid present in aged normals is antigenically cross-reactive with 
AD meningovascular amyloid.

DOI: 10.1016/0006-8993(88)90673-7
PMID: 3214703 [Indexed for MEDLINE]