1. Clin Exp Reprod Med. 2020 Mar;47(1):68-76. doi: 10.5653/cerm.2019.03188. Epub 
2020 Mar 1.

The effect of vitamin C on the gene expression profile of sperm protamines in 
the male partners of couples with recurrent pregnancy loss: A randomized 
clinical trial.

Hamidian S(1), Talebi AR(2)(3), Fesahat F(4), Bayat M(1), Mirjalili AM(1), 
Ashrafzadeh HR(3), Rajabi M(5), Montazeri F(3), Babaei S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine, Arak University of Medical 
Sciences, Arak, Iran.
(2)Department of Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine, Shahid Sadoughi University of 
Medical Sciences, Yazd, Iran.
(3)Yazd Reproductive Sciences Institute, Shahid Sadoughi University of Medical 
Sciences, Yazd, Iran.
(4)Reproductive Immunology Research Center, Shahid Sadoughi University of 
Medical Sciences, Yazd, Iran.
(5)Genetics Department of Biology, Yazd Science and Arts University, Yazd, Iran.

OBJECTIVE: Since sperm abnormalities are known to be a major reason for 
recurrent pregnancy loss (RPL), any defects in DNA structure and chromatin 
condensation can place embryos at risk in the early stage of development and 
implantation. As antioxidants such as vitamin C may play a protective role 
against the destruction of protamine genes in sperm chromatin, this study was 
conducted to evaluate the effects of vitamin C on chromatin and the expression 
of protamine genes in the male partners of couples with RPL.
METHODS: Twenty male partners of couples with RPL were selected as the 
intervention group and received vitamin C supplementation (250 mg daily for 3 
months). Healthy fertile men (n=20) were included as controls. Sperm chromatin, 
DNA integrity, and the expression levels of protamine genes were evaluated 
before and after treatment.
RESULTS: Significant differences were found in sperm morphology, protamine 
deficiency, and apoptosis between the two groups and before and after vitamin C 
administration. A significant change was found in mRNA levels of PRM1, PRM2, and 
the PRM1/PRM2 ratio after treatment.
CONCLUSION: Daily oral administration of vitamin C may improve human sperm 
parameters and DNA integrity by increasing protamine gene expression levels in 
the male partners of couples with RPL. The beneficial effects of vitamin C 
supplementation as an antioxidant for the male partners of couples with RPL 
could lead to improved pregnancy outcomes in these cases.

DOI: 10.5653/cerm.2019.03188
PMCID: PMC7127905
PMID: 32146776

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest No potential conflict of 
interest relevant to this article was reported.