1. Pharmaceuticals (Basel). 2011 Aug 10;4(8):1101-1136. doi: 10.3390/ph4081101.

The Endocannabinoid System as Pharmacological Target Derived from Its CNS Role 
in Energy Homeostasis and Reward. Applications in Eating Disorders and 
Addiction.

Viveros MP(1), Bermúdez-Silva FJ(2)(3), Lopez-Rodriguez AB(1), Wagner EJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Fisiología (Fisiología Animal II), Facultad de Biología, 
Universidad Complutense, Madrid 28040, Spain.
(2)Laboratorio de Medicina Regenerativa, Fundación IMABIS, Hospital Carlos Haya, 
Málaga 29010, Spain.
(3)INSERM U862, Avenir group "Energy Balance and Obesity", Neurocentre Magendie, 
Bordeaux 33077, France.
(4)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, College of Osteopathic Medicine of the 
Pacific, Western University of Health Sciences, Pomona, CA 91766, USA.

The endocannabinoid system (ECS) has been implicated in many physiological 
functions, including the regulation of appetite, food intake and energy balance, 
a crucial involvement in brain reward systems and a role in psychophysiological 
homeostasis (anxiety and stress responses). We first introduce this important 
regulatory system and chronicle what is known concerning the signal transduction 
pathways activated upon the binding of endogenous cannabinoid ligands to the 
Gi/0-coupled CB1 cannabinoid receptor, as well as its interactions with other 
hormones and neuromodulators which can modify endocannabinoid signaling in the 
brain. Anorexia nervosa (AN) and bulimia nervosa (BN) are severe and disabling 
psychiatric disorders, characterized by profound eating and weight alterations 
and body image disturbances. Since endocannabinoids modulate eating behavior, it 
is plausible that endocannabinoid genes may contribute to the biological 
vulnerability to these diseases. We present and discuss data suggesting an 
impaired endocannabinoid signaling in these eating disorders, including 
association of endocannabinoid components gene polymorphisms and altered 
CB1-receptor expression in AN and BN. Then we discuss recent findings that may 
provide new avenues for the identification of therapeutic strategies based on 
the endocannabinod system. In relation with its implications as a reward-related 
system, the endocannabinoid system is not only a target for cannabis but it also 
shows interactions with other drugs of abuse. On the other hand, there may be 
also a possibility to point to the ECS as a potential target for treatment of 
drug-abuse and addiction. Within this framework we will focus on enzymatic 
machinery involved in endocannabinoid inactivation (notably fatty acid amide 
hydrolase or FAAH) as a particularly interesting potential target. Since a 
deregulated endocannabinoid system may be also related to depression, anxiety 
and pain symptomatology accompanying drug-withdrawal states, this is an area of 
relevance to also explore adjuvant treatments for improving these adverse 
emotional reactions.

DOI: 10.3390/ph4081101
PMCID: PMC4058662
PMID: 32143540