1. Front Immunol. 2020 Feb 21;11:244. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.00244. eCollection 
2020.

Pf Bacteriophage and Their Impact on Pseudomonas Virulence, Mammalian Immunity, 
and Chronic Infections.

Secor PR(1)(2)(3), Burgener EB(4)(5), Kinnersley M(1), Jennings LK(1)(2), 
Roman-Cruz V(1)(2), Popescu M(5), Van Belleghem JD(5), Haddock N(5), Copeland 
C(6), Michaels LA(1), de Vries CR(5), Chen Q(5), Pourtois J(5), Wheeler 
TJ(3)(6), Milla CE(4), Bollyky PL(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, University of Montana, Missoula, MT, United 
States.
(2)Center for Translational Medicine, University of Montana, Missoula, MT, 
United States.
(3)Center for Biomolecular Structure and Dynamics, University of Montana, 
Missoula, MT, United States.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Center for Excellence in Pulmonary Biology, 
Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United States.
(5)Division of Infectious Diseases and Geographic Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United States.
(6)Department of Computer Science, University of Montana, Missoula, MT, United 
States.

Pf bacteriophage are temperate phages that infect the bacterium Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa, a major cause of chronic lung infections in cystic fibrosis (CF) and 
other settings. Pf and other temperate phages have evolved complex, mutualistic 
relationships with their bacterial hosts that impact both bacterial phenotypes 
and chronic infection. We and others have reported that Pf phages are a 
virulence factor that promote the pathogenesis of P. aeruginosa infections in 
animal models and are associated with worse skin and lung infections in humans. 
Here we review the biology of Pf phage and what is known about its contributions 
to pathogenesis and clinical disease. First, we review the structure, genetics, 
and epidemiology of Pf phage. Next, we address the diverse and surprising ways 
that Pf phages contribute to P. aeruginosa phenotypes including effects on 
biofilm formation, antibiotic resistance, and motility. Then, we cover data 
indicating that Pf phages suppress mammalian immunity at sites of bacterial 
infection. Finally, we discuss recent literature implicating Pf in chronic P. 
aeruginosa infections in CF and other settings. Together, these reports suggest 
that Pf bacteriophage have direct effects on P. aeruginosa infections and that 
temperate phages are an exciting frontier in microbiology, immunology, and human 
health.

Copyright © 2020 Secor, Burgener, Kinnersley, Jennings, Roman-Cruz, Popescu, Van 
Belleghem, Haddock, Copeland, Michaels, de Vries, Chen, Pourtois, Wheeler, Milla 
and Bollyky.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.00244
PMCID: PMC7047154
PMID: 32153575 [Indexed for MEDLINE]