1. Transl Psychiatry. 2020 Mar 9;10(1):88. doi: 10.1038/s41398-020-0769-y.

Shared genetic etiology underlying Alzheimer's disease and major depressive 
disorder.

Lutz MW(1), Sprague D(1)(2), Barrera J(1)(2), Chiba-Falek O(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Translational Brain Sciences, Department of Neurology, Duke 
University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA.
(2)Center for Genomic and Computational Biology, Duke University Medical Center, 
Durham, NC, USA.
(3)Division of Translational Brain Sciences, Department of Neurology, Duke 
University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA. o.chibafalek@duke.edu.
(4)Center for Genomic and Computational Biology, Duke University Medical Center, 
Durham, NC, USA. o.chibafalek@duke.edu.

Patients with late-onset Alzheimer's disease (LOAD) frequently manifest comorbid 
neuropsychiatric symptoms with depression and anxiety being most frequent, and 
individuals with major depressive disorder (MDD) have an increased prevalence of 
LOAD. This suggests shared etiologies and intersecting pathways between LOAD and 
MDD. We performed pleiotropy analyses using LOAD and MDD GWAS data sets from the 
International Genomics of Alzheimer's Project (IGAP) and the Psychiatric 
Genomics Consortium (PGC), respectively. We found a moderate enrichment for SNPs 
associated with LOAD across increasingly stringent levels of significance with 
the MDD GWAS association (LOAD|MDD), of maximum four and eightfolds, including 
and excluding the APOE-region, respectively. Association analysis excluding the 
APOE-region identified numerous SNPs corresponding to 40 genes, 9 of which are 
known LOAD-risk loci primarily in chromosome 11 regions that contain the SPI1 
gene and MS4A genes cluster, and others were novel pleiotropic risk-loci for 
LOAD conditional with MDD. The most significant associated SNPs on chromosome 11 
overlapped with eQTLs found in whole-blood and monocytes, suggesting functional 
roles in gene regulation. The reverse conditional association analysis 
(MDD|LOAD) showed a moderate level, ~sevenfold, of polygenic overlap, however, 
no SNP showed significant association. Pathway analyses replicated previously 
reported LOAD biological pathways related to immune response and regulation of 
endocytosis. In conclusion, we provide insights into the overlapping genetic 
signatures underpinning the common phenotypic manifestations and 
inter-relationship between LOAD and MDD. This knowledge is crucial to the 
development of actionable targets for novel therapies to treat depression 
preceding dementia, in an effort to delay or ultimately prevent the onset of 
LOAD.

DOI: 10.1038/s41398-020-0769-y
PMCID: PMC7062839
PMID: 32152295 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.