1. PLoS One. 2020 Mar 13;15(3):e0229953. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0229953. 
eCollection 2020.

Analysis of gene variants in the GASH/Sal model of epilepsy.

Díaz-Casado E(1)(2), Gómez-Nieto R(1)(2)(3), de Pereda JM(4), Muñoz LJ(5), 
Jara-Acevedo M(6), López DE(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neurosciences of Castilla y León, University of Salamanca, 
Salamanca, Spain.
(2)Salamanca Institute for Biomedical Research, Salamanca, Spain.
(3)Department of Cell Biology and Pathology, School Medicine, University of 
Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain.
(4)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology of Cancer, CSIC.-University of 
Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain.
(5)Animal facilities, University of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain.
(6)Sequencing Service-Nucleus, USAL and IBSAL, Salamanca, Spain.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2020 Apr 3;15(4):e0231603. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0231603.

Epilepsy is a complex neurological disorder characterized by sudden and 
recurrent seizures, which are caused by various factors, including genetic 
abnormalities. Several animal models of epilepsy mimic the different symptoms of 
this disorder. In particular, the genetic audiogenic seizure hamster from 
Salamanca (GASH/Sal) animals exhibit sound-induced seizures similar to the 
generalized tonic seizures observed in epileptic patients. However, the genetic 
alterations underlying the audiogenic seizure susceptibility of the GASH/Sal 
model remain unknown. In addition, gene variations in the GASH/Sal might have a 
close resemblance with those described in humans with epilepsy, which is a 
prerequisite for any new preclinical studies that target genetic abnormalities. 
Here, we performed whole exome sequencing (WES) in GASH/Sal animals and their 
corresponding controls to identify and characterize the mutational landscape of 
the GASH/Sal strain. After filtering the results, moderate- and high-impact 
variants were validated by Sanger sequencing, assessing the possible impact of 
the mutations by "in silico" reconstruction of the encoded proteins and 
analyzing their corresponding biological pathways. Lastly, we quantified gene 
expression levels by RT-qPCR. In the GASH/Sal model, WES showed the presence of 
342 variations, in which 21 were classified as high-impact mutations. After a 
full bioinformatics analysis to highlight the high quality and reliable 
variants, the presence of 3 high-impact and 15 moderate-impact variants were 
identified. Gene expression analysis of the high-impact variants of Asb14 
(ankyrin repeat and SOCS Box Containing 14), Msh3 (MutS Homolog 3) and Arhgef38 
(Rho Guanine Nucleotide Exchange Factor 38) genes showed a higher expression in 
the GASH/Sal than in control hamsters. In silico analysis of the functional 
consequences indicated that those mutations in the three encoded proteins would 
have severe functional alterations. By functional analysis of the variants, we 
detected 44 significantly enriched pathways, including the glutamatergic synapse 
pathway. The data show three high-impact mutations with a major impact on the 
function of the proteins encoded by these genes, although no mutation in these 
three genes has been associated with some type of epilepsy until now. 
Furthermore, GASH/Sal animals also showed gene variants associated with 
different types of epilepsy that has been extensively documented, as well as 
mutations in other genes that encode proteins with functions related to neuronal 
excitability, which could be implied in the phenotype of the GASH/Sal. Our 
findings provide valuable genetic and biological pathway data associated to the 
genetic burden of the audiogenic seizure susceptibility and reinforce the need 
to validate the role of each key mutation in the phenotype of the GASH/Sal 
model.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0229953
PMCID: PMC7069730
PMID: 32168507 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.