1. Sci Transl Med. 2020 Mar 11;12(534):eaaz4069. doi:
10.1126/scitranslmed.aaz4069.

Neurophysiological signatures in Alzheimer's disease are distinctly associated 
with TAU, amyloid-β accumulation, and cognitive decline.

Ranasinghe KG(1), Cha J(2), Iaccarino L(2), Hinkley LB(3), Beagle AJ(2), Pham 
J(2), Jagust WJ(4), Miller BL(2), Rankin KP(2), Rabinovici GD(2)(3), Vossel 
KA(2)(5), Nagarajan SS(3).

Author information:
(1)Memory and Aging Center, Department of Neurology, University of California, 
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA. kamalini.ranasinghe@ucsf.edu.
(2)Memory and Aging Center, Department of Neurology, University of California, 
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA.
(3)Department Radiology and Biomedical Imaging, University of California, San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.
(4)Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, UC Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.
(5)N. Bud Grossman Center for Memory Research and Care, Institute for 
Translational Neuroscience, and Department of Neurology, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

Neural synchrony is intricately balanced in the normal resting brain but becomes 
altered in Alzheimer's disease (AD). To determine the neurophysiological 
manifestations associated with molecular biomarkers of AD neuropathology, in 
patients with AD, we used magnetoencephalographic imaging (MEGI) and positron 
emission tomography with amyloid-beta (Aβ) and TAU tracers. We found that alpha 
oscillations (8 to 12 Hz) were hyposynchronous in occipital and posterior 
temporoparietal cortices, whereas delta-theta oscillations (2 to 8 Hz) were 
hypersynchronous in frontal and anterior temporoparietal cortices, in patients 
with AD compared to age-matched controls. Regional patterns of alpha 
hyposynchrony were unique in each neurobehavioral phenotype of AD, whereas the 
regional patterns of delta-theta hypersynchrony were similar across the 
phenotypes. Alpha hyposynchrony strongly colocalized with TAU deposition and was 
modulated by the degree of TAU tracer uptake. In contrast, delta-theta 
hypersynchrony colocalized with both TAU and Aβ depositions and was modulated by 
both TAU and Aβ tracer uptake. Furthermore, alpha hyposynchrony but not 
delta-theta hypersynchrony was correlated with the degree of global cognitive 
dysfunction in patients with AD. The current study demonstrates 
frequency-specific neurophysiological signatures of AD pathophysiology and 
suggests that neurophysiological measures from MEGI are sensitive indices of 
network disruptions mediated by TAU and Aβ and associated cognitive decline. 
These findings facilitate the pursuit of novel therapeutic approaches toward 
normalizing network synchrony in AD.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American 
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government 
Works.

DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aaz4069
PMCID: PMC7138514
PMID: 32161102 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: K.G.R., J.C., L.I., L.B.H., 
A.J.B., J.P., K.P.R., K.A.V., and S.S.N. declare that they have no competing 
interests relevant to this work. B.L.M. serves as medical director for the John 
Douglas French Foundation, scientific director for the Tau Consortium, 
director/medical advisory board of the Larry L. Hillblom Foundation, and 
scientific advisory board member for the National Institute for Health Research 
Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre. G.D.R. receives research support from Avid 
Radiopharmaceuticals, Eli Lilly, GE Healthcare, and Life Molecular Imaging; has 
served on scientific advisory boards for Axon Neurosciences, Eisai, Genentech, 
and Merck; and has received honoraria for speaking engagements from GE 
Healthcare. W.J.J. serves as a consultant to Genentech and Novartis.