1. Am J Hypertens. 2020 Jul 18;33(7):670-675. doi: 10.1093/ajh/hpaa037.

Pediatric Liddle Syndrome Caused by a Novel SCNN1G Variant in a Chinese Family 
and Characterized by Early-Onset Hypertension.

Fan P(1), Pan XC(2), Zhang D(3), Yang KQ(1), Zhang Y(1), Tian T(1), Luo F(1), Ma 
WJ(1), Liu YX(3), Wang LP(1), Zhang HM(1), Song L(1), Cai J(1), Zhou XL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Fuwai Hospital, National Center for Cardiovascular 
Diseases, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, 
Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Graduate School, Peking Union Medical College and Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Emergency and Critical Care, Fuwai Hospital, National Center 
for Cardiovascular Diseases, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking 
Union Medical College, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Liddle syndrome (LS), an autosomal dominant disorder, is a common 
monogenic hypertension in pediatrics. In this study, we reported a novel SCNN1G 
variant in a Chinese family with pediatric LS, and conduct a systematic review 
of epithelial sodium channel (ENaC)-gene-positive LS cases to conclude the 
clinical genetic features of LS in childhood.
METHODS: Next-generation sequencing and in silico analysis were performed in the 
proband to discover candidate variants. Sanger sequencing was used to identify 
the predicted likely pathogenic variant. LS patients in this family were treated 
with amiloride. The Medline database was searched to summarize clinical features 
of pediatric LS cases whose age at genetic diagnosis was not more than 18 years.
RESULTS: Genetic analysis identified a novel SCNN1G missense variant (c.1874C>T, 
p.Pro625Leu) in the proband with LS in childhood. In silico analysis revealed 
this heterozygous variant was highly conserved and deleterious. A total of 38 
publications described pediatric LS associated with 25 pathogenic variants in 
SCNN1B and SCNN1G in 54 children. Despite the phenotypic heterogeneity, 
early-onset hypertension is the most common feature. All LS patients in this 
family or the reviewed cases showed significantly improvements in hypertension 
and hypokalemia after treatment with ENaC inhibitors.
CONCLUSIONS: This study identified a novel SCNN1G missense variant in a patient 
with pediatric LS, expanding the genetic spectrum of SCNN1G and demonstrating 
the PY motif of γ-ENaC as a potential mutant region. Early identification and 
specific management of LS in children and adolescents are important to prevent 
the development of hypertensive end-organ disease.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of American 
Journal of Hypertension, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1093/ajh/hpaa037
PMCID: PMC7368168
PMID: 32161960 [Indexed for MEDLINE]