1. Am J Case Rep. 2020 Mar 18;21:e920685. doi: 10.12659/AJCR.920685.

Factor X Deficiency Management for Elective Cesarean Delivery in a Pregnant 
Patient.

Krkovic M(1), Koosova Gajic A(1), Tarčuković J(1)(2), Sotosek V(1)(2), Stimac 
T(3)(4), Balen S(5)(6), Dangubic B(1), Grubjesic I(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Intensive Care and Pain Medicine, Clinical 
Hospital Center Rijeka, Rijeka, Croatia.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology, Resuscitation, Emergency and Intensive Care 
Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Rijeka, Rijeka, Croatia.
(3)Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, Clinical Hospital Center Rijeka, 
Rijeka, Croatia.
(4)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Rijeka, Rijeka, Croatia.
(5)Clinical Institute for Transfusion Medicine, Clinical Hospital Center Rijeka, 
Rijeka, Croatia.
(6)Department of Clinical Laboratory Diagnostics, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Rijeka, Rijeka, Croatia.

BACKGROUND Congenital factor X deficiency is a rare inherited coagulopathy. 
Pregnancies in women with this disorder are often associated with adverse 
outcomes, including miscarriage, premature labor, and hemorrhage during 
pregnancy and in the peripartum period. The literature on this disorder is 
sparse and shows a limited number of successful pregnancies in women with factor 
X deficiency. CASE REPORT In this report, we present the case of a successful 
pregnancy and term delivery by elective cesarean section in a 39-year-old 
primigravida with congenital factor X deficiency. Medical management followed 
the recommendations of an interdisciplinary team comprising specialists in 
obstetrics, anesthesia, transfusion medicine, hematology, and neonatology. This 
high-risk pregnancy was successfully brought to term, and a healthy male neonate 
was delivered by elective cesarean section at 39 weeks' gestation. The patient's 
factor X deficiency (0.19 kIU/L) was treated using 4 units of 
solvent-detergent-treated fresh frozen plasma (SD-FFP) 1 h before the cesarean 
section, leading to hemostatic levels of factor X and an uneventful 
intraoperative course. Postoperatively, the patient's factor X levels were 
controlled daily and corrected using SD-FFP as needed, with no clinically 
significant blood loss. CONCLUSIONS SD-FFP can be used to manage congenital 
factor X deficiency in the peripartum period and maintain perioperative blood 
loss within normal limits.

DOI: 10.12659/AJCR.920685
PMCID: PMC7117852
PMID: 32184380 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: None declared