1. J Exp Bot. 2020 Jun 22;71(12):3638-3652. doi: 10.1093/jxb/eraa142.

Characterization of a sweet basil acyltransferase involved in eugenol 
biosynthesis.

Dhar N(1), Sarangapani S(1), Reddy VA(1), Kumar N(1), Panicker D(1)(2), Jin 
J(1)(3), Chua NH(1)(4), Sarojam R(1).

Author information:
(1)Temasek Life Sciences Laboratory, 1 Research Link, National University of 
Singapore, Singapore.
(2)Singapore Centre on Environmental Life Sciences Engineering, Nanyang 
Technological University, Singapore.
(3)China Tobacco Gene Research Centre, Zhengzhou Tobacco Research Institute of 
CNTC, Zhengzhou, China.
(4)Laboratory of Plant Molecular Biology, The Rockefeller University, New York, 
NY, USA.

Sweet basil (Ocimum basilicum) plants produce its characteristic 
phenylpropene-rich essential oil in specialized structures known as peltate 
glandular trichomes (PGTs). Eugenol and chavicol are the major phenylpropenes 
produced by sweet basil varieties whose synthetic pathways are not fully 
elucidated. Eugenol is derived from coniferyl acetate by a reaction catalysed by 
eugenol synthase. An acyltransferase is proposed to convert coniferyl alcohol to 
coniferyl acetate which is the first committed step towards eugenol synthesis. 
Here, we perform a comparative next-generation transcriptome sequencing of 
different tissues of sweet basil, namely PGT, leaf, leaf stripped of PGTs 
(leaf-PGT), and roots, to identify differentially expressed transcripts specific 
to PGT. From these data, we identified a PGT-enriched BAHD acyltransferase gene 
ObCAAT1 and functionally characterized it. In vitro coupled reaction of ObCAAT1 
with eugenol synthase in the presence of coniferyl alcohol resulted in eugenol 
production. Analysis of ObCAAT1-RNAi transgenic lines showed decreased levels of 
eugenol and accumulation of coniferyl alcohol and its derivatives. Coniferyl 
alcohol acts as a common substrate for phenylpropene and lignin biosynthesis. No 
differences were found in total lignin content of PGTs and leaves of transgenic 
lines, indicating that phenylpropene biosynthesis is not coupled to 
lignification in sweet basil.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Experimental Biology.

DOI: 10.1093/jxb/eraa142
PMCID: PMC7307857
PMID: 32198522 [Indexed for MEDLINE]