1. Cancers (Basel). 2020 Mar 18;12(3):716. doi: 10.3390/cancers12030716.

An Integrated Meta-Analysis of Secretome and Proteome Identify Potential 
Biomarkers of Pancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinoma.

de Oliveira G(1), Freire PP(1), Cury SS(1), de Moraes D(1), Oliveira JS(1), 
Dal-Pai-Silva M(1), Reis PP(2)(3), Carvalho RF(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Structural and Functional Biology, Institute of Biosciences, 
São Paulo State University (UNESP), Botucatu 18618-689, São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Department of Surgery and Orthopedics, Faculty of Medicine, São Paulo State 
University (UNESP), Botucatu 18618-687, São Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Experimental Research Unity, Faculty of Medicine, São Paulo State University, 
UNESP, Botucatu 18618-970, São Paulo, Brazil.

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is extremely aggressive, has an 
unfavorable prognosis, and there are no biomarkers for early detection of the 
disease or identification of individuals at high risk for morbidity or 
mortality. The cellular and molecular complexity of PDAC leads to inconsistences 
in clinical validations of many proteins that have been evaluated as prognostic 
biomarkers of the disease. The tumor secretome, a potential source of biomarkers 
in PDAC, plays a crucial role in cell proliferation and metastasis, as well as 
in resistance to treatments, which together contribute to a worse clinical 
outcome. The massive amount of proteomic data from pancreatic cancer that has 
been generated from previous studies can be integrated and explored to uncover 
secreted proteins relevant to the diagnosis and prognosis of the disease. The 
present study aimed to perform an integrated meta-analysis of PDAC proteome and 
secretome public data to identify potential biomarkers of the disease. Our 
meta-analysis combined mass spectrometry data obtained from two systematic 
reviews of the pancreatic cancer literature, which independently selected 20 
studies of the secretome and 35 of the proteome. Next, we predicted the secreted 
proteins using seven in silico tools or databases, which identified 39 secreted 
proteins shared between the secretome and proteome data. Notably, the expression 
of 31 genes of these secretome-related proteins was upregulated in PDAC samples 
from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) when compared to control samples from TCGA 
and The Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx). The prognostic value of these 39 
secreted proteins in predicting survival outcome was confirmed using gene 
expression data from four PDAC datasets (validation set). The gene expression of 
these secreted proteins was able to distinguish high- and low-survival patients 
in nine additional tumor types from TCGA, demonstrating that deregulation of 
these secreted proteins may also contribute to the prognosis in multiple cancers 
types. Finally, we compared the prognostic value of the identified secreted 
proteins in PDAC biomarkers studies from the literature. This analysis revealed 
that our gene signature performed equally well or better than the signatures 
from these previous studies. In conclusion, our integrated meta-analysis of PDAC 
proteome and secretome identified 39 secreted proteins as potential biomarkers, 
and the tumor gene expression profile of these proteins in patients with PDAC is 
associated with worse overall survival.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers12030716
PMCID: PMC7140071
PMID: 32197468

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.