1. DNA Repair (Amst). 2020 May;89:102837. doi: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2020.102837. Epub
 2020 Mar 7.

Excision repair of topoisomerase DNA-protein crosslinks (TOP-DPC).

Sun Y(1), Saha S(1), Wang W(1), Saha LK(1), Huang SN(1), Pommier Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Developmental Therapeutics Branch and Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacology, 
Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, MD, United States.
(2)Developmental Therapeutics Branch and Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacology, 
Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, MD, United States. Electronic address: pommier@nih.gov.

Topoisomerases are essential enzymes solving DNA topological problems such as 
supercoils, knots and catenanes that arise from replication, transcription, 
chromatin remodeling and other nucleic acid metabolic processes. They are also 
the targets of widely used anticancer drugs (e.g. topotecan, irinotecan, 
enhertu, etoposide, doxorubicin, mitoxantrone) and fluoroquinolone antibiotics 
(e.g. ciprofloxacin and levofloxacin). Topoisomerases manipulate DNA topology by 
cleaving one DNA strand (TOP1 and TOP3 enzymes) or both in concert (TOP2 
enzymes) through the formation of transient enzyme-DNA cleavage complexes 
(TOPcc) with phosphotyrosyl linkages between DNA ends and the catalytic tyrosyl 
residue of the enzymes. Failure in the self-resealing of TOPcc results in 
persistent TOPcc (which we refer it to as topoisomerase DNA-protein crosslinks 
(TOP-DPC)) that threaten genome integrity and lead to cancers and 
neurodegenerative diseases. The cell prevents the accumulation of 
topoisomerase-mediated DNA damage by excising TOP-DPC and ligating the 
associated breaks using multiple pathways conserved in eukaryotes. Tyrosyl-DNA 
phosphodiesterases (TDP1 and TDP2) cleave the tyrosyl-DNA bonds whereas 
structure-specific endonucleases such as Mre11 and XPF (Rad1) incise the DNA 
phosphodiester backbone to remove the TOP-DPC along with the adjacent DNA 
segment. The proteasome and metalloproteases of the WSS1/Spartan family typify 
proteolytic repair pathways that debulk TOP-DPC to make the peptide-DNA bonds 
accessible to the TDPs and endonucleases. The purpose of this review is to 
summarize our current understanding of how the cell excises TOP-DPC and why, 
when and where the cell recruits one specific mechanism for repairing 
topoisomerase-mediated DNA damage, acquiring resistance to therapeutic 
topoisomerase inhibitors and avoiding genomic instability, cancers and 
neurodegenerative diseases.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2020.102837
PMCID: PMC7188568
PMID: 32200233 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare no conflict of interest.