1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2020 Mar 26;14(3):e0008125. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pntd.0008125. eCollection 2020 Mar.

Glutamine supplementation improves the efficacy of miltefosine treatment for 
visceral leishmaniasis.

Ferreira C(1)(2), Mesquita I(1)(2), Barbosa AM(1)(2), Osório NS(1)(2), Torrado 
E(1)(2), Beauparlant CJ(3)(4), Droit A(3)(4), Cunha C(1)(2), Carvalho A(1)(2), 
Saha B(5)(6), Estaquier J(4)(7), Silvestre R(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Life and Health Sciences Research Institute (ICVS), School of Medicine, 
University of Minho, Braga, Portugal.
(2)ICVS/3B's-PT Government Associate Laboratory, Braga/Guimarães, Portugal.
(3)Département de Médecine Moléculaire-Université Laval, Faculté de médecine, 
Québec, Canada.
(4)Centre de Recherche du CHU de Québec-Université Laval, Québec, Canada.
(5)National Centre for Cell Science, Pune, India.
(6)Trident Academy of Creative Technology, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India.
(7)INSERM U1124, Université de Paris, Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: The disturbance of host metabolic pathways by Leishmania parasites 
has crucial consequences for the activation status of immune cells and the 
outcome of infection. Glutamine has been described as an immunomodulatory amino 
acid, yet its role during Leishmania infection is still unknown.
METHODS: We performed transcriptomics in uninfected and L. donovani-infected 
macrophages 6 hours post-infection. Glutamine quantification by HPLC was 
assessed in the supernatant of macrophages throughout the infection course. For 
experimental L. donovani infections, mice were infected with 1.0 x 108 
stationary L. donovani promastigotes. Glutaminase (GLS) chemical inhibition was 
performed using BPTES and glutamine was administered throughout infection. For 
combined therapy experiment, a daily administration of miltefosine and glutamine 
was performed by oral gavage. Parasite burden was determined using a 
Taqman-based assay. Immune cell phenotyping and cytotoxicity were performed in 
splenic cells using flow cytometry.
FINDINGS: We show that glutamine is essential for the control of L. donovani 
infection. Transcriptomic analysis of L. donovani-infected macrophages 
demonstrated an upregulation of genes involved in glutamine metabolism. 
Pharmacological inhibition of glutaminolysis significantly increased the 
susceptibility to infection, accompanied by an increased recruitment of 
anti-inflammatory myeloid cells and impaired T cell responses. Remarkably, the 
supplementation of glutamine to mice infected with L. donovani during 
miltefosine treatment potentiates parasite clearance through the development of 
a more effective anti-Leishmania adaptive immune response.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data indicates that dietary glutamine supplementation may act 
as a promising adjuvant for the treatment of visceral leishmaniasis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0008125
PMCID: PMC7138311
PMID: 32214337 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.