1. mSphere. 2020 Mar 25;5(2):e00162-20. doi: 10.1128/mSphere.00162-20.

HIV Env-Specific IgG Antibodies Induced by Vaccination of Neonatal Rhesus 
Macaques Persist and Can Be Augmented by a Late Booster Immunization in Infancy.

Curtis AD 2nd(1), Dennis M(2), Eudailey J(2), Walter KL(3), Cronin K(2), Alam 
SM(2), Choudhary N(1), Tuck RH(1), Hudgens M(4), Kozlowski PA(3), Pollara 
J(2)(5), Ferrari G(2)(5)(6), Van Rompay KKA(7), Permar S(2)(6), De Paris K(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Center for AIDS Research, and 
Children's Research Institute, School of Medicine, University of North Carolina 
at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.
(2)Duke Human Vaccine Institute, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North 
Carolina, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Parasitology, Louisiana State 
University Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA.
(4)Department of Biostatistics, Gillings School of Public Health, University of 
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.
(5)Department of Surgery, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, North 
Carolina, USA.
(6)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University Medical 
Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA.
(7)California National Primate Research Center, University of California at 
Davis, Davis, California, USA.
(8)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Center for AIDS Research, and 
Children's Research Institute, School of Medicine, University of North Carolina 
at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA abelk@med.unc.edu.

The HIV epidemics in infants and adolescent women are linked. Young women of 
childbearing age are at high risk for HIV infection and, due to poor HIV testing 
rates and low adherence to antiretroviral therapy, are at high risk for 
mother-to-infant transmission. We hypothesize that HIV vaccine regimens 
initiated in early life would provide the necessary time frame to induce mature 
and highly functional Env-specific antibody responses that could potentially 
also protect against HIV acquisition later in life. The present study was 
designed to test two vaccine regimens, a clade C HIV Env protein vaccine (Env 
only) alone or combined with a modified vaccinia Ankara (MVA) vector expressing 
HIV Env (MVA/Env) for the induction and persistence of Env-specific antibody 
responses in an infant nonhuman primate model. Vaccination was initiated within 
the first week of life, with booster immunizations at weeks 6, 12, and 32. We 
demonstrate that both vaccine strategies were able to elicit durable 
Env-specific antibody responses that were enhanced by a late boost in infancy. 
Furthermore, we confirmed earlier data that intramuscular administration of the 
Env protein with the Toll-like receptor 7/8 (TLR7/8)-based adjuvant 3M-052 in 
stable emulsion (3M-052-SE) induced higher Env-specific antibody responses than 
vaccination with Env adjuvanted in Span85-Tween 80-squalene (STS) tested in a 
previous study. These results support the concept of early vaccination as a 
means to induce durable immune responses that may prevent HIV infection in 
adolescence at the onset of sexual debut.IMPORTANCE The majority of new HIV-1 
infections occur in young adults, with adolescent women being 3 times more 
likely to acquire HIV than young men. Implementation of HIV prevention 
strategies has been less successful in this age group; thus, a vaccine given 
prior to adolescence remains a high priority. We propose that instead of 
starting HIV vaccination during adolescence, an HIV vaccine regimen initiated in 
early infancy, aligned with the well-accepted pediatric vaccine schedule and 
followed with booster immunizations, will provide an alternative means to reduce 
HIV acquisition in adolescence. Importantly, the long window of time between the 
first infant vaccine dose and the adolescence vaccine dose will allow for the 
maturation of highly functional HIV Env-specific antibody responses. Our study 
provides evidence that early life vaccination induces durable Env-specific 
plasma IgG responses that can be boosted to further improve the quality of the 
antibody response.

Copyright © 2020 Curtis et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mSphere.00162-20
PMCID: PMC7096624
PMID: 32213623 [Indexed for MEDLINE]