1. Ulster Med J. 2020 Jan;89(1):14-16. Epub 2020 Feb 18.

Natural history of a fibrous cephalic plaque and sustained eight decade 
follow-up in an 80 year old with tuberous sclerosis complex type 2.

Kirk CW(1), Donnelly DE(1)(2), Hardy R(1), Shepherd CW(1), Morrison PJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetic Medicine, Belfast Health and Social Care Trust, Belfast 
BT9 7AB, UK.
(2)Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, Queens University Belfast, BT9 
7AE, UK.

INTRODUCTION: Fibrous cephalic plaques (FCP) are a characteristic manifestation 
of tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) and occur in one third of cases. Their 
natural history and long term course is unknown, as is the outcome of long term 
follow-up of TSC cases in old age.
PHENOTYPE AND METHODS: We describe an 80 year old with TSC due to a c.2784dupC 
TSC2 mutation, who was diagnosed in infancy with an FCP and was regularly 
followed up at the TSC clinic over 8 decades with regular epilepsy treatment and 
renal monitoring.
RESULTS: Regular clinical photography and clinical records document the plaque 
at different ages. The FCP naturally resolved at 74 years. Facial angiofibromas 
also faded with time in the last decade. His epilepsy and renal abnormalities 
remained under control with careful surveillance and monitoring.
DISCUSSION: Natural aging in the eighth decade causes progressive laxity of 
collagen and leads to natural resolution of FCPs. This novel finding with a 
unique 80 year follow up yields valuable insights into the aging changes within 
FCPs and facial angiofibromas as the pathways linking facial angiofibromas and 
FCP's through the TGF-β1 pathway are now being elucidated.
CONCLUSION: We present a clinical odyssey showing the natural progression and 
history of FCPs in TSC and comment on the mechanistic pathways allowing 
potential interventions in this disfiguring condition. TSC cases can be 
successfully managed and complications - particularly in the brain and kidney, 
can be avoided over an entire lifetime. This is encouraging for long term 
prospects for patients with TSC.

Copyright © 2020 Ulster Medical Society.

PMCID: PMC7027183
PMID: 32218621 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Provenance: externally peer-reviewed