1. J Immunother Cancer. 2020 Mar;8(1):e000485. doi: 10.1136/jitc-2019-000485.

PRKDC: new biomarker and drug target for checkpoint blockade immunotherapy.

Tan KT(#)(1), Yeh CN(#)(2), Chang YC(3), Cheng JH(1), Fang WL(4)(5), Yeh 
YC(5)(6), Wang YC(7)(8), Hsu DS(9), Wu CE(2), Lai JI(5)(10), Chang PM(5)(10), 
Chen MH(5), Lu ML(10), Chen SJ(1), Chao Y(5)(10), Hsiao M(3), Chen MH(11)(10).

Author information:
(1)ACT Genomics Co., Ltd, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Surgery, Liver Research Center, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, 
Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(3)Genomics Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Surgery, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)School of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(6)Department of Pathology, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(7)Institute of Biomedical Informatics, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(8)Preventive Medicine Research Center, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(9)Asclepiumm Taiwan Co., Ltd, New Taipei, Taiwan.
(10)Center of Immuno-Oncology, Department of Oncology, Taipei Veterans General 
Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(11)School of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan 
mhchen9@vghtpe.gov.tw.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Immunological checkpoint blockade is effective in treating various 
malignancies. Identifying predictive biomarkers to assist patient selection for 
immunotherapy has become a priority in both clinical and research settings.
METHODS: Mutations in patients who responded to immunotherapy were identified 
through next-generation sequencing. Relationships among protein kinase, 
DNA-activated, catalytic polypeptide (PRKDC) mutations, mutation load and 
microsatellite instability (MSI) were analyzed using datasets from The Cancer 
Genome Atlas. These relationships were validated by conducting an in vitro study 
and by using tissue samples from 34 patients with gastric cancer. The CT26 
animal model was used to evaluate the role of PRKDC as a predictive biomarker 
and the efficacy of the DNA-PK inhibitor.
RESULTS: From the published literature, we found that among patients whose 
tumors harbored PRKDC mutations, 75%, 53.8%, and 50% of those with lung cancer, 
melanoma, and renal cell carcinoma, respectively, responded to immunotherapy. 
Most of these mutations were truncating and located in functional domains or in 
a destabilizing PRKDC protein structure. Additional analysis showed that a PRKDC 
mutation was significantly associated with a high mutation load in cervical 
cancer, colon adenocarcinoma, head and neck squamous cell carcinoma, lung 
adenocarcinoma, gastric adenocarcinoma and endometrial cancer. Patients with 
gastric cancer or colon cancer harboring PRKDC mutations were also highly 
associated with MSI-high status. Finally, we found that knockout PRKDC or DNA-PK 
inhibitor (PRKDC encodes the catalytic subunit of DNA-dependent protein kinase) 
enhanced the efficacy of the anti-programmed cell death protein one pathway 
monoclonal antibody in the CT26 animal model.
CONCLUSIONS: PRKDC is not only a predictive biomarker but also a drug target for 
immune checkpoint inhibitors.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2020. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/jitc-2019-000485
PMCID: PMC7174075
PMID: 32238472 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: KTT, J-HC and S-JC are 
employees of ACT genomics. DS-SH is an employee of Asclepiumm Taiwan Com.