1. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol. 2020 Dec;46(7):654-672. doi: 10.1111/nan.12618.
Epub  2020 May 1.

White matter alterations in Alzheimer's disease without concomitant pathologies.

Ferrer I(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Andrés-Benito P(1)(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Experimental Therapeutics, University of 
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Bellvitge University Hospital, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness, CIBERNED (Network Centre of 
Biomedical Research of Neurodegenerative Diseases), Institute of Health Carlos 
III, Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Institute of Neurosciences, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Bellvitge Biomedical Research Institute (IDIBELL), Barcelona, Spain.

AIMS: Most individuals with AD neuropathological changes have co-morbidities 
which have an impact on the integrity of the WM. This study analyses 
oligodendrocyte and myelin markers in the frontal WM in a series of AD cases 
without clinical or pathological co-morbidities.
METHODS: From a consecutive autopsy series, 206 cases had neuropathological 
changes of AD; among them, only 33 were AD without co-morbidities. WM 
alterations were first evaluated in coronal sections of the frontal lobe in 
every case. Then, RT-qPCR and immunohistochemistry were carried out in the 
frontal WM of AD cases without co-morbidities to analyse the expression of 
selected oligodendrocyte and myelin markers.
RESULTS: WM demyelination was more marked in AD with co-morbidities when 
compared with AD cases without co-morbidities. Regarding the later, mRNA 
expression levels of MBP, PLP1, CNP, MAG, MAL, MOG and MOBP were preserved at 
stages I-II/0-A when compared with middle-aged (MA) individuals, but 
significantly decreased at stages III-IV/0-C. This was accompanied by reduced 
expression of NG2 and PDGFRA mRNA, reduced numbers of NG2-, Olig2- and 
HDAC2-immunoreactive cells and reduced glucose transporter immunoreactivity. 
Partial recovery of some of these markers occurred at stages V-VI/B-C.
CONCLUSIONS: The present observations demonstrate that co-morbidities have an 
impact on WM integrity in the elderly and in AD, and that early alterations in 
oligodendrocytes and transcription of genes linked to myelin proteins in WM 
occur in AD cases without co-morbidities. These are followed by partial recovery 
attempts at advanced stages. These observations suggest that 
oligodendrocytopathy is part of AD.

© 2020 The Authors. Neuropathology and Applied Neurobiology published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of British Neuropathological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/nan.12618
PMCID: PMC7754505
PMID: 32255227 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they do not have 
conflict of interest.