1. Nat Commun. 2020 Mar 23;11(1):1515. doi: 10.1038/s41467-020-14918-5.

Developing a highly efficient hydroxytyrosol whole-cell catalyst by 
de-bottlenecking rate-limiting steps.

Yao J(#)(1)(2), He Y(#)(3), Su N(3), Bharath SR(3), Tao Y(1), Jin JM(4), Chen 
W(5), Song H(6), Tang SY(7).

Author information:
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Microbial Physiological and Metabolic Engineering, 
State Key Laboratory of Microbial Resources, Institute of Microbiology, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, 61 Biopolis Drive, Singapore, 
Singapore.
(4)Beijing Key Laboratory of Plant Resources Research and Development, Beijing 
Technology and Business University, Beijing, China. jinjianming@btbu.edu.cn.
(5)CAS Key Laboratory of Microbial Physiological and Metabolic Engineering, 
State Key Laboratory of Microbial Resources, Institute of Microbiology, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China. chenw@im.ac.cn.
(6)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, 61 Biopolis Drive, Singapore, 
Singapore. haiwei@imcb.a-star.edu.sg.
(7)CAS Key Laboratory of Microbial Physiological and Metabolic Engineering, 
State Key Laboratory of Microbial Resources, Institute of Microbiology, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China. tangsy@im.ac.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

Hydroxytyrosol is an antioxidant free radical scavenger that is biosynthesized 
from tyrosine. In metabolic engineering efforts, the use of the mouse tyrosine 
hydroxylase limits its production. Here, we design an efficient whole-cell 
catalyst of hydroxytyrosol in Escherichia coli by de-bottlenecking two 
rate-limiting enzymatic steps. First, we replace the mouse tyrosine hydroxylase 
by an engineered two-component flavin-dependent monooxygenase HpaBC of E. coli 
through structure-guided modeling and directed evolution. Next, we elucidate the 
structure of the Corynebacterium glutamicum VanR regulatory protein complexed 
with its inducer vanillic acid. By switching its induction specificity from 
vanillic acid to hydroxytyrosol, VanR is engineered into a hydroxytyrosol 
biosensor. Then, with this biosensor, we use in vivo-directed evolution to 
optimize the activity of tyramine oxidase (TYO), the second rate-limiting enzyme 
in hydroxytyrosol biosynthesis. The final strain reaches a 95% conversion rate 
of tyrosine. This study demonstrates the effectiveness of sequentially 
de-bottlenecking rate-limiting steps for whole-cell catalyst development.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-020-14918-5
PMCID: PMC7090077
PMID: 32251291 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.