1. Nat Commun. 2020 Apr 15;11(1):1839. doi: 10.1038/s41467-020-15538-9.

Spatially resolved analyses link genomic and immune diversity and reveal 
unfavorable neutrophil activation in melanoma.

Mitra A(#)(1)(2), Andrews MC(#)(3)(4), Roh W(5), De Macedo MP(6), Hudgens CW(6), 
Carapeto F(6), Singh S(7), Reuben A(8), Wang F(1), Mao X(1), Song X(1), Wani 
K(6), Tippen S(1), Ng KS(9), Schalck A(10), Sakellariou-Thompson DA(11), Chen 
E(6), Reddy SM(12), Spencer CN(13), Wiesnoski D(1), Little LD(1), Gumbs C(1), 
Cooper ZA(14), Burton EM(3), Hwu P(11), Davies MA(11), Zhang J(1), Bernatchez 
C(11), Navin N(10), Sharma P(15), Allison JP(7), Wargo JA(1)(3), Yee C(11)(13), 
Tetzlaff MT(6), Hwu WJ(11), Lazar AJ(1)(6), Futreal PA(16).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genomic Medicine, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, Texas, USA.
(2)Quantitative Sciences Graduate Training Program, Graduate School of 
Biomedical Sciences, Houston, Texas, USA.
(3)Department of Surgical Oncology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, Texas, USA.
(4)Olivia Newton-John Cancer Research Institute and School of Cancer Medicine, 
La Trobe University, Heidelberg, VIC, Australia.
(5)The Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.
(6)Department of Pathology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, Texas, USA.
(7)Department of Immunology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, Texas, USA.
(8)Department of Thoracic Head and Neck Medical Oncology, University of Texas MD 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA.
(9)Institute for Personalized Cancer Therapy, University of Texas MD Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA.
(10)Department of Genetics, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, Texas, USA.
(11)Department of Melanoma Medical Oncology, University of Texas MD Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA.
(12)Department of Breast Medical Oncology, University of Texas MD Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA.
(13)Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy, San Francisco, California, USA.
(14)AstraZeneca, Gaithersburg, Maryland, USA.
(15)Department of Genitourinary Medical Oncology, University of Texas MD 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA.
(16)Department of Genomic Medicine, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, Texas, USA. AFutreal@mdanderson.org.
(#)Contributed equally

Complex tumor microenvironmental (TME) features influence the outcome of cancer 
immunotherapy (IO). Here we perform immunogenomic analyses on 67 intratumor 
sub-regions of a PD-1 inhibitor-resistant melanoma tumor and 2 additional 
metastases arising over 8 years, to characterize TME interactions. We identify 
spatially distinct evolution of copy number alterations influencing local immune 
composition. Sub-regions with chromosome 7 gain display a relative lack of 
leukocyte infiltrate but evidence of neutrophil activation, recapitulated in The 
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) samples, and associated with lack of response to IO 
across three clinical cohorts. Whether neutrophil activation represents cause or 
consequence of local tumor necrosis requires further study. Analyses of T-cell 
clonotypes reveal the presence of recurrent priming events manifesting in a 
dominant T-cell clonotype over many years. Our findings highlight the links 
between marked levels of genomic and immune heterogeneity within the physical 
space of a tumor, with implications for biomarker evaluation and immunotherapy 
response.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-020-15538-9
PMCID: PMC7160105
PMID: 32296058 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare the following competing 
interests: M.C.A. reports advisory board participation and honoraria from Merck 
Sharp and Dohme, outside the submitted work. Z.A.C. is currently an employee of 
Medimmune. D.W. is currently an employee of Vedanta Biosciences. CNS is 
currently an employee of Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy. A.J.L. 
reports personal fees from Merck, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Novartis, and 
Roche/Genentech; personal fees and non-financial support from ArcherDX and 
Beta-Cat; grants and non-financial support from Medimmune/AstraZeneca and 
Sanofi; and grants, personal fees, and non-financial support from Janssen, all 
outside the submitted work. P.H. reports consultant or advisor fees from 
Dragonfly Therapeutics, GlaxoSmithKline, Immatics, and Sanofi. P.S. reports 
consultant or advisor fees from Bristol-Myers Squibb, GlaxoSmithKline, 
AstraZeneca, Amgen, Jounce, Kite Pharma, Neon, Evelo, EMD Serono, and Astellas; 
stock from Jounce, Kite Pharma, Evelo, Constellation, Neon; and has a patent 
licensed to Jounce, all outside the submitted work. J.P.A. reports stock 
ownership from Jounce, Neon, BioAtla, Forty-Seven, Apricity, Polaris, Marker 
Therapeutics, Codiak, Kite Pharma, and consultant or advisor fees from Jounce, 
Neon, Amgen, Forty-Seven, Apricity, Polaris, Marker Therapeutics, Codiak, 
BioAlta LLC, Tvardi Therapeutics, and owns patents licensed to Jounce, Merck & 
BMS. M.T.T. reports personal fees from Myriad Genetics, Seattle Genetics and 
Novartis LLC, all outside the submitted work. C.N.S., A.R., and J.A.W. are 
co-inventors on US patent (PCT/US17/53.717) relating to the microbiome, outside 
of the current work. J.A.W. reports speaker fees from Imedex, Dava Oncology, 
Omniprex, Illumina, Gilead, MedImmune, and Bristol-Myers Squibb; 
consultant/advisor roles or advisory board membership for Roche-Genentech, 
Novartis, AstraZeneca, GlaxoSmithKline, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Merck/MSD, 
Biothera Pharma, and Microbiome DX; and receives clinical trial support from 
GlaxoSmithKline, Roche/Genentech, Bristol-Myers Squibb, and Novartis, all 
outside the current work. M.A.D. reports being the PI of research supported by 
grants to his institution from Myriad, AstraZeneca, Roche/Genentech, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Oncothyreon, and Sanofi-Aventis; consulting for NanoString; and 
advisory board participation for GlaxoSmithKline, Roche/Genentech, Novartis, 
Array, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Sanofi-Aventis, and Vaccinex. W.J.H. reports 
research support from Merck, Schering-Plough, GlaxoSmithKline, Bristol-Myers 
Squibb, and MedImmune, outside the current work. P.A.F. reports consulting for 
Gene+, outside of the current work. All other authors declare no competing 
interests.