1. Sci Rep. 2020 Apr 16;10(1):6558. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-63451-4.

Whole genome sequencing for mutation discovery in a single case of lysosomal 
storage disease (MPS type 1) in the dog.

Mansour TA(1)(2), Woolard KD(3), Vernau KL(4), Ancona DM(5), Thomasy SM(4)(6), 
Sebbag L(7), Moore BA(4), Knipe MF(8), Seada HA(9), Cowan TM(10), Aguilar M(11), 
Titus Brown C(11), Bannasch DL(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Population Health and Reproduction, School of Veterinary 
Medicine, University of California, Davis, CA, United States. 
drtamermansour@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Clinical Pathology, School of Medicine, Mansoura University, 
Mansoura, Egypt. drtamermansour@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Pathology, Immunology and Microbiology, School of Veterinary 
Medicine, University of California, Davis, CA, United States.
(4)Department of Surgical and Radiological Sciences, School of Veterinary 
Medicine, University of California, Davis, CA, United States.
(5)VCA West Coast Specialty and Emergency Animal Hospital, Fountain Valley, CA, 
United States.
(6)Department of Ophthalmology & Vision Science, School of Medicine, University 
of California, Davis, CA, United States.
(7)Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, 
Iowa State University, Ames, IA, United States.
(8)William R Pritchard Veterinary Medical Teaching Hospital, School of 
Veterinary Medicine, University of California, Davis, CA, United States.
(9)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Brown University, 
Providence, RI, United States.
(10)Department of Pathology, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA, United States.
(11)Department of Population Health and Reproduction, School of Veterinary 
Medicine, University of California, Davis, CA, United States.
(12)Department of Population Health and Reproduction, School of Veterinary 
Medicine, University of California, Davis, CA, United States. 
dlbannasch@ucdavis.edu.

Mucopolysaccharidosis (MPS) is a metabolic storage disorder caused by the 
deficiency of any lysosomal enzyme required for the breakdown of 
glycosaminoglycans. A 15-month-old Boston Terrier presented with clinical signs 
consistent with lysosomal storage disease including corneal opacities, 
multifocal central nervous system disease and progressively worsening clinical 
course. Diagnosis was confirmed at necropsy based on histopathologic evaluation 
of multiple organs demonstrating accumulation of mucopolysaccharides. Whole 
genome sequencing was used to uncover a frame-shift insertion affecting the 
alpha-L-iduronidase (IDUA) gene (c.19_20insCGGCCCCC), a mutation confirmed in 
another Boston Terrier presented 2 years later with a similar clinical picture. 
Both dogs were homozygous for the IDUA mutation and shared coat colors not 
recognized as normal for the breed by the American Kennel Club. In contrast, the 
mutation was not detected in 120 unrelated Boston Terriers as well as 202 dogs 
from other breeds. Recent inbreeding to select for recessive and unusual coat 
colors may have concentrated this relatively rare allele in the breed. The 
identification of the variant enables ante-mortem diagnosis of similar cases and 
selective breeding to avoid the spread of this disease in the breed. Boston 
Terriers carrying this variant represent a promising model for MPS I with 
neurological abnormalities in humans.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-63451-4
PMCID: PMC7162951
PMID: 32300136 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.