1. mSphere. 2020 Apr 22;5(2):e00279-20. doi: 10.1128/mSphere.00279-20.

A Zinc Cluster Transcription Factor Contributes to the Intrinsic Fluconazole 
Resistance of Candida auris.

Mayr EM(#)(1), Ramírez-Zavala B(#)(1), Krüger I(1), Morschhäuser J(2).

Author information:
(1)Institut für Molekulare Infektionsbiologie, Universität Würzburg, Würzburg, 
Germany.
(2)Institut für Molekulare Infektionsbiologie, Universität Würzburg, Würzburg, 
Germany joachim.morschhaeuser@uni-wuerzburg.de.
(#)Contributed equally

The recently emerged pathogenic yeast Candida auris is a major concern for human 
health, because it is easily transmissible, difficult to eradicate from 
hospitals, and highly drug resistant. Most C. auris isolates are resistant to 
the widely used antifungal drug fluconazole due to mutations in the target 
enzyme Erg11 and high activity of efflux pumps, such as Cdr1. In the 
well-studied, distantly related yeast Candida albicans, overexpression of drug 
efflux pumps also is a major mechanism of acquired fluconazole resistance and 
caused by gain-of-function mutations in the zinc cluster transcription factors 
Mrr1 and Tac1. In this study, we investigated a possible involvement of related 
transcription factors in efflux pump expression and fluconazole resistance of C. 
auris The C. auris genome contains three genes encoding Mrr1 homologs and two 
genes encoding Tac1 homologs, and we generated deletion mutants lacking these 
genes in two fluconazole-resistant strains from clade III and clade IV. Deletion 
of TAC1b decreased the resistance to fluconazole and voriconazole in both strain 
backgrounds, demonstrating that the encoded transcription factor contributes to 
azole resistance in C. auris strains from different clades. CDR1 expression was 
not or only minimally affected in the mutants, indicating that Tac1b can confer 
increased azole resistance by a CDR1-independent mechanism.IMPORTANCECandida 
auris is a recently emerged pathogenic yeast that within a few years after its 
initial description has spread all over the globe. C. auris is a major concern 
for human health, because it can cause life-threatening systemic infections, is 
easily transmissible, and is difficult to eradicate from hospital environments. 
Furthermore, C. auris is highly drug resistant, especially against the widely 
used antifungal drug fluconazole. Mutations in the drug target and high activity 
of efflux pumps are associated with azole resistance, but it is not known how 
drug resistance genes are regulated in C. auris We have investigated the 
potential role of several candidate transcriptional regulators in the intrinsic 
fluconazole resistance of C. auris and identified a transcription factor that 
contributes to the high resistance to fluconazole and voriconazole of two C. 
auris strains from different genetic clades, thereby providing insight into the 
molecular basis of drug resistance of this medically important yeast.

Copyright © 2020 Mayr et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mSphere.00279-20
PMCID: PMC7178551
PMID: 32321822 [Indexed for MEDLINE]