1. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2020 Jun;143:132-144. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2020.04.012.
Epub  2020 Apr 25.

Proteomic analysis of the cardiac myocyte secretome reveals extracellular 
protective functions for the ER stress response.

Blackwood EA(1), Thuerauf DJ(1), Stastna M(2), Stephens H(1), Sand Z(1), 
Pentoney A(1), Azizi K(1), Jakobi T(3), Van Eyk JE(4), Katus HA(5), Glembotski 
CC(1), Doroudgar S(6).

Author information:
(1)San Diego State University Heart Institute and the Department of Biology, San 
Diego State University, San Diego, CA, USA.
(2)Advanced Clinical Biosystems Research Institute, Heart Institute and 
Department of Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA; 
Institute of Analytical Chemistry of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Brno, Czech 
Republic.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine III (Cardiology, Angiology, and Pneumology), 
Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany; DZHK (German Centre for 
Cardiovascular Research), Partner Site Heidelberg/Mannheim, Germany; Section of 
Bioinformatics and Systems Cardiology, Klaus Tschira Institute for Integrative 
Computational Cardiology, Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)Advanced Clinical Biosystems Research Institute, Heart Institute and 
Department of Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine III (Cardiology, Angiology, and Pneumology), 
Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany; DZHK (German Centre for 
Cardiovascular Research), Partner Site Heidelberg/Mannheim, Germany.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine III (Cardiology, Angiology, and Pneumology), 
Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany; DZHK (German Centre for 
Cardiovascular Research), Partner Site Heidelberg/Mannheim, Germany. Electronic 
address: shirin.doroudgar@med.uni-heidelberg.de.

The effects of ER stress on protein secretion by cardiac myocytes are not well 
understood. In this study, the ER stressor thapsigargin (TG), which depletes ER 
calcium, induced death of cultured neonatal rat ventricular myocytes (NRVMs) in 
high media volume but fostered protection in low media volume. In contrast, 
another ER stressor, tunicamycin (TM), a protein glycosylation inhibitor, 
induced NRVM death in all media volumes, suggesting that protective proteins 
were secreted in response to TG but not TM. Proteomic analyses of TG- and 
TM-conditioned media showed that the secretion of most proteins was inhibited by 
TG and TM; however, secretion of several ER-resident proteins, including GRP78 
was increased by TG but not TM. Simulated ischemia, which decreases ER/SR 
calcium also increased secretion of these proteins. Mechanistically, secreted 
GRP78 was shown to enhance survival of NRVMs by collaborating with a 
cell-surface protein, CRIPTO, to activate protective AKT signaling and to 
inhibit death-promoting SMAD2 signaling. Thus, proteins secreted during ER 
stress mediated by ER calcium depletion can enhance cardiac myocyte viability.

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2020.04.012
PMCID: PMC8597053
PMID: 32339566 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no conflict of interest.