1. Syst Rev. 2020 Apr 25;9(1):93. doi: 10.1186/s13643-020-01356-z.

HIV-1 integrase resistance associated mutations and the use of dolutegravir in 
Sub-Saharan Africa: a systematic review and meta-analysis protocol.

Semengue ENJ(1)(2)(3), Santoro MM(3), Ndze VN(4), Dambaya B(1), Takou D(1), Teto 
G(1), Nka AD(1)(2)(3), Fabeni L(3), Wiyeh A(5), Ceccherini-Silberstein F(3), 
Colizzi V(2)(6), Perno CF(7), Fokam J(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Chantal Biya International Reference Centre for research on HIV/AIDS 
prevention and management (CIRCB), Yaoundé, Cameroon.
(2)Evangelical University of Cameroon, Bandjoun, Cameroon.
(3)University of Rome "Tor Vergata", Rome, Italy.
(4)Faculty of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, University of Yaoundé I, 
Yaoundé, Cameroon.
(5)South African Medical Research Council (MRC), Cochrane South Africa, 
Pretoria, South Africa.
(6)Chair of Biotechnology-UNESCO, University of Rome "Tor Vergata", Rome, Italy.
(7)University of Milan, Milan, Italy.
(8)Chantal Biya International Reference Centre for research on HIV/AIDS 
prevention and management (CIRCB), Yaoundé, Cameroon. josephfokam@gmail.com.
(9)Faculty of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, University of Yaoundé I, 
Yaoundé, Cameroon. josephfokam@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Sub-Saharan Africa carries the greatest burden of HIV-infection with 
increasing drug resistance burden, which requires improved patient management 
and monitoring. Current WHO recommendations suggest transitioning to 
dolutegravir-based (adults) or raltegravir-based-regimens (neonates) for initial 
antiretroviral therapy (ART) and as a suitable alternative in cases of 
multi-resistance in resource-limited settings. This review aims at synthesizing 
the current knowledge on dolutegravir use and integrase resistance-associated 
mutations found before the wide use of dolutegravir-based regimens.
METHODS: This systematic review will include randomized and non-randomized 
trials, cohort, and cross-sectional studies published on dolutegravir use or 
integrase resistance-associated mutations in Sub-Saharan Africa. Searches will 
be conducted (from 2007 onwards) in PubMed, Embase, Cochrane Central Register of 
Controlled Trials (CENTRAL), Latin American and Caribbean Health Sciences 
Literature (LILAC), Web of Science, African Journals Online, and Cumulative 
Index to Nursing and Allied Health Literature (CINAHL) databases. Hand searching 
of the reference lists of relevant reviews and trials will be conducted and we 
will also look for conference abstracts. We will include studies of adults 
and/or children exposed to integrase inhibitors-based therapies; especially 
dolutegravir or raltegravir (which is our intervention of interest as compared 
to other antiretroviral regimens). We will exclude studies of patients with 
specific co-morbidities such as tuberculosis or opportunistic infections. 
Primary outcomes will be "the rate of viral suppression" and "the level of drug 
resistance" on integrase inhibitor-based regimens among patients in Sub-Saharan 
Africa. Secondary outcomes will be "the effect of baseline viremia on viral 
suppression," "the effect of treatment duration on viral suppression," "the 
proportion of patients with immune recovery," "the rate of non-adherence," "rate 
of adverse events;" "drug resistance according to different integrase 
inhibitor-based regimens," and "drug resistance according to viral 
subtypes/recombinants." Two reviewers will independently screen titles and 
abstracts, assess the full texts for eligibility, and extract data. If data 
permits, random effects models will be used where appropriate. Subgroup and 
additional analyses will be conducted to explore the potential sources of 
heterogeneity (e.g., age, sex, baseline viremia, CD4 following treatment, 
treatment duration, and adherence level).
DISCUSSION: This review will help to strengthen evidence on the effectiveness of 
integrase strand transfer inhibitors by contributing to current knowledge on the 
use of dolutegravir and/or raltegravir (especially for neonates) in Sub-Saharan 
Africa. Results will therefore help in setting-up baseline data for an optimal 
management of people living with HIV as Sub-Saharan African countries are 
transitioning to dolutegravir-based regimens. Evidence will also support 
HIV/AIDS programs in identifying gaps and actions to be undertaken for improved 
long-term care and treatment of people living with HIV in Sub-Saharan Africa.
SYSTEMATIC REVIEW REGISTRATION: PROSPERO CRD42019122424.

DOI: 10.1186/s13643-020-01356-z
PMCID: PMC7183126
PMID: 32334643 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no existing competing 
interest.