1. Cells. 2020 Apr 24;9(4):1065. doi: 10.3390/cells9041065.

Altered Mitochondrial Dynamics in Motor Neuron Disease: An Emerging Perspective.

Kodavati M(1), Wang H(1), Hegde ML(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Center for Neuroregeneration, Houston Methodist 
Research Institute, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Weill Medical College, New York, NY 10065, USA.

Mitochondria plays privotal role in diverse pathways that regulate cellular 
function and survival, and have emerged as a prime focus in aging and 
age-associated motor neuron diseases (MNDs), such as amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal dementia (FTD). Accumulating evidence 
suggests that many amyloidogenic proteins, including MND-associated 
RNA/DNA-binding proteins fused in sarcoma (FUS) and TAR DNA binding protein 
(TDP)-43, are strongly linked to mitochondrial dysfunction. Animal model and 
patient studies have highlighted changes in mitochondrial structure, plasticity, 
replication/copy number, mitochondrial DNA instability, and altered membrane 
potential in several subsets of MNDs, and these observations are consistent with 
the evidence of increased excitotoxicity, induction of reactive oxygen species, 
and activation of intrinsic apoptotic pathways. Studies in MND rodent models 
also indicate that mitochondrial abnormalities begin prior to the clinical and 
pathological onset of the disease, suggesting a causal role of mitochondrial 
dysfunction. Our recent studies, which demonstrated the involvement of specific 
defects in DNA break-ligation mediated by DNA ligase 3 (LIG3) in FUS-associated 
ALS, raised a key question of its potential implication in mitochondrial DNA 
transactions because LIG3 is essential for both mitochondrial DNA replication 
and repair. This question, as well as how wild-type and mutant MND-associated 
factors affect mitochondria, remain to be elucidated. These new investigation 
avenues into the mechanistic role of mitochondrial dysfunction in MNDs are 
critical to identify therapeutic targets to alleviate mitochondrial toxicity and 
its consequences. In this article, we critically review recent advances in our 
understanding of mitochondrial dysfunction in diverse subgroups of MNDs and 
discuss challenges and future directions.

DOI: 10.3390/cells9041065
PMCID: PMC7226538
PMID: 32344665 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.