1. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 Apr 30;21(9):3182. doi: 10.3390/ijms21093182.

Functional Mechanisms of Mitochondrial Respiratory Chain Supercomplex Assembly 
Factors and Their Involvement in Muscle Quality.

Azuma K(1), Ikeda K(2), Inoue S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Systems Aging Science and Medicine, Tokyo Metropolitan 
Institute of Gerontology, Itabashi-ku, Tokyo 173-0015, Japan.
(2)Division of Gene Regulation and Signal Transduction, Research Center for 
Genomic Medicine, Saitama Medical University, Hidaka, Saitama 350-1241, Japan.

Impairment of skeletal muscle function causes disabilities in elderly people. 
Therefore, in an aged society, prevention and treatment of sarcopenia are 
important for expanding healthy life expectancy. In addition to aging, adipose 
tissue disfunction and inflammation also contribute to the pathogenesis of 
sarcopenia by causing the combined state called 'sarcopenic obesity'. Muscle 
quality as well as muscle mass contributes to muscle strength and physical 
performance. Mitochondria in the skeletal muscles affect muscle quality by 
regulating the production of energy and reactive oxygen species. A certain 
portion of the mitochondrial respiratory chain complexes form a higher-order 
structure called a "supercomplex", which plays important roles in efficient 
energy production, stabilization of respiratory chain complex I, and prevention 
of reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation. Several molecules including 
phospholipids, proteins, and certain chemicals are known to promote or stabilize 
mitochondrial respiratory chain supercomplex assembly directly or indirectly. In 
this article, we review the distinct mechanisms underlying the promotion or 
stabilization of mitochondrial respiratory chain supercomplex assembly by 
supercomplex assembly factors. Further, we introduce regulatory pathways of 
mitochondrial respiratory chain supercomplex assembly and discuss the roles of 
supercomplex assembly factors and regulatory pathways in skeletal muscles and 
adipose tissues, believing that this will lead to discovery of potential targets 
for prevention and treatment of muscle disorders such as sarcopenia.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21093182
PMCID: PMC7246575
PMID: 32365950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.