1. Front Aging Neurosci. 2020 Apr 17;12:103. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2020.00103. 
eCollection 2020.

Resveratrol Derivatives as Potential Treatments for Alzheimer's and Parkinson's 
Disease.

Arbo BD(1), André-Miral C(2), Nasre-Nasser RG(3), Schimith LE(3), Santos MG(3), 
Costa-Silva D(3), Muccillo-Baisch AL(3), Hort MA(3).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Ciências Básicas da Saúde, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do 
Sul (UFRGS), Porto Alegre, Brazil.
(2)Université de Nantes, CNRS, Unité de Fonctionnalité et Ingénierie des 
Protéines (UFIP), UMR 6286, Nantes, France.
(3)Instituto de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande (FURG), 
Rio Grande, Brazil.

Neurodegenerative diseases are characterized by the progressive loss of neurons 
in different regions of the nervous system. Alzheimer's disease (AD) and 
Parkinson's disease (PD) are the two most prevalent neurodegenerative diseases, 
and the symptoms associated with these pathologies are closely related to the 
regions that are most affected by the process of neurodegeneration. Despite 
their high prevalence, currently, there is no cure or disease-modifying drugs 
for the treatment of these conditions. In the last decades, due to the need for 
the development of new treatments for neurodegenerative diseases, several 
authors have investigated the neuroprotective actions of naturally occurring 
molecules, such as resveratrol. Resveratrol is a stilbene found in several 
plants, including grapes, blueberries, raspberries, and peanuts. Studies have 
shown that resveratrol presents neuroprotective actions in experimental models 
of AD and PD, however, its clinical application is limited due to its rapid 
metabolism and low bioavailability. In this context, studies have proposed that 
structural changes in the resveratrol molecule, including glycosylation, 
alkylation, halogenation, hydroxylation, methylation, and prenylation could lead 
to the development of derivatives with enhanced bioavailability and 
pharmacological activity. Therefore, this review article aims to discuss how 
resveratrol derivatives could represent viable molecules in the search for new 
drugs for the treatment of AD and PD.

Copyright © 2020 Arbo, André-Miral, Nasre-Nasser, Schimith, Santos, Costa-Silva, 
Muccillo-Baisch and Hort.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2020.00103
PMCID: PMC7180342
PMID: 32362821