1. Transfusion. 2020 Jul;60(7):1373-1377. doi: 10.1111/trf.15792. Epub 2020 May
6.

Extensive clinical, serologic and molecular studies lead to the first reported 
Rh(mod) phenotype in Argentina.

Mufarrege N(1), Franco N(2), Trucco Boggione C(1), Arnoni C(3), de Paula 
Vendrame T(3), Bartoli S(4), Ensinck A(1), Principi C(1), Lujan Brajovich M(1), 
Mattaloni S(1), Riquelme B(5), Biondi C(1), Castilho L(6), Cotorruelo C(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratorio de Inmunohematología e Inmunogenética. IDICER - CONICET, 
Universidad Nacional de Rosario - Facultad de Ciencias Bioquímicas y 
Farmacéuticas, Rosario, Argentina.
(2)Unidad de Hemato - Oncología Pediátrica, Hospital Materno Infantil Dr. Héctor 
Quintana, Jujuy, Argentina.
(3)Colsan-Associacao Beneficente de Coleta de Sangue, Sao Paulo, Brazil.
(4)Centro Regional de Hemoterapia, Jujuy, Argentina.
(5)Área Física, Grupo de Física Biomédica, IFIR (CONICET-UNR). Universidad 
Nacional de Rosario - Facultad de Ciencias Bioquímicas y Farmacéuticas, Rosario, 
Argentina.
(6)Hemocentro - Unicamp, Campinas, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: A highly reduced expression of Rh antigens in the erythrocyte 
membrane is the main feature of Rhmod , an extremely rare phenotype. Mutations 
within RHAG gene, which encodes RhAG glycoprotein and modulates Rh antigen 
expression and Rh complex formation, are the molecular events responsible for 
the Rhmod phenotype. Here we report a clinical, serologic, and molecular study 
of an Argentinean proband with Rh-deficiency syndrome.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Rh antigens, RhAG and CD47 glycoproteins were studied by 
serologic methods in the proband, her parents and sister. Osmotic fragility and 
viscoelastic parameters were also examined. RHD zygosity was analyzed by 
RFLP-PCR. RHD, RHCE, and RHAG genes were studied by Sanger sequencing.
RESULTS: No Rh antigens were detected in the proband by standard techniques. 
However, adsorption-elution and anti-RhAG tests showed that the proposita was 
Rhmod . Reduced expression of CD47, enhanced osmotic fragility, and surface 
viscosity alterations giving rise to spherocytes were observed in the patient. 
Sequencing analysis showed that a c.920C>T mutation in RHAG Exon 6 was present 
in a homozygous state in the proband and in a heterozygous state in the rest of 
the family. This novel missense mutation caused the p.Ser307Phe amino acid 
substitution in Transmembrane Segment 10 of the RhAG glycoprotein.
CONCLUSION: This comprehensive study determined the causes of the proband's 
anemia allowing the diagnosis of Rh-deficiency syndrome.

© 2020 AABB.

DOI: 10.1111/trf.15792
PMID: 32378229 [Indexed for MEDLINE]