1. Radiother Oncol. 2020 Aug;149:55-62. doi: 10.1016/j.radonc.2020.04.054. Epub 
2020 May 6.

Ultra-high dose rate effect on circulating immune cells: A potential mechanism 
for FLASH effect?

Jin JY(1), Gu A(2), Wang W(3), Oleinick NL(3), Machtay M(4), Spring Kong FM(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University Hospitals, Cleveland Medical 
Center, United States; Department of Radiation Oncology, Case Western Reserve 
University School of Medicine, Cleveland, United States. Electronic address: 
jian-yue.jin@UHhospitals.org.
(2)Department of Radiation Oncology, Case Western Reserve University School of 
Medicine, Cleveland, United States; Department of Radiation Oncology, Harbin 
Medical University Cancer Hospital, China.
(3)Department of Radiation Oncology, Case Western Reserve University School of 
Medicine, Cleveland, United States.
(4)Department of Radiation Oncology, University Hospitals, Cleveland Medical 
Center, United States; Department of Radiation Oncology, Case Western Reserve 
University School of Medicine, Cleveland, United States.
(5)Department of Radiation Oncology, University Hospitals, Cleveland Medical 
Center, United States; Department of Radiation Oncology, Case Western Reserve 
University School of Medicine, Cleveland, United States; Departments of Clinical 
Oncology, Hong Kong University Shenzhen Hospital, and Hong Kong University, Hong 
Kong, China.

PURPOSE: "FLASH" radiotherapy (RT) is a potential paradigm-changing RT 
technology with marked tumor killing and normal tissue sparing. However, the 
mechanism of the FLASH effect is not well understood. We hypothesize that the 
ultra-high dose rate FLASH-RT significantly reduces the killing of circulating 
immune cells which may partially contribute to the reported FLASH effect.
METHODS: This computation study directly models the effect of radiation dose 
rate on the killing of circulating immune cells. The model considers an 
irradiated volume that takes up A% of cardiac output and contains B% of total 
blood. The irradiated blood volume and dose were calculated for various A%, B%, 
blood circulation time, and irradiation time (which depends on the dose rate). 
The linear-quadratic model was used to calculate the extent of killing of 
circulating immune cells at ultra-high vs. conventional dose rates.
RESULTS: A strong sparing effect on circulating blood cells by FLASH-RT was 
noticed; i.e., killing of circulating immune cells reduced from 90% to 100% at 
conventional dose rates to 5-10% at ultra-high dose rates. The threshold FLASH 
dose rate was determined to be ~40 Gy/s for mice in an average situation 
(A% = 50%), consistent with the reported FLASH dose rate in animal studies, and 
it was approximately one order of magnitude lower for humans than for mice. The 
magnitude of this sparing effect increased with the dose/fraction, reached a 
plateau at 30-50 Gy/fraction, and almost completely vanished at 2 Gy/fraction.
CONCLUSION: We have calculated a strong sparing effect on circulating immune 
cells by FLASH-RT, which may contribute to the reported FLASH effects in animal 
studies.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.radonc.2020.04.054
PMCID: PMC7442672
PMID: 32387486 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest This work was 
partially supported by the USA National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of 
Health, R01 CA142840 (Kong). The authors declare that they have no other known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.