1. J Bacteriol. 2020 Jun 25;202(14):e00120-20. doi: 10.1128/JB.00120-20. Print
2020  Jun 25.

Role of Glutamate Synthase in Biofilm Formation by Bacillus subtilis.

Kimura T(1), Kobayashi K(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Biological Science, Nara Institute of Science & Technology, 
Ikoma, Nara, Japan.
(2)Division of Biological Science, Nara Institute of Science & Technology, 
Ikoma, Nara, Japan kazuok@bs.naist.jp.

Bacillus subtilis forms robust biofilms in the presence of large amounts of 
carbon sources, such as glycerol. However, little is known about the importance 
of the metabolic systems, or the relationship between metabolic systems and 
regulatory systems, involved in biofilm formation. Glutamate synthase, encoded 
by gltAB, is an enzyme that converts 2-ketoglutarate (a tricarboxylic acid [TCA] 
cycle intermediate) and glutamine into glutamate, which is a general amino group 
donor in metabolism. Here, we show that a ΔgltA mutant exhibited early arrest of 
biofilm formation in complex medium containing glycerol. This phenotype was not 
due to glutamate auxotrophy. Consistent with its biofilm formation phenotype, 
the ΔgltA mutant exhibited an early decrease in expression of the epsA and tapA 
operons, which are responsible for production of biofilm matrix polymers. This 
resulted from decreased activity of their regulator, Spo0A, as evidenced by 
reduced expression of other Spo0A-regulated genes in the ΔgltA mutant. The ΔgltA 
mutation prevented biofilm formation only in the presence of large amounts of 
glycerol. Moreover, limited expression of citrate synthase (but not other TCA 
enzymes) restored biofilm-forming ability to the ΔgltA mutant. These results 
indicate that the ΔgltA mutant accumulates an inhibitory intermediate (citrate) 
in the TCA cycle in the presence of large amounts of glycerol. The ΔgltA mutant 
formed biofilms when excess iron was added to the medium. Taken together, the 
data suggest that accumulation of citrate ions by the ΔgltA mutant causes iron 
shortage due to chelation, which prevents activation of Spo0A and causes 
defective biofilm formation.IMPORTANCEBacillus subtilis, a model organism for 
bacterial biofilm formation, forms robust biofilms in a medium-dependent manner. 
Although the regulatory network that controls biofilm formation has been well 
studied, the importance of the underlying metabolic systems remains to be 
elucidated. The present study demonstrates that a metabolic disorder in a 
well-conserved metabolic system causes accumulation of an inhibitory metabolic 
intermediate that prevents activation of the system that regulates biofilm 
formation. These findings increase our understanding of the coordination between 
cellular metabolic status and the regulatory networks governing biofilm 
formation.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00120-20
PMCID: PMC7317036
PMID: 32393519 [Indexed for MEDLINE]