1. BMC Cancer. 2020 May 11;20(1):403. doi: 10.1186/s12885-020-06842-0.

Knowledge-based analyses reveal new candidate genes associated with risk of 
hepatitis B virus related hepatocellular carcinoma.

Jiang D(1), Deng J(2), Dong C(3), Ma X(4), Xiao Q(5), Zhou B(1), Yang C(1), Wei 
L(6)(7), Conran C(8), Zheng SL(6), Ng IO(9)(10), Yu L(4), Xu J(6), Sham PC(11), 
Qi X(1), Hou J(1), Ji Y(7), Cao G(12), Li M(13)(14)(15)(16)(17).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Organ Failure Research, Guangdong Key Laboratory of 
Viral Hepatitis Research, Institutes of Liver Diseases Research of Guangdong 
Province, Department of Infectious Diseases and Hepatology Unit, Nanfang 
Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, the University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong.
(3)Ningbo University School of Medicine, Ningbo, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Collaborative Innovation Center 
for Genetics and Development, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, 
Shanghai, China.
(5)Center for Genomic Translational Medicine and Prevention, School of Public 
Health, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(6)Program of Computational Genomics & Medicine, NorthShore University 
HealthSystem, Evanston, IL, USA.
(7)Department of Public Health Sciences, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, 
USA.
(8)Program for Personalized Cancer Care, NorthShore University HealthSystem, 
Pritzker School of Medicine, University of Chicago, Evanston, IL, USA.
(9)Department of Pathology, the University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong.
(10)State Key Laboratory of Liver Research, the University of Hong Kong, 
Pokfulam, Hong Kong.
(11)The Centre for Genomic Sciences, the University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong 
Kong.
(12)Department of Epidemiology, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, 
China. gcao@smmu.edu.cn.
(13)Department of Psychiatry, the University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong. 
limiaoxin@mail.sysu.edu.cn.
(14)The Centre for Genomic Sciences, the University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong 
Kong. limiaoxin@mail.sysu.edu.cn.
(15)State Key Laboratory for Cognitive and Brain Sciences, the University of 
Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong. limiaoxin@mail.sysu.edu.cn.
(16)Zhongshan School of Medicine, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China. 
limiaoxin@mail.sysu.edu.cn.
(17)Key Laboratory of Tropical Disease Control (SYSU), Ministry of Education, 
Guangzhou, China. limiaoxin@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Recent genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have suggested 
several susceptibility loci of hepatitis B virus (HBV)-related hepatocellular 
carcinoma (HCC) by statistical analysis at individual single-nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs). However, these loci only explain a small fraction of 
HBV-related HCC heritability. In the present study, we aimed to identify 
additional susceptibility loci of HBV-related HCC using advanced knowledge-based 
analysis.
METHODS: We performed knowledge-based analysis (including gene- and 
gene-set-based association tests) on variant-level association p-values from two 
existing GWASs of HBV-related HCC. Five different types of gene-sets were 
collected for the association analysis. A number of SNPs within the gene 
prioritized by the knowledge-based association tests were selected to replicate 
genetic associations in an independent sample of 965 cases and 923 controls.
RESULTS: The gene-based association analysis detected four genes significantly 
or suggestively associated with HBV-related HCC risk: SLC39A8, GOLGA8M, SMIM31, 
and WHAMMP2. The gene-set-based association analysis prioritized two promising 
gene sets for HCC, cell cycle G1/S transition and NOTCH1 intracellular domain 
regulates transcription. Within the gene sets, three promising candidate genes 
(CDC45, NCOR1 and KAT2A) were further prioritized for HCC. Among genes of 
liver-specific expression, multiple genes previously implicated in HCC were also 
highlighted. However, probably due to small sample size, none of the genes 
prioritized by the knowledge-based association analyses were successfully 
replicated by variant-level association test in the independent sample.
CONCLUSIONS: This comprehensive knowledge-based association mining study 
suggested several promising genes and gene-sets associated with HBV-related HCC 
risks, which would facilitate follow-up functional studies on the pathogenic 
mechanism of HCC.

DOI: 10.1186/s12885-020-06842-0
PMCID: PMC7216662
PMID: 32393195 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.