1. Front Neurosci. 2020 Apr 28;14:380. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2020.00380. eCollection
 2020.

MCT8 Deficiency: The Road to Therapies for a Rare Disease.

Grijota-Martínez C(1)(2)(3), Bárez-López S(2)(4), Gómez-Andrés D(5), 
Guadaño-Ferraz A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrine and Nervous System Pathophysiology, Instituto de 
Investigaciones Biomédicas Alberto Sols, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones 
Científicas (CSIC), Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (UAM), Madrid, Spain.
(2)Center for Biomedical Research on Rare Diseases (Ciberer), Instituto de Salud 
Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Department of Cell Biology, Faculty of Biology, Universidad Complutense de 
Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Translational Health Sciences, Dorothy Hodgkin Building, University of 
Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom.
(5)Pediatric Neurology, Vall d'Hebron University Hospital and VHIR (Euro-NMD, 
ERN-RND), Barcelona, Spain.

Allan-Herndon-Dudley syndrome is a rare disease caused by inactivating mutations 
in the SLC16A2 gene, which encodes the monocarboxylate transporter 8 (MCT8), a 
transmembrane transporter specific for thyroid hormones (T3 and T4). Lack of 
MCT8 function produces serious neurological disturbances, most likely due to 
impaired transport of thyroid hormones across brain barriers during development 
resulting in severe brain hypothyroidism. Patients also suffer from 
thyrotoxicity in other organs due to the presence of a high concentration of T3 
in the serum. An effective therapeutic strategy should restore thyroid hormone 
serum levels (both T3 and T4) and should address MCT8 transporter deficiency in 
brain barriers and neural cells, to enable the access of thyroid hormones to 
target neural cells. Unfortunately, targeted therapeutic options are currently 
scarce and their effect is limited to an improvement in the thyrotoxic state, 
with no sign of any neurological improvement. The use of thyroid hormone analogs 
such as TRIAC, DITPA, or sobetirome, that do not require MCT8 to cross cell 
membranes and whose controlled thyromimetic activity could potentially restore 
the normal function of the affected organs, are being explored to improve the 
cerebral availability of these analogs. Other strategies aiming to restore the 
transport of THs through MCT8 at the brain barriers and the cellular membranes 
include gene replacement therapy and the use of pharmacological chaperones. The 
design of an appropriate therapeutic strategy in combination with an early 
diagnosis (at prenatal stages), will be key aspects to improve the devastating 
alterations present in these patients.

Copyright © 2020 Grijota-Martínez, Bárez-López, Gómez-Andrés and Guadaño-Ferraz.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2020.00380
PMCID: PMC7198743
PMID: 32410949