1. Front Pharmacol. 2020 May 4;11:574. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2020.00574. eCollection
 2020.

Synthesis, Characterization, and In Vitro Studies of an Reactive Oxygen Species 
(ROS)-Responsive Methoxy Polyethylene Glycol-Thioketal-Melphalan Prodrug for 
Glioblastoma Treatment.

Oddone N(1), Boury F(2), Garcion E(2), Grabrucker AM(3)(4)(5), Martinez MC(6), 
Da Ros F(1), Janaszewska A(7), Forni F(1), Vandelli MA(1), Tosi G(1), Ruozi 
B(1), Duskey JT(1)(8).

Author information:
(1)Nanotech Lab TeFarTI Group, Department of Life Sciences, University of Modena 
and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy.
(2)CRCINA, INSERM, Université de Nantes, Université d'Angers, Angers, France.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Limerick, Limerick, Ireland.
(4)Bernal Institute, University of Limerick, Limerick, Ireland.
(5)Health Research Institute (HRI), University of Limerick, Limerick, Ireland.
(6)SOPAM, U1063, INSERM, UNIV Angers, SFR ICAT, Angers, France.
(7)Department of General Biophysics, Faculty of Biology and Environmental 
Protection, Lodz, Poland.
(8)Umberto Veronesi Foundation, Milano, Italy.

Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most frequent and aggressive primary tumor of the 
brain and averages a life expectancy in diagnosed patients of only 15 months. 
Hence, more effective therapies against this malignancy are urgently needed. 
Several diseases, including cancer, are featured by high levels of reactive 
oxygen species (ROS), which are possible GBM hallmarks to target or benefit 
from. Therefore, the covalent linkage of drugs to ROS-responsive molecules can 
be exploited aiming for a selective drug release within relevant pathological 
environments. In this work, we designed a new ROS-responsive prodrug by using 
Melphalan (MPH) covalently coupled with methoxy polyethylene glycol (mPEG) 
through a ROS-cleavable group thioketal (TK), demonstrating the capacity to 
self-assembly into nanosized micelles. Full chemical-physical characterization 
was conducted on the polymeric-prodrug and proper controls, along with in vitro 
cytotoxicity assayed on different GBM cell lines and "healthy" astrocyte cells 
confirming the absence of any cytotoxicity of the prodrug on healthy cells (i.e. 
astrocytes). These results were compared with the non-ROS responsive 
counterpart, underlining the anti-tumoral activity of ROS-responsive compared to 
the non-ROS-responsive prodrug on GBM cells expressing high levels of ROS. On 
the other hand, the combination treatment with this ROS-responsive prodrug and 
X-ray irradiation on human GBM cells resulted in an increase of the antitumoral 
effect, and this might be connected to radiotherapy. Hence, these results 
represent a starting point for a rationale design of innovative and tailored 
ROS-responsive prodrugs to be used in GBM therapy and in combination with 
radiotherapy.

Copyright © 2020 Oddone, Boury, Garcion, Grabrucker, Martinez, Da Ros, 
Janaszewska, Forni, Vandelli, Tosi, Ruozi and Duskey.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2020.00574
PMCID: PMC7212708
PMID: 32425795