1. Mol Genet Genomic Med. 2020 Aug;8(8):e1290. doi: 10.1002/mgg3.1290. Epub 2020 
May 18.

A novel dominant mutation in CRYAB gene leading to a severe phenotype with 
childhood onset.

Marcos AT(1)(2)(3), Amorós D(4), Muñoz-Cabello B(5), Galán F(4), Rivas Infante 
E(6), Alcaraz-Mas L(4), Navarro-Pando JM(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Unidad de Genética, INEBIR (Instituto para el estudio de la Biología de la 
Reproducción Humana), Seville, Spain.
(2)Cátedra de Reproducción y Genética Humana, INEBIR/Universidad Europea del 
Atlántico, Santander, Spain.
(3)FUNIBER (Fundación Universitaria Iberoamericana), Barcelona, Spain.
(4)BioArray, Universidad Miguel Hernández de Elche, Elche, Alicante, Spain.
(5)Sección de Neuropediatría, Hospital Virgen del Rocío, Sevilla, Spain.
(6)Unidad de Neuropatología, Hospital Virgen del Rocío, Sevilla, Spain.

BACKGROUND: αB-crystallin is a promiscuous protein involved in numerous cell 
functions. Mutations in CRYAB have been found in patients with different 
pathological phenotypes that are not properly understood. Patients can present 
different diseases like cataracts, muscle weakness, myopathy, cardiomyopathy, 
respiratory insufficiency or dysphagia, but also a variable combination of these 
pathologies has been found. These mutations can show either autosomal dominant 
or recessive mode of inheritance and variable penetrance and expressivity. This 
is the first report of congenital cataracts and myopathy described in childhood 
due to a CRYAB mutation with autosomal dominant mode of inheritance.
METHODS: The whole exome sequence was subjected to phenotype-driven analysis and 
a novel variant in CRYAB was detected: c.514delG, p.(Ala172ProfsTer14). The 
mutation was located in the C-terminal domain of the protein, which is essential 
for chaperone activity. The deduced protein was analyzed searching for 
alterations of the relevant physico-chemical properties described for this 
domain. A muscle biopsy was also tested for CRYAB with immunohistochemical and 
histoenzymatic techniques.
RESULTS: CRYAB displayed a mild immunoreactivity in the subsarcolemmal 
compartment with no pathological sarcoplasmic accumulation. It agrees with an 
alteration of the physico-chemical properties predicted for the C-terminal 
domain: hydrophobicity, stiffness, and isomerization.
CONCLUSIONS: The described mutation leads to elongation of the protein at the 
carboxi-terminal domain (CTD) with altered properties, which are essential for 
solubility and activity. It suggests that can be the cause of the severe 
conditions observed in this patient.

© 2020 The Authors. Molecular Genetics & Genomic Medicine published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/mgg3.1290
PMCID: PMC7434720
PMID: 32420686 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no competing interests to 
declare.