1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2020 May 11;61(5):37. doi: 10.1167/iovs.61.5.37.

ERG Responses in Mice with Deletion of the Synaptic Ribbon Component RIBEYE.

Fairless R(1)(2), Williams SK(1)(2), Katiyar R(1), Maxeiner S(1), Schmitz F(1), 
Diem R(1)(2).

Author information:
(1),.
(2).

PURPOSE: To determine the influence of RIBEYE deletion and the resulting absence 
of synaptic ribbons on retinal light signaling by electroretinography.
METHODS: Full-field flash electroretinograms (ERGs) were recorded in RIBEYE 
knock-out (KO) and wild-type (WT) littermate mice under photopic and scotopic 
conditions, with oscillatory potentials (OPs) extracted by digital filtering. 
Flicker ERGs and ERGs following intravitreal injection of pharmacological agents 
were also obtained under scotopic conditions.
RESULTS: The a-wave amplitudes were unchanged between RIBEYE KO and WT mice; 
however, the b-wave amplitudes were reduced in KOs under scotopic, but not 
photopic, conditions. Increasing stimulation frequency led to a greater 
reduction in RIBEYE KO b-wave amplitudes compared with WTs. Furthermore, we 
observed prominent, supernormal OPs in RIBEYE KO mice in comparison with WT 
mice. Following intravitreal injections with l-2 amino-4-phosphonobutyric acid 
and cis-2,3 piperidine dicarboxylic acid to block ON and OFF responses at 
photoreceptor synapses, OPs were completely abolished in both mice types, 
indicating a synaptic origin of the prominent OPs in the KOs. Conversely, 
tetrodotoxin treatment to block voltage-gated Na+ channels/spiking neurons did 
not differentially affect OPs in WT and KO mice.
CONCLUSIONS: The decreased scotopic b-wave and decreased responses to increased 
stimulation frequencies are consistent with signaling malfunctions at 
photoreceptor and inner retinal ribbon synapses. Because phototransduction in 
the photoreceptor outer segments is unaffected in the KOs, their supernormal OPs 
presumably result from a dysfunction in retinal synapses. The relatively mild 
ERG phenotype in KO mice, particularly in the photopic range, is probably caused 
by compensatory mechanisms in retinal signaling pathways.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.61.5.37
PMCID: PMC7405791
PMID: 32437548 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: R. Fairless, None; S.K. Williams, 
None; R. Katiyar, None; S. Maxeiner, None; F. Schmitz, None; R. Diem, None