1. J Neuromuscul Dis. 2020;7(3):301-308. doi: 10.3233/JND-200510.

Confirmation of TACO1 as a Leigh Syndrome Disease Gene in Two Additional 
Families.

Oktay Y(1)(2), Güngör S(3), Zeltner L(4), Wiethoff S(4), Schöls L(4)(5), 
Sonmezler E(1)(2), Yilmaz E(1)(2), Munro B(6), Bender B(7), Kernstock C(8), 
Kaemereit S(4), Liepelt I(4)(5), Töpf A(9), Yis U(10), Laurie S(11), Yaramis 
A(12), Zuchner S(13), Hiz S(1)(10), Lochmüller H(11)(14)(15), Schüle R(4)(5), 
Horvath R(6).

Author information:
(1)Izmir Biomedicine and Genome Center, Dokuz Eylul University Health Campus, 
Izmir, Turkey.
(2)Izmir International Biomedicine and Genome Institute, Dokuz Eylul University, 
Izmir, Turkey.
(3)Inonu University, Faculty of Medicine, Turgut Ozal Research Center, 
Department of Paediatric Neurology, Malatya, Turkey.
(4)Department of Neurodegenerative Diseases, Hertie-Institute for Clinical Brain 
Research and Center of Neurology, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(5)German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), University of Tübingen, 
Tübingen, Germany.
(6)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Cambridge School of 
Clinical Medicine, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Cambridge, UK.
(7)Diagnostic and Interventional Neuroradiology, Radiologic Clinics, University 
of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(8)Centre for Ophthalmology, University Eye Hospital Tübingen, University of 
Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(9)John Waltom Muscular Dystrophy Research Centre, Translational and Clinical 
Research Institute, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(10)Dokuz Eylul University, School of Medicine, Department of Paediatric 
Neurology, Izmir, Turkey.
(11)CNAG-CRG, Centre for Genomic Regulation, Barcelona Institute of Science and 
Technology, Barcelona, Spain.
(12)Pediatric Neurology Clinic, Private Office, Diyarbakir, Turkey.
(13)Department of Human Genetics and Hussman Institute for Human Genomics, 
University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA.
(14)Department of Neuropediatrics and Muscle Disorders, Medical 
Center-University of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, Freiburg, Germany.
(15)Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Institute; Division of 
Neurology, Department of Medicine, The Ottawa Hospital; and Brain and Mind 
Research Institute, University of Ottawa, Canada.

BACKGROUND: In 2009, we identified TACO1 as a novel mitochondrial disease gene 
in a single family, however no second family has been described to confirm the 
role of TACO1 in mitochondrial disease.
OBJECTIVE: In this report, we describe two independent consanguineous families 
carrying pathogenic variants in TACO1, confirming the phenotype.
METHODS: Detailed clinical investigations and whole exome sequencing with 
haplotype analysis have been performed in several members of the two reported 
families.
RESULTS: Clinical phenotype of the patients confirms the originally reported 
phenotype of a childhood-onset progressive cerebellar and pyramidal syndrome 
with optic atrophy and learning difficulties. Brain MRI showed periventricular 
white matter lesions with multiple cystic defects, suggesting 
leukoencephalopathy in both patients. One patient carried the previously 
described homozygous TACO1 variant (p.His158ProfsTer8) and haplotype analysis 
suggested that this variant is a rare founder mutation. The second patient from 
another family carried a homozygous novel frame shift variant 
(p.Cys85PhefsTer15).
CONCLUSIONS: The identification of two Turkish families with similar 
characteristic clinical presentation and an additional homozygous nonsense 
mutation confirms that TACO1 is a human mitochondrial disease gene. Although 
most patients with this clinical presentation undergo next generation sequencing 
analysis, screening for selected founder mutations in the Turkish population 
based on the precise clinical presentation may reduce time and cost of finding 
the genetic diagnosis even in the era of massively parallel sequencing.

DOI: 10.3233/JND-200510
PMCID: PMC7458500
PMID: 32444556 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interest to 
report.