1. J Clin Med. 2020 May 30;9(6):1644. doi: 10.3390/jcm9061644.

Infertility: Practical Clinical Issues for Routine Investigation of the Male 
Partner.

Ferlin A(1), Foresta C(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Sciences, Unit of Endocrinology and 
Metabolism, University of Brescia and ASST Spedali Civili Brescia, 25123 
Brescia, Italy.
(2)Department of Medicine, Unit of Andrology and Reproductive Medicine, 
University of Padova, 35121 Padova, Italy.

About one-fifth of couples has fertility problems in Western countries. Male 
factors are present in about half of them, either alone or in combination with 
female causes. Therefore, both partners should be evaluated simultaneously. The 
fertility status and/or specific conditions of each partner influence the 
clinical and treatment approach. This article summarizes in a practical way 
when, how, and why the male partner of an infertile couple should be 
investigated. The available evidence and international guidelines were used, 
interpreting, discussing, and expanding them from personal decades-long 
experience in this field. The aim is to delineate the most appropriate clinical 
approach for the male partner of infertile couples, considering traditional and 
emerging technologies and laboratory analyses in the context of their clinical 
significance. Components of the initial evaluation in men without known risk 
factors for infertility should include at minimum medical history, physical 
examination, and semen analysis. Semen microbiological examination, endocrine 
assessment, scrotal ultrasound, and transrectal ultrasound are suggested in most 
men and are mandatory when specific risk factors for male infertility are known 
to be present or when the initial screening demonstrated abnormalities. Full 
examination, including genetic tests, testicular histology, or additional tests 
on sperm, is clinically oriented and/or suggested after the results of initial 
investigations.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm9061644
PMCID: PMC7356539
PMID: 32486230

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.