1. Environ Sci Process Impacts. 2020 Jul 1;22(7):1444-1460. doi: 
10.1039/d0em00147c. Epub 2020 Jun 4.

Strategies for grouping per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) to protect 
human and environmental health.

Cousins IT (1), DeWitt JC , Glüge J , Goldenman G , Herzke D , Lohmann R , 
Miller M , Ng CA , Scheringer M , Vierke L , Wang Z .

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Science, Stockholm University, SE-10691 
Stockholm, Sweden. ian.cousins@aces.su.se.

Grouping strategies are needed for per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS), 
in part, because it would be time and resource intensive to test and evaluate 
the more than 4700 PFAS on the global market on a chemical-by-chemical basis. In 
this paper we review various grouping strategies that could be used to inform 
actions on these chemicals and outline the motivations, advantages and 
disadvantages for each. Grouping strategies are subdivided into (1) those based 
on the intrinsic properties of the PFAS (e.g. persistence, bioaccumulation 
potential, toxicity, mobility, molecular size) and (2) those that inform risk 
assessment through estimation of cumulative exposure and/or effects. The most 
precautionary grouping approach of those reviewed within this article suggests 
phasing out PFAS based on their high persistence alone (the so-called 
"P-sufficient" approach). The least precautionary grouping approach reviewed 
advocates only grouping PFAS for risk assessment that have the same 
toxicological effects, modes and mechanisms of action, and elimination kinetics, 
which would need to be well documented across different PFAS. It is recognised 
that, given jurisdictional differences in chemical assessment philosophies and 
methodologies, no one strategy will be generally acceptable. The guiding 
question we apply to the reviewed grouping strategies is: grouping for what 
purpose? The motivation behind the grouping (e.g. determining use in products 
vs. setting guideline levels for contaminated environments) may lead to 
different grouping decisions. This assessment provides the necessary context for 
grouping strategies such that they can be adopted as they are, or built on 
further, to protect human and environmental health from potential PFAS-related 
effects.

DOI: 10.1039/d0em00147c
PMCID: PMC7585739
PMID: 32495786 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest This paper does not 
necessarily reflect the opinions or the policies of the German Environment 
Agency. Ian Cousins has provided expert reports in three separate class actions 
related to PFAS in the Federal Court of Australia. Jamie DeWitt is serving as a 
plaintiff’s expert witness in several cases related to PFAS. No other authors 
declare any conflicts of interest.