1. J Neurosci. 2020 Jul 15;40(29):5572-5588. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0905-19.2020.
 Epub 2020 Jun 8.

Dynamical Mechanisms of Interictal Resting-State Functional Connectivity in 
Epilepsy.

Courtiol J(1), Guye M(2)(3), Bartolomei F(1)(4), Petkoski S(5), Jirsa VK(5).

Author information:
(1)Aix-Marseille Univ, Inserm, INS, Institut de Neurosciences des Systèmes, 
13005 Marseille, France.
(2)Aix-Marseille Univ, CNRS, Centre de Résonance Magnétique et Biologique et 
Médicale (CRMBM), 13005 Marseille, France.
(3)Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Marseille, Hôpital de La Timone, CEMEREM, 
Pôle d'Imagerie Médicale, CHU, 13005 Marseille, France.
(4)Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Marseille, Hôpital de La Timone, Service de 
Neurophysiologie Clinique, CHU, 13005 Marseille, France.
(5)Aix-Marseille Univ, Inserm, INS, Institut de Neurosciences des Systèmes, 
13005 Marseille, France spase.petkoski@univ-amu.fr viktor.jirsa@univ-amu.fr.

Drug-resistant focal epilepsy is a large-scale brain networks disorder 
characterized by altered spatiotemporal patterns of functional connectivity 
(FC), even during interictal resting state (RS). Although RS-FC-based metrics 
can detect these changes, results from RS functional magnetic resonance imaging 
(RS-fMRI) studies are unclear and difficult to interpret, and the underlying 
dynamical mechanisms are still largely unknown. To better capture the RS 
dynamics, we phenomenologically extended the neural mass model of partial 
seizures, the Epileptor, by including two neuron subpopulations of epileptogenic 
and nonepileptogenic type, making it capable of producing physiological 
oscillations in addition to the epileptiform activity. Using the 
neuroinformatics platform The Virtual Brain, we reconstructed 14 epileptic and 5 
healthy human (of either sex) brain network models (BNMs), based on individual 
anatomical connectivity and clinically defined epileptogenic heatmaps. Through 
systematic parameter exploration and fitting to neuroimaging data, we 
demonstrated that epileptic brains during interictal RS are associated with 
lower global excitability induced by a shift in the working point of the model, 
indicating that epileptic brains operate closer to a stable equilibrium point 
than healthy brains. Moreover, we showed that functional networks are unaffected 
by interictal spikes, corroborating previous experimental findings; 
additionally, we observed higher excitability in epileptogenic regions, in 
agreement with the data. We shed light on new dynamical mechanisms responsible 
for altered RS-FC in epilepsy, involving the following two key factors: (1) a 
shift of excitability of the whole brain leading to increased stability; and (2) 
a locally increased excitability in the epileptogenic regions supporting the 
mixture of hyperconnectivity and hypoconnectivity in these areas.SIGNIFICANCE 
STATEMENT Advances in functional neuroimaging provide compelling evidence for 
epilepsy-related brain network alterations, even during the interictal resting 
state (RS). However, the dynamical mechanisms underlying these changes are still 
elusive. To identify local and network processes behind the RS-functional 
connectivity (FC) spatiotemporal patterns, we systematically manipulated the 
local excitability and the global coupling in the virtual human epileptic 
patient brain network models (BNMs), complemented by the analysis of the impact 
of interictal spikes and fitting to the neuroimaging data. Our results suggest 
that a global shift of the dynamic working point of the brain model, coupled 
with locally hyperexcitable node dynamics of the epileptogenic networks, 
provides a mechanistic explanation of the epileptic processes during the 
interictal RS period. These, in turn, are associated with the changes in FC.

Copyright © 2020 the authors.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0905-19.2020
PMCID: PMC7363471
PMID: 32513827 [Indexed for MEDLINE]