1. J Neurol. 2020 Oct;267(10):3038-3053. doi: 10.1007/s00415-020-09936-8. Epub
2020  Jun 10.

Respiratory function during enzyme replacement therapy in late-onset Pompe 
disease: longitudinal course, prognostic factors, and the impact of time from 
diagnosis to treatment start.

Stockton DW(1), Kishnani P(2), van der Ploeg A(3), Llerena J Jr(4), Boentert 
M(5), Roberts M(6), Byrne BJ(7), Araujo R(8), Maruti SS(8), Thibault N(8), 
Verhulst K(9), Berger KI(10).

Author information:
(1)Division of Genetic, Genomic and Metabolic Disorders, Departments of 
Pediatrics and Internal Medicine, Wayne State University and Children's Hospital 
of Michigan, Detroit, MI, USA. dstockton@med.wayne.edu.
(2)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Duke University 
Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA.
(3)Center for Lysosomal and Metabolic Diseases, Erasmus MC, University Medical 
Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Departamento de Genética Médica, Instituto Fernandes Figueira (FIOCRUZ), Rio 
de Janeiro RJ, Brazil.
(5)Department of Neurology, University Hospital of Münster, Münster, Germany.
(6)Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust, Salford, UK.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(8)Sanofi Genzyme, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(9)Sanofi Genzyme, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(10)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, New York University 
School of Medicine, and the André Cournand Pulmonary Physiology Laboratory, 
Bellevue Hospital, New York, NY, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To examine respiratory muscle function among late-onset Pompe disease 
(LOPD) patients in the Pompe Registry (NCT00231400/Sanofi Genzyme) during enzyme 
replacement therapy (ERT) with alglucosidase alfa by assessing the longitudinal 
course of forced vital capacity (FVC), prognostic factors for FVC, and impact of 
time from diagnosis to ERT initiation.
METHODS: Longitudinal FVC data from LOPD (symptom onset > 12 months 
or ≤ 12 months without cardiomyopathy) patients were analyzed. Patients had to 
have baseline FVC (percent predicted upright) assessments at ERT start and ≥ 2 
valid post-baseline assessments. Longitudinal analyses used linear 
mixed-regression models.
RESULTS: Among 396 eligible patients, median baseline FVC was 66.9% (range 
9.3-126.0). FVC remained stable during the 5-year follow-up (slope = - 0.17%, 
p = 0.21). Baseline FVC was lower among various subgroups, including patients 
who were male; older at ERT initiation; had a longer duration from symptom onset 
to ERT initiation; and had more advanced disease at baseline (based on 
respiratory support use, inability to ambulate, ambulation device use). Age at 
symptom onset was not associated with baseline degree of respiratory 
dysfunction. Differences between subgroups observed at baseline remained during 
follow-up. Shorter time from diagnosis to ERT initiation was associated with 
higher FVC after 5 years in all patients and the above subgroups using a cut-off 
of 1.7 years.
CONCLUSION: FVC stability over 5 years suggests that respiratory function is 
preserved during long-term ERT in real-world settings. Early initiation of 
alglucosidase alfa was associated with preservation of FVC in LOPD patients with 
better respiratory function at the time of treatment initiation.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-020-09936-8
PMCID: PMC7501128
PMID: 32524257 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: David W. Stockton received research support from 
Sanofi Genzyme; received consulting fees from Sanofi Genzyme and Takeda; 
received travel reimbursement from Sanofi Genzyme; is a member of the Pompe 
Registry Scientific Advisory Board. Priya Kishnani received research/grant 
support from Sanofi Genzyme, Shire Pharmaceuticals, Amicus, Alexion and Pfizer, 
Ultragenyx, Selecta Bio, and Valerion; received consulting fees and/or honoraria 
from Sanofi Genzyme, Alexion, Amicus, AskBio, Baebies, and Shire; and is a 
member of advisory boards for Sanofi Genzyme (the International Collaborative 
Gaucher Group [ICGG] Gaucher Registry and the Pompe Registry Scientific Advisory 
Board), Baebies, Amicus, Alexion, and Shire. Ans van der Ploeg has been an 
advisor for Sanofi Genzyme, Amicus Therapeutics, Biomarin, Ultragenix, Sarepta, 
Audentes, and Spark Therapeutics under agreements between these companies and 
Erasmus MC, University Medical Center. Juan Llerena, Jr., received consulting 
fees from Sanofi Genzyme and BioMarin; and is a member of the Pompe Registry 
Scientific Advisory Board. Matthias Boentert received research support from 
Sanofi Genzyme and Lӧwenstein Medical; received consulting fees and honoraria 
from Sanofi Genzyme; received travel reimbursement from Sanofi Genzyme; and is a 
member of a speaker’s bureau for Sanofi Genzyme, UCB, and Löwenstein Medical. 
Mark Roberts received research support from Amicus; received consulting fees, 
honoraria, and travel reimbursement from Sanofi Genzyme, BioMarin, and Amicus; 
has received royalties from NIL; is a member of a speaker’s bureau for NIL; and 
is a member of the Pompe Registry Scientific Advisory Board. Barry J. Byrne 
received research support from Sanofi Genzyme and Amicus; is a member of the 
Pompe Registry Scientific Advisory Board. Roberto Araujo is an employee of 
Sanofi Genzyme. Sonia S. Maruti was an employee of Sanofi Genzyme at the time of 
the analysis and the development of the manuscript. Nathan Thibault is an 
employee of Sanofi Genzyme and is a Sanofi stockholder. Karien Verhulst is an 
employee of Sanofi Genzyme and owns shares of Sanofi. Kenneth I. Berger received 
research support from Sanofi Genzyme and BioMarin; received consulting fees, 
honoraria and/or travel reimbursement from Sanofi Genzyme, BioMarin 
Pharmaceutical, Amicus Therapeutics, Valerion Therapeutics, and Spark 
Therapeutics; is a member of advisory boards for Sanofi Genzyme and BioMarin.