1. Bone. 2020 Sep;138:115477. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2020.115477. Epub 2020 Jun 11.

Polymorphisms in genes involved in inflammation, the NF-kB pathway and the 
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system are associated with the risk of 
osteoporotic fracture. The Hortega Follow-up Study.

Usategui-Martín R(1), Lendinez-Tortajada V(2), Pérez-Castrillón JL(3), 
Briongos-Figuero L(4), Abadía-Otero J(5), Martín-Vallejo J(6), Lara-Hernandez 
F(7), Chaves FJ(8), García-Garcia AB(9), Martín-Escudero JC(5).

Author information:
(1)IOBA, University of Valladolid, Valladolid, Spain. Electronic address: 
rusategui@gmail.com.
(2)Genomic and Genetic Diagnosis Unit, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria 
Clínico de Valencia, INCLIVA, Valencia, Spain. Electronic address: 
veronica.lendinez@uv.es.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Rio Hortega Universitary Hospital, 
Valladolid, Spain; Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Valladolid, Valladolid, Spain. Electronic address: uvacastrv@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Rio Hortega Universitary Hospital, 
Valladolid, Spain.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Rio Hortega Universitary Hospital, 
Valladolid, Spain; Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Valladolid, Valladolid, Spain.
(6)Department of Statistics, University of Salamanca, Salamanca Biomedical 
Research Institute (IBSAL), Salamanca, Spain. Electronic address: jmv@usal.es.
(7)Genomic and Genetic Diagnosis Unit, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria 
Clínico de Valencia, INCLIVA, Valencia, Spain.
(8)Genomic and Genetic Diagnosis Unit, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria 
Clínico de Valencia, INCLIVA, Valencia, Spain; CIBER of Diabetes and Associated 
Metabolic Diseases (CIBERDEM), Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: 
felipe.chaves@uv.es.
(9)Genomic and Genetic Diagnosis Unit, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria 
Clínico de Valencia, INCLIVA, Valencia, Spain; CIBER of Diabetes and Associated 
Metabolic Diseases (CIBERDEM), Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: 
a.barbara.garcia@ext.uv.es.

Osteoporosis is the most common bone disorder worldwide and is associated with a 
reduced quality of life with important clinical and economic consequences. The 
most widely accepted etiopathogenic hypothesis on the origin of osteoporosis and 
its complications is that they are a consequence of the synergic action of 
environmental and genetic factors. Bone is constantly being remodelled through 
anabolic and catabolic pathways in which inflammation, the NF-kB pathway and the 
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) are crucial. The aim of our study 
was to determine whether polymorphisms in genes implicated in inflammation, the 
NF-kB pathway and RAAS modified the risk of osteoporotic fracture. We analysed 
221 patients with osteoporotic fracture and 354 controls without fracture from 
the HORTEGA sample after 12-14 years of follow up. In addition, we studied the 
genotypic distribution of 230 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in genes 
involved in inflammation, NF-kB pathway and RAAS. Our results showed that be 
carrier of the C allele of the rs2228145 IL6R polymorphism was the principal 
genetic risk factor associated with osteoporotic fracture. The results also 
showed that variant genotypes of the rs4762 AGT, rs4073 IL8, rs2070699 END1 and 
rs4291 ACE polymorphisms were important genetic risk factors for fracture. The 
study provides information about the genetic factors associated with 
inflammation, the NF-kB pathway and RAAS, which are involved in the risk of 
osteoporotic fracture and reinforces the hypothesis that genetic factors are 
crucial in the etiopathogenesis of osteoporosis and its complications.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bone.2020.115477
PMID: 32535289 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
report no potential conflicts of interest.