1. PLoS One. 2020 Jun 19;15(6):e0234726. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0234726. 
eCollection 2020.

Fermentable fiber-induced hepatocellular carcinoma in mice recapitulates gene 
signatures found in human liver cancer.

Chandrashekar DS(1), Golonka RM(2), Yeoh BS(2), Gonzalez DJ(3), Heikenwälder 
M(4), Gerwirtz AT(5), Varambally S(1)(6), Vijay-Kumar M(2)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, 
United States of America.
(2)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Toledo College of 
Medicine and Life Sciences, Toledo, OH, United States of America.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, and The School of Pharmacy 
and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, 
United States of America.
(4)Division of Chronic Inflammation and Cancer, German Cancer Research Center 
(DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany.
(5)Center for Inflammation, Immunity and Infection, Institute for Biomedical 
Sciences, Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA, United States of America.
(6)Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, 
AL, United States of America.
(7)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Toledo 
College of Medicine and Life Sciences, Toledo, OH, United States of America.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), the most malignant form of primary liver cancer, 
is the fourth most prevalent cause of cancer mortality globally. It was recently 
discovered that the dietary fermentable fiber, inulin, can reprogram the murine 
liver to favor HCC development in a gut microbiota-dependent manner. Determining 
the molecular pathways that are either over expressed or repressed during 
inulin-induced HCC would provide a platform of potential therapeutic targets. In 
the present study, we have combined analysis of the novel inulin-induced HCC 
murine model and human HCC samples to identify differentially expressed genes 
(DEGs) in hepatocarcinogenesis. Hepatic transcriptome profiling revealed that 
there were 674 DEGs in HCC mice compared to mice safeguarded from HCC. Kyoto 
Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analysis uncovered enrichment 
in ECM-receptor interaction, steroid hormone biosynthesis, PPAR signaling 
pathway, focal adhesion and protein digestion and absorption during 
inulin-induced HCC. Tandem mass tag based quantitative, multiplexed proteomic 
analysis delineated 57 differentially expressed proteins, where the 
over-expressed proteins were associated with cell adhesion molecules, valine, 
leucine and isoleucine degradation and ECM-receptor interaction. After obtaining 
the human orthologs of the mouse genes, we did a comparison analysis to level 3 
RNA-seq data found in the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database, corresponding to 
human HCC (n = 361) and healthy liver (n = 50) samples. Out of the 549 
up-regulated and 68 down-regulated human orthologs identified, 142 genes (137 
significantly over-expressed and 5 significantly under-expressed) were 
associated with human HCC. Using univariate survival analysis, we found 27 
over-expressed genes involved in cell-cell adhesion and cell division that were 
associated with poor HCC patient survival. Overall, the genetic and proteomics 
signatures highlight potential underlying mechanisms in inulin-induced HCC and 
support that this murine HCC model is human relevant.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0234726
PMCID: PMC7304627
PMID: 32559205 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.