1. Eur J Med Genet. 2020 Sep;63(9):103981. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2020.103981. Epub 
2020 Jun 20.

Enteric anendocrinosis attributable to a novel Neurogenin-3 variant.

Azab B(1), Dardas Z(2), Rabab'h O(3), Srour L(4), Telfah H(5), Hatmal MM(6), 
Mustafa L(4), Rashdan L(3), Altamimi E(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology and Forensic Medicine, School of 
Medicine, The University of Jordan, Amman, Jordan; Prevention Genetics, 
Marshfield, WI, USA. Electronic address: azabbm@mymail.vcu.edu.
(2)Department of Pathology and Microbiology and Forensic Medicine, School of 
Medicine, The University of Jordan, Amman, Jordan. Electronic address: 
zain.dardas@bcm.edu.
(3)Pediatric Department, Faculty of Medicine, Jordan University of Science and 
Technology, Irbid, Jordan.
(4)Department of Pathology and Microbiology and Forensic Medicine, School of 
Medicine, The University of Jordan, Amman, Jordan.
(5)Department of Pathology, University Hospital Crosshouse, Kilmarnock, UK.
(6)Department of Medical Laboratory Sciences, Faculty of Allied Health Sciences, 
The Hashemite University, Zarqa, Jordan.
(7)Pediatric Department, Faculty of Medicine, Jordan University of Science and 
Technology, Irbid, Jordan. Electronic address: emaltamimi@just.edu.jo.

Congenital diarrhea and enteropathies (CODEs) are a group of monogenic disorders 
that often present with severe diarrhea in the first weeks of life. Enteric 
anendocrinosis (EA), an extremely rare cause of CODE, is characterized by a 
marked reduction of intestinal enteroendocrine cells (EC). EA is associated with 
recessively inherited variants in Neurogenin-3 (NEUROG3) gene. Here we 
investigate a case of a male infant who presented with mysterious severe 
malabsorptive diarrhea since birth. Thorough clinical assessments and laboratory 
tests were successful to exclude the majority of differential diagnosis 
categories. However, the patient's diagnosis was not established until the 
genetic test using whole-exome sequencing (WES) was performed. We identified a 
novel homozygous missense disease-causing variant (DCV) in NEUROG3 (c.413C>G, 
p.Thr138Arg). Moreover, molecular dynamic simulation analysis showed that 
(p.Thr138Arg) led to a global change of the NEUROG3 orientation affecting its 
DNA binding capacity. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time to 
apply WES to reach a differential diagnosis of patients with CODEs. Our study 
not only expands our knowledge about NEUROG3 variants and their clinical 
consequences but also proves that WES is a very effective tool for the diagnosis 
of CODEs. This might be of value in early diagnosis of diseases and prenatal 
CODEs detection.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2020.103981
PMID: 32574610 [Indexed for MEDLINE]