1. Mol Genet Genomic Med. 2020 Sep;8(9):e1378. doi: 10.1002/mgg3.1378. Epub 2020 
Jun 29.

Identification of novel splice mutation in SMAD3 in two Cypriot families with 
nonsyndromic thoracic aortic aneurysm. Two case reports.

Keravnou A(1)(2), Bashiardes E(1)(2), Barberis V(3), Michailidou K(2)(4), 
Soteriou M(3), Tanteles GA(5), Cariolou MA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Genetics and The Laboratory of Forensic 
Genetics, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus.
(2)Cyprus School of Molecular Medicine, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and 
Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus.
(3)Department of Cardiology and Cardiovascular Surgery, American Medical Center, 
Nicosia, Cyprus.
(4)Biostatistics Unit, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology & Genetics, Nicosia, 
Cyprus.
(5)Clinical Genetics Clinic, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology & Genetics, 
Nicosia, Cyprus.

BACKGROUND: Thoracic aortic aneurysm and dissection (TAA/D) represents a 
potentially lethal disease group characterized by an increased risk of 
dissection or rupture. Only a small percentage (approximately 30%) of 
individuals with nonsyndromic familial TAA/D have a pathogenic variant in one of 
the genes that have been found to be associated with the disease.
METHODS: A targeted sequencing panel and direct sequencing approach were used to 
identify causative mutations in the index patients and other family members.
RESULTS: In this study we report two apparently unrelated Cypriot families with 
nonsyndromic familial TAA/D. The proband A is a female patient diagnosed with 
TAA/D and intracranial aneurysm and opted for an elective intervention. The 
proband B is a male patient who was diagnosed with TAA/D and underwent cardiac 
surgery. Sequencing analysis identified a novel splice site variant (c.871+1G>A) 
in SMAD3 which is shown to be associated with the disease. Analysis of mRNA from 
the patient's tissue confirmed aberrant splicing and exon 6 skipping.
CONCLUSION: Our findings expand the mutation spectrum of variants that have been 
shown to be associated with nonsyndromic familial TAA/D. This study demonstrates 
the importance of a comprehensive clinical and genetic evaluation aiming at 
early diagnosis and intervention.

© 2020 The Authors. Molecular Genetics & Genomic Medicine published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/mgg3.1378
PMCID: PMC7507478
PMID: 32597575 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: There is no conflict of interest.