1. J Korean Med Sci. 2020 Jul 6;35(26):e225. doi: 10.3346/jkms.2020.35.e225.

Anti-Allodynic Effects of Polydeoxyribonucleotide in an Animal Model of 
Neuropathic Pain and Complex Regional Pain Syndrome.

Lee SH(1), Yoo SH(2), Lee HJ(3), Han D(3), Lee J(3), Jeon SH(4), Cho EA(1), Park 
HJ(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine, Kangbuk Samsung Hospital, 
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine, Soonchunhyang University 
Cheonan Hospital, Soonchunhyang University College of Medicine, Cheonan, Korea.
(3)Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine, Seoul St. Mary's Hospital, 
College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea.
(4)Department of Urology, Seoul St. Mary's Hospital, College of Medicine, The 
Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea.
(5)Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine, Seoul St. Mary's Hospital, 
College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea. 
huejung@catholic.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: Spinal nerve ligation (SNL) model is one of the representative 
models of the neuropathic pain model. Neuropathic pain in a chronic 
post-ischemic pain (CPIP) mimics the symptoms of complex regional pain syndrome 
(CRPS). The administration of polydeoxyribonucleotide (PDRN), which has 
regenerative and anti-inflammatory effects, has been studied and is used in 
clinical practice treating various diseases. However, the analgesic effect of 
PDRN in a neuropathic pain or CRPS model remains unknown.
METHODS: PDRN (3.3, 10, and 20 mg/kg) was administered into the subcutaneous 
(SC) layer of the hind paws of SNL and CPIP models. Mechanical anti-allodynic 
effects were then investigated using the von Frey test. In the 
immunohistochemical examination, dorsal root ganglia (DRG) and the spinal cord 
were harvested and examined for the expression of glial fibrillary acidic 
protein (GFAP) after the 20 mg PDRN injection.
RESULTS: Mechanical allodynia was significantly alleviated by administration of 
PDRN in SNL and CPIP mice at all of the time point. As the dose of PDRN 
increased, the effect was greater. The 20 mg PDRN injection was found to have 
the most effective anti-allodynic effect. The increased expression of GFAP in 
DRG and the spinal cord of SNL and CPIP model decreased following the 
administration of PDRN than vehicle.
CONCLUSION: SC administration of PDRN results in the attenuation of allodynia 
and activation of astrocytes in neuropathic pain or CRPS models. We propose that 
PDRN can have significant potential advantages in neuropathic pain treatment.

© 2020 The Korean Academy of Medical Sciences.

DOI: 10.3346/jkms.2020.35.e225
PMCID: PMC7338212
PMID: 32627441 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors disclosed no conflicts of interest.