1. EFSA J. 2020 Jan 17;18(1):e05947. doi: 10.2903/j.efsa.2020.5947. eCollection 
2020 Jan.

Calcium l-methylfolate as a source of folate added for nutritional purposes to 
infant and follow-on formula, baby food and processed cereal-based food.

EFSA Panel on Nutrition, Novel Foods and Food Allergens (NDA); Turck D, 
Castenmiller J, De Henauw S, Hirsch-Ernst KI, Kearney J, Maciuk A, Mangelsdorf 
I, McArdle HJ, Naska A, Pelaez C, Pentieva K, Siani A, Thies F, Tsabouri S, 
Vinceti M, Cubadda F, Engel KH, Frenzel T, Heinonen M, Marchelli R, 
Neuhäuser-Berthold M, Poulsen M, Sanz Y, Schlatter JR, van Loveren H, Bernasconi 
G, Germini A, Knutsen HK.

Following a request from the European Commission, the EFSA Panel on Nutrition, 
Novel Foods and Food Allergens (NDA) was asked to deliver a scientific opinion 
on the extension of use of calcium l-methylfolate to be used as a source of 
folate added for nutritional purposes to infant and follow-on formula, baby food 
and processed cereal-based food pursuant to Regulation (EU) 609/2013. In 2004, 
EFSA assessed the use of calcium l-methylfolate as a source of folate in foods 
for particular nutritional uses, food supplements and foods intended for the 
general population. The new alternative synthetic step proposed to produce the 
nutrient source, using platinum as a catalyst, did not raise any safety concern 
and the production process was found to consistently yield a product in line 
with the proposed specifications. Based on the studies assessed in the previous 
evaluation, it was concluded that calcium l-methylfolate is non-genotoxic and 
that subchronic and embryotoxicity/teratogenicity studies in rats did not reveal 
any adverse effects up to the highest doses tested. The Panel considered that no 
additional toxicological studies are required on the nutrient source. The 
intervention study in healthy infants provided by the applicant did not indicate 
differences in growth and tolerance parameters in infants who consumed either an 
infant formula supplemented with calcium l-methylfolate or with folic acid, and 
did not raise concerns regarding safety or tolerability of the infant formula 
with the proposed nutrient source. The study also provided further supporting 
evidence for the bioavailability of calcium l-methylfolate. The Panel considers 
that calcium l-methylfolate is a source from which folate is bioavailable and 
concludes that calcium l-methylfolate is safe under the proposed uses and use 
levels for infants and young children.

© 2020 European Food Safety Authority. EFSA Journal published by John Wiley and 
Sons Ltd on behalf of European Food Safety Authority.

DOI: 10.2903/j.efsa.2020.5947
PMCID: PMC7008817
PMID: 32626499