1. Neoplasia. 2020 Sep;22(9):390-398. doi: 10.1016/j.neo.2020.06.007. Epub 2020
Jul  6.

Ex vivo assessment of targeted therapies in a rare metastatic 
epithelial-myoepithelial carcinoma.

Mäkelä R(1), Arjonen A(2), Suryo Rahmanto A(3), Härmä V(4), Lehtiö J(5), Kuopio 
T(6), Helleday T(7), Sangfelt O(8), Kononen J(9), Rantala JK(10).

Author information:
(1)Misvik Biology Oy, Turku, Finland. Electronic address: makela@misvik.com.
(2)Misvik Biology Oy, Turku, Finland. Electronic address: arjonen@misvik.com.
(3)Karolinska Institutet, Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Stockholm, 
Sweden. Electronic address: aldwin.suryo.rahmanto@ki.se.
(4)Misvik Biology Oy, Turku, Finland; University of Sheffield, Department of 
Oncology and Metabolism, South Yorkshire, Sheffield, UK. Electronic address: 
v.harma@sheffield.ac.uk.
(5)Department of Oncology-Pathology, Science for Life Laboratory, Karolinska 
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. Electronic address: janne.lehtio@ki.se.
(6)Central Finland Health Care District, Jyväskylä Medical Centre, Jyväskylä, 
Finland. Electronic address: teijo.kuopio@ksshp.fi.
(7)University of Sheffield, Department of Oncology and Metabolism, South 
Yorkshire, Sheffield, UK.
(8)Karolinska Institutet, Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Stockholm, 
Sweden. Electronic address: olle.sangfelt@ki.se.
(9)Central Finland Health Care District, Jyväskylä Medical Centre, Jyväskylä, 
Finland; Docrates Hospital, Helsinki, Finland. Electronic address: 
juha.kononen@docrates.com.
(10)Misvik Biology Oy, Turku, Finland; University of Sheffield, Department of 
Oncology and Metabolism, South Yorkshire, Sheffield, UK. Electronic address: 
rantala@misvik.com.

Epithelial-myoepithelial carcinoma (EMC) is a rare subtype of salivary gland 
neoplasms. Since the initial description of the cancer, just over 300 cases have 
been reported. EMCs occupy a biphasic cellular differentiation-state defined by 
the constitution of two cell types representing epithelial and myoepithelial 
lineages, yet the functional consequence of the differentiation-state 
heterogeneity with respect to therapy resistance of the tumors remains unclear. 
The reported local recurrence rate of the cases is approximately 30%, and while 
distant metastases are rare, a significant fraction of these cases are reported 
to receive no survival benefit from radio- or chemotherapy given in addition to 
surgery. Moreover, no targeted therapies have been reported for these neoplasms. 
We report here the first use and application of ex vivo drug screening together 
with next generation sequencing to assess targeted treatment strategies for a 
rare metastatic epithelial-myoepithelial carcinoma. Results of the ex vivo drug 
screen demonstrate significant differential therapeutic sensitivity between the 
epithelial and myoepithelial intra-tumor cell lineages suggesting that 
differentiation-state heterogeneity within epithelial-myoepithelial carcinomas 
may present an outlet to partial therapeutic responses to targeted therapies 
including MEK and mTOR inhibitors. These results suggest that the intra-tumor 
lineage composition of EMC could be an important factor to be assessed when 
novel treatments are being evaluated for management of metastatic EMC.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neo.2020.06.007
PMCID: PMC7341452
PMID: 32645560 [Indexed for MEDLINE]