1. PLoS One. 2020 Jul 13;15(7):e0235491. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0235491. 
eCollection 2020.

SIRT3 promotes auditory function in young adult FVB/nJ mice but is dispensable 
for hearing recovery after noise exposure.

Patel S(1), Shah L(1), Dang N(1), Tan X(2), Almudevar A(3), White PM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Ernest J. Del Monte Institute for Neuroscience, 
University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, New York, 
United States of America.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Feinberg School of 
Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois, United States of America.
(3)Department of Biostatistics and Computational Biology, University of 
Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, New York, United States 
of America.

Noise-induced hearing loss (NIHL) affects millions of people worldwide and 
presents a large social and personal burden. Pharmacological activation of 
SIRT3, a regulator of the mitochondrial oxidative stress response, has a 
protective effect on hearing thresholds after traumatic noise damage in mice. In 
contrast, the role of endogenously activated SIRT3 in hearing recovery has not 
been established. Here we tested the hypothesis that SIRT3 is required in mice 
for recovery of auditory thresholds after a noise exposure that confers a 
temporary threshold shift (TTS). SIRT3-specific immunoreactivity is present in 
outer hair cells, around the post-synaptic regions of inner hair cells, and 
faintly within inner hair cells. Prior to noise exposure, homozygous Sirt3-KO 
mice have slightly but significantly higher thresholds than their wild-type 
littermates measured by the auditory brainstem response (ABR), but not by 
distortion product otoacoustic emissions (DPOAE). Moreover, homozygous Sirt3-KO 
mice display a significant reduction in the progression of their peak 1 
amplitude at higher frequencies prior to noise exposure. After exposure to a 
single sub-traumatic noise dose that does not permanently reduce cochlear 
function, compromise cell survival, or damage synaptic structures in wild-type 
mice, there was no difference in hearing function between the two genotypes, 
measured by ABR and DPOAE. The numbers of hair cells and auditory synapses were 
similar in both genotypes before and after noise exposure. These 
loss-of-function studies complement previously published gain-of-function 
studies and help refine our understanding of SIRT3's role in cochlear 
homeostasis under different damage paradigms. They suggest that SIRT3 may 
promote spiral ganglion neuron function. They imply that cellular mechanisms of 
homeostasis, in addition to the mitochondrial oxidative stress response, act to 
restore hearing after TTS. Finally, we present a novel application of a 
biomedical statistical analysis for identifying changes between peak 1 amplitude 
progressions in ABR waveforms after damage.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0235491
PMCID: PMC7357743
PMID: 32658908 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.