1. J Clin Med. 2020 Jul 8;9(7):2155. doi: 10.3390/jcm9072155.

Mitochondrial Alterations and Enhanced Human Leukocyte/Endothelial Cell 
Interactions in Type 1 Diabetes.

Iannantuoni F(1), M de Marañon A(1), Abad-Jiménez Z(1), Canet F(1), Díaz-Pozo 
P(1), López-Domènech S(1), Morillas C(1), Rocha M(1)(2), Víctor VM(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Service of Endocrinology and Nutrition, University Hospital Doctor Peset, 
Foundation for the Promotion of Health and Biomedical Research in the Valencian 
Region (FISABIO), 46017 Valencia, Spain.
(2)CIBERehd-Department of Pharmacology and Physiology, University of Valencia, 
46010 Valencia, Spain.
(3)Department of Physiology, University of Valencia, 46010 Valencia, Spain.

Type 1 diabetes has been associated with oxidative stress. This study evaluates 
the rates of oxidative stress, mitochondrial function, leukocyte-endothelium 
interactions and adhesion molecules in type 1 diabetic patients. The study 
population consisted of 52 diabetic patients and 46 body-composition and 
age-matched controls. We assessed anthropometric and metabolic parameters, 
oxidative stress and mitochondrial function by evaluating reactive oxygen 
species (ROS) production, mitochondrial ROS production, mitochondrial membrane 
potential and superoxide dismutase (SOD) and catalase (CAT) expression in 
polymorphonuclear leukocytes from type 1 diabetic patients. In addition, we 
evaluated interactions between leukocytes and human umbilical vein endothelial 
cells (HUVEC), and serum expression of adhesion molecules (P-selectin, VCAM-1 
and ICAM-1), proinflammatory cytokines (IL-6 and TNFα) and myeloperoxidase 
(MPO). HbA1C and glucose levels were higher in diabetic patients than in control 
subjects, as expected. Mitochondrial function was altered and 
leukocyte-endothelium interactions were enhanced in diabetic patients, which was 
evident in the increase in total and mitochondrial ROS production, higher 
mitochondrial membrane potential, enhanced leukocyte rolling and adhesion, and 
decreased rolling velocity. Furthermore, we observed an increase in levels of 
adhesion molecules P-selectin, VCAM-1, and ICAM-1 in these subjects. In 
addition, type 1 diabetic patients exhibited an increase in proinflammatory 
mediators TNFα and MPO, and a decreased expression of SOD. The enhancement of 
leukocyte-endothelium interactions and proinflammatory markers correlated with 
glucose and HbA1Clevels. Mitochondrial alteration, oxidative stress, and 
enhanced leukocyte-endothelium interactions are features of type 1 diabetes and 
may be related to cardiovascular implications.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm9072155
PMCID: PMC7408780
PMID: 32650465

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funding sponsors had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, 
analyses or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the 
decision to publish the results.