1. Aging (Albany NY). 2020 Jul 16;12(14):13905-13923. doi: 10.18632/aging.103655.
 Epub 2020 Jul 16.

Activation of C-reactive protein proinflammatory phenotype in the blood retinal 
barrier in vitro: implications for age-related macular degeneration.

Romero-Vázquez S(1), Adán A(1), Figueras-Roca M(1), Llorenç V(1), Slevin M(2), 
Vilahur G(3), Badimon L(3), Dick AD(4)(5), Molins B(1).

Author information:
(1)Group of Ocular Inflammation, Clinical and Experimental Studies, Institut 
d'Investigacions Biomèdiques Agustí Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Hospital Clínic de 
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Department of Life Sciences, Manchester Metropolitan University, Manchester, 
UK.
(3)Cardiovascular Research Center-ICCC, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, 
IIB-Sant Pau, CiberCV, Institute Carlos III, Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Academic Unit of Ophthalmology, School of Clinical Sciences and School of 
Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK.
(5)National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Biomedical Research Centre at 
Moorfields Eye Hospital and University College London Institute of 
Ophthalmology, London, UK.

The retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) is considered one of the main targets of 
age-related macular degeneration (AMD), the leading cause of irreversible vision 
loss among the ageing population worldwide. Persistent low grade inflammation 
and oxidative stress eventually lead to RPE dysfunction and disruption of the 
outer blood-retinal barrier (oBRB). Increased levels of circulating pentameric 
C-reactive protein (pCRP) are associated with higher risk of AMD. The monomeric 
form (mCRP) has been detected in drusen, the hallmark deposits associated with 
AMD, and we have found that mCRP induces oBRB disruption. However, it is unknown 
how mCRP is generated in the subretinal space. Using a Transwell model we found 
that both pCRP and mCRP can cross choroidal endothelial cells and reach the RPE 
in vitro and that mCRP, but not pCRP, is able to cross the RPE monolayer in 
ARPE-19 cells. Alternatively, mCRP can originate from the dissociation of pCRP 
in the surface of lipopolysaccharide-damaged RPE in both ARPE-19 and primary 
porcine RPE lines. In addition, we found that the proinflammatory phenotype of 
mCRP in the RPE depends on its topological localization. Together, our findings 
further support mCRP contribution to AMD progression enhancing oBRB disruption.

DOI: 10.18632/aging.103655
PMCID: PMC7425453
PMID: 32673285 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST: Authors have no conflicts 
of interest to declare.