1. Bioelectricity. 2019 Dec 1;1(4):260-272. doi: 10.1089/bioe.2019.0008. Epub
2019  Dec 12.

Preventing Ethanol-Induced Brain and Eye Morphology Defects Using Optogenetics.

Pai VP(1), Adams DS(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Tufts Center for Regenerative and Developmental 
Biology, Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts.
(2)Department of Biology, Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts.
(3)Ion Diagnostics LLC, Watertown, Massachusetts.

Background: Embryonic exposure to the teratogen ethanol leads to dysmorphias, 
including eye and brain morphology defects associated with fetal alcohol 
spectrum disorder (FASD). Exposure of Xenopus laevis embryos to ethanol leads to 
similar developmental defects, including brain and eye dysmorphism, confirming 
our work and the work of others showing Xenopus as a useful system for studies 
of the brain and eye birth defects associated with FASD. Several targets of 
ethanol action have been hypothesized, one being regulation of Kir2.1 potassium 
channel. Endogenous ion fluxes and membrane voltage variation (bioelectric 
signals) have been shown to be powerful regulators of embryonic cell behaviors 
that are required for correct brain and eye morphology. Disruptions to these 
voltage patterns lead to spatially correlated disruptions in gene expression 
patterns and corresponding morphology. Materials and Methods: Here, we use 
controlled membrane voltage modulation to determine when and where voltage 
modulation is sufficient to rescue ethanol-induced brain and eye defects in 
Xenopus embryos. Results: We found (1) that modulating membrane voltage using 
light activation of the channelrhodopsin-2 variant D156A rescues ethanol exposed 
embryos, resulting in normal brain and eye morphologies; (2) hyperpolarization 
is required for the full duration of ethanol exposure; (3) hyperpolarization of 
only superficial ectoderm is sufficient for this effect; and(4) the rescue 
effect acts at a distance. Conclusions: These results, particularly the last, 
raise the exciting possibility of using bioelectric modulation to treat 
ethanol-induced brain and eye birth defects, possibly with extant ion channel 
drugs already prescribed to pregnant women. This may prove to be a simple and 
cost-effective strategy for reducing the impact of FASD.

Copyright 2019, Mary Ann Liebert, Inc., publishers.

DOI: 10.1089/bioe.2019.0008
PMCID: PMC7363055
PMID: 32685918

Conflict of interest statement: No competing financial interests exist.