1. Parasit Vectors. 2020 Jul 22;13(1):366. doi: 10.1186/s13071-020-04232-w.

Molecular detection and genetic characteristics of Babesia gibsoni in dogs in 
Shaanxi Province, China.

Guo WP(1), Xie GC(2), Li D(3), Su M(3), Jian R(3), Du LY(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathogenic Biology, College of Basic Medicine, Chengde Medical 
University, Chengde, Hebei, China. guowenping@nwsuaf.edu.cn.
(2)Department of Pathogenic Biology, College of Basic Medicine, Chengde Medical 
University, Chengde, Hebei, China. xieguangcheng123@126.com.
(3)Department of Pathogenic Biology, College of Basic Medicine, Chengde Medical 
University, Chengde, Hebei, China.

BACKGROUND: Several members of genus Babesia are important pathogens causing 
babesiosis in dogs. In China, at least five Babesia species have been described 
in dogs or ticks. This study sought to determine the prevalence and molecular 
characteristics of various Babesia spp. in dogs in cities in Shaanxi Province in 
China, including Xi'an and Hanzhong.
METHODS: A total of 371 blood samples were collected from pet dogs presenting to 
veterinary clinics in the cities of Xi'an and Hanzhong in Shaanxi, China. 
Babesia spp. DNA was detected via amplification of partial 18S rRNA genes by 
semi-nested PCR. Almost full-length 18S rRNA, ITS, partial TRAP and complete 
cytb genes were recovered for analysis of the genetic characteristics and 
relationships with known isolates.
RESULTS: A single species, Babesia gibsoni, was identified in dogs in Xi'an and 
Hanzhong. Consistently, B. gibsoni was also detected in 14 ticks collected from 
positive dogs. Sequence similarities and phylogenetic analysis suggested that 
the isolates identified herein showed a closer genetic relationship with 
isolates from East Asian countries rather than India, Bangladesh, or the USA. 
Sequence analysis based on tandem repeat analysis of the TRAP gene further 
revealed that specific haplotypes were circulating in both Xi'an and Hanzhong, 
with no specific regionality. In addition, 10.9% of all isolates with atovaquone 
(ATV)-resistance were identified because of M121I mutation in the deduced cytb 
protein.
CONCLUSIONS: This study revealed a high prevalence rate of Babesia infection. 
Babesia gibsoni was the only Babesia species identified in cases of canine 
babesiosis in the cities of Xi'an and Hanzhong cities in Shaanxi, China. In 
addition, the TRAP gene presented high genetic diversity across isolates. Such 
information is useful for elucidating the epidemiological characteristics of 
canine babesiosis, as well as the overall genetic diversity of Babesia spp. 
circulating in dog populations in Shaanxi Province.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-020-04232-w
PMCID: PMC7376908
PMID: 32698848 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.