1. Clin Pharmacokinet. 2020 Oct;59(10):1217-1236. doi:
10.1007/s40262-020-00914-x.

Drug-Drug Interactions with Antiretroviral Drugs in Pregnant Women Living with 
HIV: Are They Different from Non-Pregnant Individuals?

Bukkems VE(1), Colbers A(2), Marzolini C(3)(4), Molto J(5)(6)(7), Burger DM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Radboud University Medical Center and Radboud 
Institute for Health Sciences (RIHS), Geert Grooteplein Zuid 10, 6525 GA, 
Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, Radboud University Medical Center and Radboud 
Institute for Health Sciences (RIHS), Geert Grooteplein Zuid 10, 6525 GA, 
Nijmegen, the Netherlands. Angela.Colbers@radboudumc.nl.
(3)Division of Infectious Diseases and Hospital Epidemiology, Departments of 
Medicine and Clinical Research, University Hospital of Basel and University of 
Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Molecular and Clinical Pharmacology, University of Liverpool, 
Liverpool, UK.
(5)Fundació Lluita Contra La Sida, Badalona, Spain.
(6)Infectious Diseases Department, Hospital Universitari Germans Trias I Pujol, 
Badalona, Spain.
(7)Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona (UAB), Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Although the separate effects of drug-drug 
interactions and pregnancy on antiretroviral drug pharmacokinetics have been 
widely studied and described, their combined effect is largely unknown. 
Physiological changes during pregnancy may change the extent or clinical 
relevance of a drug-drug interaction in a pregnant woman. This review aims to 
provide a detailed overview of the mechanisms, magnitude, and clinical 
significance of antiretroviral drug-drug interactions in pregnant women.
METHODS: We performed a literature search and selected studies that compared the 
magnitude of drug-drug interactions with antiretroviral drugs in pregnant vs 
non-pregnant women.
RESULTS: Forty-eight papers examining drug-drug interactions during pregnancy 
were selected, of which the majority focused on pharmacokinetic boosting. Other 
selected studies examined the drug-drug interactions between efavirenz and 
lumefantrine, efavirenz and tuberculosis drugs, etravirine and tenofovir 
disoproxil fumarate, atazanavir and tenofovir disoproxil, and mefloquine and 
nevirapine in pregnant compared to non-pregnant women. The clinical significance 
of antiretroviral drug-drug interactions changed during pregnancy from a minimal 
effect to a contra-indication. In almost all cases, the clinical significance of 
a drug-drug interaction was more relevant in pregnant women, owing to the 
combined effects of pregnancy-induced physiological changes and drug-drug 
interactions leading to a lower absolute drug exposure.
CONCLUSIONS: Multiple studies show that the clinical relevance of a drug-drug 
interaction can change during pregnancy. Unfortunately, many potential 
interactions have not been studied in pregnancy, which may place pregnant women 
living with human immunodeficiency virus and their newborns at risk.

DOI: 10.1007/s40262-020-00914-x
PMCID: PMC7550380
PMID: 32696442 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DMB has received research grants to his 
institution from Merck, BMS, Janssen/Tibotec, ViiV Healthcare, and Gilead, has 
received educational grants from Merck, was a speaker for a symposia for Merck, 
and is a member of the advisory boards of ViiV Healthcare and Merck. VEB, AC, 
CM, and JM have no conflicts of interest that are directly relevant to the 
content of this article.