1. Metabolites. 2020 Jul 23;10(8):301. doi: 10.3390/metabo10080301.

Comprehensive Vitamer Profiling of Folate Mono- and Polyglutamates in Baker's 
Yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) as a Function of Different Sample Preparation 
Procedures.

Gmelch L(1), Wirtz D(1), Witting M(1)(2), Weber N(1), Striegel L(1), 
Schmitt-Kopplin P(1)(2), Rychlik M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Chair of Analytical Food Chemistry, Technical University of Munich, 85354 
Freising-Weihenstephan, Germany.
(2)Research Unit BioGeoChemistry, Helmholtz Zentrum Munich, 85764 Neuherberg, 
Germany.

Folates are a group of B9 vitamins playing an important role in many metabolic 
processes such as methylation reactions, nucleotide synthesis or oxidation and 
reduction processes. However, humans are not able to synthesize folates de novo 
and thus rely on external sources thereof. Baker's yeast (Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae) has been shown to produce high amounts of this vitamin but extensive 
identification of its folate metabolism is still lacking. Therefore, we 
optimized and compared different sample preparation and purification procedures 
applying solid phase extraction (SPE). Strong anion exchange (SAX), C18 and 
hydrophilic-lipophilic-balanced (HLB) materials were tested for their 
applicability in future metabolomics studies. SAX turned out to be the preferred 
material for the quantitative purification of folates. Qualification of several 
folate vitamers was achieved by ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography 
quadrupole time of flight mass spectrometry (UHPLC-Q-ToF-MS) measurements and 
quantification was performed by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry 
(LC-MS/MS) applying stable isotope dilution assays (SIDAs). The oxidation 
product s-pyrazino-triazine (MeFox) was included into the SIDA method for total 
folate determination and validation. Applying the best protocol (SAX) in regard 
to folate recovery, we analyzed 32 different vitamers in different polyglutamate 
states up to nonaglutamates, of which we could further identify 26 vitamers 
based on tandem-MS (MS2) spectra. Total folate quantification revealed 
differences in formyl folate contents depending on the cartridge chemistry used 
for purification. These are supposedly a result of interconversion reactions 
occurring during sample preparation due to variation in pH adjustments for the 
different purification protocols. The occurrence of interconversion and 
oxidation reactions should be taken into consideration in sample preparation 
procedures for metabolomics analyses with a focus on folates.

DOI: 10.3390/metabo10080301
PMCID: PMC7464241
PMID: 32717862

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.