1. Epileptic Disord. 2020 Aug 1;22(4):443-448. doi: 10.1684/epd.2020.1176.

Autosomal dominant lateral temporal lobe epilepsy associated with a novel reelin 
mutation.

Michelucci R(1), Dazzo E(2), Volpi L(1), Pasini E(1), Riguzzi P(1), Minardi 
R(3), Marliani AF(4), Tappatà M(1), Bisulli F(5), Tassinari CA(6), Nobile C(7).

Author information:
(1)IRCCS-Istituto delle Scienze Neurologiche di Bologna, Unit of Neurology, 
Bellaria Hospital, Bologna, Italy.
(2)CNR-Neuroscience Institute, Section of Padua, Padova, Italy.
(3)IRCCS-Istituto delle Scienze Neurologiche di Bologna, Unit of Neurological 
Clinic, Bellaria Hospital, Bologna, Italy.
(4)IRCCS-Istituto delle Scienze Neurologiche di Bologna, Unit of Neuroradiology, 
Bellaria Hospital, Bologna, Italy.
(5)IRCCS-Istituto delle Scienze Neurologiche di Bologna, Unit of Neurological 
Clinic, Bellaria Hospital, Bologna, Italy, Department of Biomedical and 
Neuromotor Sciences, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(6)Department of Biomedical and Neuromotor Sciences, University of Bologna, 
Bologna, Italy.
(7)CNR-Neuroscience Institute, Section of Padua, Padova, Italy, Department of 
Biomedical Sciences, University of Padua, Padova, Italy.

Reelin mutations are responsible for a minority of families with autosomal 
dominant lateral temporal lobe epilepsy. Here, we report a novel nuclear family 
with distinct clinical and neuroradiological findings. We studied the proband 
and her mother by means of EEG, video-EEG, 3T MRI, FDG-PET and genetic testing. 
Both patients had a focal drug-resistant epilepsy with onset at the age of 16 
and focal seizures with typical auditory features combined with fear, followed 
by loss of contact or evolving to bilateral tonic-clonic seizures. The proband's 
ictal EEG showed clear left temporal seizure onset, and cerebral MRI revealed 
subtle left temporal changes (mild hypotrophy, slight blurring of the white and 
grey matter and hyperintensity) with corresponding left temporal mesial focal 
hypometabolism on FDG-PET. Genetic testing identified a missense variant, 
c.6631C>T (p.Arg2211Cys), in reelin repeat #5 in both patients, which markedly 
affected the secretion of the protein. The data from this family support 
previous findings indicating that reelin mutations are a cause of autosomal 
dominant lateral temporal lobe epilepsy which has a clinical spectrum that may 
also encompass drug-resistant epilepsy associated with mild MRI temporal 
changes.

DOI: 10.1684/epd.2020.1176
PMID: 32723706 [Indexed for MEDLINE]