1. JCI Insight. 2020 Sep 3;5(17):e140532. doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.140532.

Tirzepatide is an imbalanced and biased dual GIP and GLP-1 receptor agonist.

Willard FS(1), Douros JD(2), Gabe MB(3), Showalter AD(4), Wainscott DB(1), Suter 
TM(4), Capozzi ME(2), van der Velden WJ(3), Stutsman C(4), Cardona GR(1), Urva 
S(5), Emmerson PJ(4), Holst JJ(3), D'Alessio DA(2), Coghlan MP(4), Rosenkilde 
MM(3), Campbell JE(2), Sloop KW(4).

Author information:
(1)Quantitative Biology, Lilly Research Laboratories, Eli Lilly and Company, 
Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.
(2)Duke Molecular Physiology Institute, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, 
USA.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences and NNF Center for Basic Metabolic 
Research, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(4)Diabetes and Complications, and.
(5)PK/PD & Pharmacometrics, Lilly Research Laboratories, Eli Lilly and Company, 
Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.

Tirzepatide (LY3298176) is a dual GIP and GLP-1 receptor agonist under 
development for the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), obesity, and 
nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. Early phase trials in T2DM indicate that 
tirzepatide improves clinical outcomes beyond those achieved by a selective 
GLP-1 receptor agonist. Therefore, we hypothesized that the integrated potency 
and signaling properties of tirzepatide provide a unique pharmacological profile 
tailored for improving broad metabolic control. Here, we establish methodology 
for calculating occupancy of each receptor for clinically efficacious doses of 
the drug. This analysis reveals a greater degree of engagement of tirzepatide 
for the GIP receptor than the GLP-1 receptor, corroborating an imbalanced 
mechanism of action. Pharmacologically, signaling studies demonstrate that 
tirzepatide mimics the actions of native GIP at the GIP receptor but shows bias 
at the GLP-1 receptor to favor cAMP generation over β-arrestin recruitment, 
coincident with a weaker ability to drive GLP-1 receptor internalization 
compared with GLP-1. Experiments in primary islets reveal β-arrestin1 limits the 
insulin response to GLP-1, but not GIP or tirzepatide, suggesting that the 
biased agonism of tirzepatide enhances insulin secretion. Imbalance toward GIP 
receptor, combined with distinct signaling properties at the GLP-1 receptor, 
together may account for the promising efficacy of this investigational agent.

DOI: 10.1172/jci.insight.140532
PMCID: PMC7526454
PMID: 32730231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: FSW, ADS, DBW, TMS, CS, 
GRC, SU, PJE, MPC, and KWS are employees of Eli Lilly and Company and may own 
company stock. JEC and DAD receive research support from Eli Lilly and Company. 
DAD participates on the Diabetes Advisory Board for Eli Lilly and Company and 
the steering committee for the tirzepatide CVOT. MMR is a minority shareholder 
of and consultant for Antag Therapeutics, Bainan Biotech, and Synklino and is a 
coinventor on patents covering GIPR ligands and dual-acting GIP/GLP-2 agonists. 
JJH is a minority shareholder and board member of Antag Therapeutics and Bainan 
Biotech and has been a consultant for, has served on scientific advisory panels 
of, and has been speaker honoraria for Novo Nordisk and MSD/Merck. JJH is a 
coinventor on patents covering GIPR ligands and dual-acting GIP/GLP-2 agonists.