1. J Alzheimers Dis. 2020;77(2):807-819. doi: 10.3233/JAD-200401.

Escitalopram Alleviates Alzheimer's Disease-Type Tau Pathologies in the Aged 
P301L Tau Transgenic Mice.

Wang YJ(1), Gong WG(1), Ren QG(1), Zhang ZJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, ZhongDa Hospital, Neuropsychiatric Institute, 
Medical School of Southeast University, Nanjing, China.

BACKGROUND: The inhibition of tau hyperphosphorylation is one of the most 
promising therapeutic targets for the development of Alzheimer's disease (AD) 
modifying drugs. Escitalopram, a kind of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor 
antidepressant, has been previously reported to ameliorate tau 
hyperphosphorylation in vitro.
OBJECTIVE: In this study, we determined whether escitalopram alleviates tau 
pathologies in the aged P301L mouse.
METHODS: Mice were intraperitoneal injected with either escitalopram or saline 
for 4 weeks, and a battery of behavioral tests were conducted before tissue 
collection and biochemical analyses of brain tissue with western blot and 
immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Wild-type (Wt) mice statistically outperformed the aged pR5 mice in the 
Morris water maze, while escitalopram treatment did not significantly rescue 
learning and memory deficits of aged pR5 mice. Tau phosphorylation at different 
phosphorylation sites were enhanced in the hippocampus of aged pR5 mice, while 
escitalopram treatment significantly decreased tau phosphorylation. The levels 
of phosphorylated GSK-3β and phosphorylated Akt were significantly decreased in 
the hippocampus of aged pR5 mice, while escitalopram administration markedly 
increased the expression level. The aged pR5 mice showed significant decreases 
in PSD95 and PSD93, while the administration of escitalopram significantly 
increased PSD95 and PSD93 to levels comparable with the Wt mice.
CONCLUSION: The protective effects of escitalopram exposure during advanced AD 
are mainly associated with significant decrease in tau hyperphosphorylation, 
increased numbers of neurons, and increased synaptic protein levels, which may 
via activation of the Akt/GSK-3β signaling pathway.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-200401
PMID: 32741828 [Indexed for MEDLINE]