1. Front Plant Sci. 2020 Jul 10;11:1058. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2020.01058.
eCollection  2020.

Phosphorylation of ADP-Glucose Pyrophosphorylase During Wheat Seeds Development.

Ferrero DML(1), Piattoni CV(1), Asencion Diez MD(1), Rojas BE(1), Hartman MD(1), 
Ballicora MA(2), Iglesias AA(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratorio de Enzimología Molecular, Instituto de Agrobiotecnología del 
Litoral (UNL-CONICET) & FBCB, Santa Fe, Argentina.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, 
IL, United States.

Starch is the dominant reserve polysaccharide accumulated in the seed of grasses 
(like wheat). It is the most common carbohydrate in the human diet and a 
material applied to the bioplastics and biofuels industry. Hence, the complete 
understanding of starch metabolism is critical to design rational strategies to 
improve its allocation in plant reserve tissues. ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase 
(ADP-Glc PPase) catalyzes the key (regulated) step in the synthetic starch 
pathway. The enzyme comprises a small (S) and a large (L) subunit forming an 
S2L2 heterotetramer, which is allosterically regulated by orthophosphate, 
fructose-6P, and 3P-glycerate. ADP-Glc PPase was found in a phosphorylated state 
in extracts from wheat seeds. The amount of the phosphorylated protein increased 
along with the development of the seed and correlated with relative increases of 
the enzyme activity and starch content. Conversely, this post-translational 
modification was absent in seeds from Ricinus communis. In vitro, the 
recombinant ADP-Glc PPase from wheat endosperm was phosphorylated by wheat seed 
extracts as well as by recombinant Ca2+-dependent plant protein kinases. Further 
analysis showed that the preferential phosphorylation takes place on the L 
subunit. Results suggest that the ADP-Glc PPase is a phosphorylation target in 
seeds from grasses but not from oleaginous plants. Accompanying seed maturation 
and starch accumulation, a combined regulation of ADP-Glc PPase by metabolites 
and phosphorylation may provide an enzyme with stable levels of activity. Such 
concerted modulation would drive carbon skeletons to the synthesis of starch for 
its long-term storage, which later support seed germination.

Copyright © 2020 Ferrero, Piattoni, Asencion Diez, Rojas, Hartman, Ballicora and 
Iglesias.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2020.01058
PMCID: PMC7366821
PMID: 32754189