1. Cells. 2020 Aug 5;9(8):1837. doi: 10.3390/cells9081837.

Epigenomic Dysregulation in Schizophrenia: In Search of Disease Etiology and 
Biomarkers.

Khavari B(1)(2), Cairns MJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences and Pharmacy, University of Newcastle, 
Callaghan, NSW 2308, Australia.
(2)Centre for Brain and Mental Health Research, University of Newcastle and the 
Hunter Medical Research Institute, Newcastle, NSW 2308, Australia.

Schizophrenia is a severe psychiatric disorder with a complex array of signs and 
symptoms that causes very significant disability in young people. While 
schizophrenia has a strong genetic component, with heritability around 80%, 
there is also a very significant range of environmental exposures and stressors 
that have been implicated in disease development and neuropathology, such as 
maternal immune infection, obstetric complications, childhood trauma and 
cannabis exposure. It is postulated that epigenetic factors, as well as 
regulatory non-coding RNAs, mediate the effects of these environmental 
stressors. In this review, we explore the most well-known epigenetic marks, 
including DNA methylation and histone modification, along with emerging RNA 
mediators of epigenomic state, including miRNAs and lncRNAs, and discuss their 
collective potential for involvement in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia 
implicated through the postmortem analysis of brain tissue. Given that 
peripheral tissues, such as blood, saliva, and olfactory epithelium have the 
same genetic composition and are exposed to many of the same environmental 
exposures, we also examine some studies supporting the application of peripheral 
tissues for epigenomic biomarker discovery in schizophrenia. Finally, we provide 
some perspective on how these biomarkers may be utilized to capture a signature 
of past events that informs future treatment.

DOI: 10.3390/cells9081837
PMCID: PMC7463953
PMID: 32764320 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.