1. Front Immunol. 2020 Jul 14;11:1471. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.01471. eCollection
 2020.

Candida and Complement: New Aspects in an Old Battle.

Harpf V(1), Rambach G(1), Würzner R(1), Lass-Flörl C(1), Speth C(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Hygiene and Medical Microbiology, Medical University of 
Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.

Candida is a dominant fungal pathogen in immunocompromised hosts, leading to 
opportunistic infections. Complement with its multifaceted functions is involved 
in the immune defense against this yeast, and recently several novel aspects 
have emerged in this old battle. It is clear that Candida can adopt both roles 
as a colonizer or as a pathogen. In our article, we focus on the molecular 
mechanisms of the Candida-complement interplay, which occur in disseminated 
disease as well as locally on skin or on mucous membranes in mouth and vagina; 
the mechanisms can be supposed to be the same. Activation of the complement 
system by Candida is facilitated by directly triggering the three dominant 
pathways, but also indirectly via the coagulation and fibrinolysis systems. The 
complement-mediated anti-Candida effects induced thereby clearly extend 
chemotaxis, opsonization, and phagocytosis, and even the membrane attack complex 
formed on the fungal surface plays a modulatory role, although lysis of the 
yeast per se cannot be induced due to the thick fungal cell wall. In order to 
avoid the hostile action of complement, several evasion mechanisms have evolved 
during co-evolution, comprising the avoidance of recognition, and destruction. 
The latter comes in many flavors, in particular the cleavage of complement 
proteins by yeast enzymes and the exploitation of regulatory proteins by 
recruiting them on the cell wall, such as factor H. The rationale behind that is 
that the fluid phase regulators on the fungal cell surface down-regulate 
complement locally. Interestingly, however, evasion protein knockout strains do 
not necessarily lead to an attenuated disease, so it is likely more complex in 
vivo than initially thought. The interactions between complement and 
non-albicans species also deserve attention, especially Candida auris, a 
recently identified drug-resistant species of medical importance. This is in 
particular worth investigating, as deciphering of these interactions may lead to 
alternative anti-fungal therapies directly targeting the molecular mechanisms.

Copyright © 2020 Harpf, Rambach, Würzner, Lass-Flörl and Speth.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.01471
PMCID: PMC7381207
PMID: 32765510 [Indexed for MEDLINE]