1. Matrix Biol. 2020 Dec;94:31-56. doi: 10.1016/j.matbio.2020.07.002. Epub 2020
Aug  7.

Periostin and matrix stiffness combine to regulate myofibroblast differentiation 
and fibronectin synthesis during palatal healing.

Nikoloudaki G(1), Snider P(2), Simmons O(2), Conway SJ(2), Hamilton DW(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Schulich School of Medicine and 
Dentistry, The University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario N6A 5C1, Canada. 
Electronic address: gnikolou@uwo.ca.
(2)Herman B. Wells Center for Pediatric Research, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, 1044 West Walnut, Indianapolis, IN, United States.
(3)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Schulich School of Medicine and 
Dentistry, The University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario N6A 5C1, Canada; 
Division of Oral Biology, Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry, The 
University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario N6A 5C1, Canada. Electronic 
address: dhamil2@uwo.ca.

Although the matricellular protein periostin is prominently upregulated in skin 
and gingival healing, it plays contrasting roles in myofibroblast 
differentiation and matrix synthesis respectively. Palatal healing is associated 
with scarring that can alter or restrict maxilla growth, but the expression 
pattern and contribution of periostin in palatal healing is unknown. Using 
periostin-knockout (Postn-/-) and wild-type (WT) mice, the contribution of 
periostin to palatal healing was investigated through 1.5 mm full-thickness 
excisional wounds in the hard palate. In WT mice, periostin was upregulated 6 
days post-wounding, with mRNA levels peaking at day 12. Genetic deletion of 
periostin significantly reduced wound closure rates compared to WT mice. Absence 
of periostin reduced mRNA levels of pivotal genes in wound repair, including 
α-SMA/acta2, fibronectin and βigh3. Recruitment of fibroblasts and inflammatory 
cells, as visualized by immunofluorescent staining for fibroblast specific 
factor-1, vimentin, and macrophages markers Arginase-1 and iNOS was also 
impaired in Postn-/-, but not WT mice. Palatal fibroblasts isolated from the 
hard palate of mice were cultured on collagen gels and prefabricated silicon 
substrates with varying stiffness. Postn-/- fibroblasts showed a significantly 
reduced ability to contract a collagen gel, which was rescued by the exogenous 
addition of recombinant periostin. As the stiffness increased, Postn-/- 
fibroblasts increasingly differentiated into myofibroblasts, but not to the same 
degree as the WT. Pharmacological inhibition of Rac rescued the deficient 
myofibroblastic phenotype of Postn-/- cells. Low stiffness substrates (0.2 kPa) 
resulted in upregulation of fibronectin in WT cells, an effect which was 
significantly reduced in Postn-/- cells. Quantification of immunostaining for 
vinculin and integrinβ1 adhesions revealed that Periostin is required for the 
formation of focal and fibrillar adhesions in mPFBs. Our results suggest that 
periostin modulates myofibroblast differentiation and contraction via 
integrinβ1/RhoA pathway, and fibronectin synthesis in an ECM stiffness dependent 
manner in palatal healing.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.matbio.2020.07.002
PMCID: PMC8922408
PMID: 32777343 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare no conflict of interest. The funders had no role in the design of the 
study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of 
the manuscript, or in the decision to publish the results.