1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2020 Aug 3;61(10):17. doi: 10.1167/iovs.61.10.17.

BBSome Component BBS5 Is Required for Cone Photoreceptor Protein Trafficking and 
Outer Segment Maintenance.

Bales KL(1), Bentley MR(2), Croyle MJ(2), Kesterson RA(3), Yoder BK(2), Gross 
AK(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Optometry and Vision Sciences, University of Alabama at 
Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama, United States.
(2)Department of Cell, Developmental, and Integrative Biology, University of 
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama, United States.
(3)Department of Genetics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, 
Alabama, United States.
(4)Department of Neurobiology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, 
Alabama, United States.

PURPOSE: To identify the role of the BBSome protein Bardet-Biedl syndrome 5 
(BBS5) in photoreceptor function, protein trafficking, and structure using a 
congenital mutant mouse model.
METHODS: Bbs5-/- mice (2 and 9 months old) were used to assess retinal function 
and morphology. Hematoxylin and eosin staining of retinal sections was performed 
to visualize histology. Electroretinography was used to analyze rod and cone 
photoreceptor function. Retinal protein localization was visualized using 
immunofluorescence (IF) within retinal cryosections. TUNEL staining was used to 
quantify cell death. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was used to examine 
retinal ultrastructure.
RESULTS: In the Bbs5-/- retina, there was a significant loss of nuclei in the 
outer nuclear layer accompanied by an increase in cell death. Through 
electroretinography, Bbs5-/- mice showed complete loss of cone photoreceptor 
function. IF revealed mislocalization of the cone-specific proteins M- and 
S-opsins, arrestin-4, CNGA3, and GNAT2, as well as a light-dependent arrestin-1 
mislocalization, although perpherin-2 was properly localized. TEM revealed 
abnormal outer segment disk orientation in Bbs5-/-.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, these data suggest that, although BBS5 is a core 
BBSome component expressed in all ciliated cells, its role within the retina 
mediates specific photoreceptor protein cargo transport. In the absence of BBS5, 
cone-specific protein mislocalization and a loss of cone photoreceptor function 
occur.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.61.10.17
PMCID: PMC7441369
PMID: 32776140 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: K.L. Bales, None; M.R. Bentley, 
None; M.J. Croyle, None; R.A. Kesterson, None; B.K. Yoder, None; A.K. Gross, 
None