1. Cancer Res. 2020 Oct 1;80(19):4145-4157. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-20-0125. 
Epub 2020 Aug 14.

A Division of Labor between YAP and TAZ in Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.

Shreberk-Shaked M(1), Dassa B(2), Sinha S(3)(4), Di Agostino S(5), Azuri I(2), 
Mukherjee S(1), Aylon Y(1), Blandino G(5), Ruppin E(3)(4), Oren M(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, 
Israel.
(2)Bioinformatics Unit, Department of Life Sciences Core Facilities, Faculty of 
Biochemistry, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel.
(3)Cancer Data Science Laboratory, NCI, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland.
(4)Center for Bioinformatics and Computational Biology & Department of Computer 
Sciences, University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland.
(5)Oncogenomic and Epigenetic Lab., IRCCS Regina Elena National Cancer 
Institute-IFO, Rome, Italy.
(6)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, 
Israel. moshe.oren@weizmann.ac.il.

Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide. The 
paralogous transcriptional cofactors Yes-associated protein (YAP) and 
transcriptional coactivator with PDZ-binding motif (TAZ, also called WWTR1), the 
main downstream effectors of the Hippo signal transduction pathway, are emerging 
as pivotal determinants of malignancy in lung cancer. Traditionally, studies 
have tended to consider YAP and TAZ as functionally redundant transcriptional 
cofactors with similar biological impact. However, there is growing evidence 
that each of them also possesses distinct attributes. Here we sought to 
systematically characterize the division of labor between YAP and TAZ in 
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), the most common histological subtype of lung 
cancer. Representative NSCLC cell lines as well as patient-derived data showed 
that the two paralogs orchestrated nonoverlapping transcriptional programs in 
this cancer type. YAP preferentially regulated gene sets associated with cell 
division and cell-cycle progression, whereas TAZ preferentially regulated genes 
associated with extracellular matrix organization. Depletion of YAP resulted in 
growth arrest, whereas its overexpression promoted cell proliferation. Likewise, 
depletion of TAZ compromised cell migration, whereas its overexpression enhanced 
migration. The differential effects of YAP and TAZ on key cellular processes 
were also associated with differential response to anticancer therapies. 
Uncovering the different activities and downstream effects of YAP and TAZ may 
thus facilitate better stratification of patients with lung cancer for 
anticancer therapies. SIGNIFICANCE: Thease findings show that oncogenic paralogs 
YAP and TAZ have distinct roles in NSCLC and are associated with differential 
response to anticancer drugs, knowledge that may assist lung cancer therapy 
decisions.

©2020 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-20-0125
PMCID: PMC8916161
PMID: 32816858 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest No 
potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.