1. Front Immunol. 2020 Jul 31;11:1733. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.01733. eCollection
 2020.

Deletion of cftr Leads to an Excessive Neutrophilic Response and Defective 
Tissue Repair in a Zebrafish Model of Sterile Inflammation.

Bernut A(1)(2), Loynes CA(1)(2), Floto RA(3)(4), Renshaw SA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infection, Immunity and Cardiovascular Disease, Medical School, 
University of Sheffield, Sheffield, United Kingdom.
(2)Bateson Centre, University of Sheffield, Firth Court, Western Bank, 
Sheffield, United Kingdom.
(3)Molecular Immunity Unit, Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, 
Francis Crick Avenue, Cambridge Biomedical, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(4)Cambridge Centre for Lung Infection, Royal Papworth Hospital, Cambridge, 
United Kingdom.

Inflammation-related progressive lung destruction is the leading causes of 
premature death in cystic fibrosis (CF), a genetic disorder caused by a 
defective cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR). However, 
therapeutic targeting of inflammation has been hampered by a lack of 
understanding of the links between a dysfunctional CFTR and the deleterious 
innate immune response in CF. Herein, we used a CFTR-depleted zebrafish larva, 
as an innovative in vivo vertebrate model, to understand how CFTR dysfunction 
leads to abnormal inflammatory status in CF. We show that impaired CFTR-mediated 
inflammation correlates with an exuberant neutrophilic response after injury: CF 
zebrafish exhibit enhanced and sustained accumulation of neutrophils at wounds. 
Excessive epithelial oxidative responses drive enhanced neutrophil recruitment 
towards wounds. Persistence of neutrophils at inflamed sites is associated with 
impaired reverse migration of neutrophils and reduction in neutrophil apoptosis. 
As a consequence, the increased number of neutrophils at wound sites causes 
tissue damage and abnormal tissue repair. Importantly, the molecule Tanshinone 
IIA successfully accelerates inflammation resolution and improves tissue repair 
in CF animal. Our findings bring important new understanding of the mechanisms 
underlying the inflammatory pathology in CF, which could be addressed 
therapeutically to prevent inflammatory lung damage in CF patients with 
potential improvements in disease outcomes.

Copyright © 2020 Bernut, Loynes, Floto and Renshaw.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.01733
PMCID: PMC7412881
PMID: 32849617 [Indexed for MEDLINE]