1. J Gene Med. 2020 Dec;22(12):e3265. doi: 10.1002/jgm.3265. Epub 2020 Sep 29.

The first report of two homozygous sequence variants in FKRP and SELENON genes 
associated with syndromic congenital muscular dystrophy in Iran: Further 
expansion of the clinical phenotypes.

Mohamadian M(1), Naseri M(2), Ghandil P(3)(4), Bahrami A(2), Momen AA(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Birjand University of Medical Sciences, 
Birjand, Iran.
(2)Cellular and Molecular Research Center, Birjand University of Medical 
Sciences, Birjand, Iran.
(3)Diabetes Research Center, Health Research Institute, Ahvaz Jundishapur 
University of Medical Sciences, Ahvaz, Iran.
(4)Department of Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Ahvaz Jundishapur 
University of Medical Sciences, Ahvaz, Iran.
(5)Department of Paediatric Neurology, Golestan Medical, Educational, and 
Research Center, Ahvaz Jundishapur University of Medical Sciences, Ahvaz, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Congenital muscular dystrophy (CMD) refers to hypotonia and delayed 
motor development that is manifested at or near the birth. Additional 
presentations have been observed in CMD syndromes.
METHODS: Thorough clinical examinations were performed on two unrelated Iranian 
families with typical symptoms of CMD and uncommon features such as intellectual 
disability and nephrolithiasis. The genomic DNA of probands were subjected to 
whole exome sequencing. Following the detection of candidate variants with a 
bioinformatic pipeline, the familial co-segregation analysis was carried out 
using polymerase chain reaction-based Sanger sequencing.
RESULTS: We identified a missense homozygous variant in the fukutin-related 
protein (FKRP) gene (c.968G>A, p.Arg323His) related to CMD-dystroglycanopathy 
type B5 (MDDGB5) and a frameshift homozygous variant in the selenoprotein N 
(SELENON) gene (c.1446delC, p.Asn483Thrfs*11) associated with congenital 
rigid-spine muscular dystrophy 1 (RSMD1), which were completely segregated with 
the phenotypes in the families. These variants were not found in either the 1000 
Genomes Project or the Exome Aggregation Consortium. The present study provides 
the first report of these homozygous sequence variants in Iran. Moreover, our 
study was the first observation of nephrolithiasis in FKRP-related 
dystroglycanopathy and intellectual disability in SELENON-related myopathies. 
Based on in silico studies and molecular docking, these variations induced 
pathogenic effects on the proteins.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings extend the genetic database of Iranian patients with 
CMD and, in general, the phenotypical spectrum of syndromic CMD. It is 
recommended to consider these variants for a more accurate clinical 
interpretation, prenatal diagnosis and genetic counseling in families with a 
history of CMD, especially in those combined with cognitive impairments or renal 
dysfunctions.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/jgm.3265
PMID: 32864802 [Indexed for MEDLINE]