1. EFSA J. 2020 Feb 3;18(2):e05966. doi: 10.2903/j.efsa.2020.5966. eCollection
2020  Feb.

Scientific Opinion on the update of the list of QPS-recommended biological 
agents intentionally added to food or feed as notified to EFSA (2017-2019).

EFSA Panel on Biological Hazards (BIOHAZ); Koutsoumanis K, Allende A, 
Alvarez-Ordóñez A, Bolton D, Bover-Cid S, Chemaly M, Davies R, De Cesare A, 
Hilbert F, Lindqvist R, Nauta M, Peixe L, Ru G, Simmons M, Skandamis P, 
Suffredini E, Cocconcelli PS, Fernández Escámez PS, Maradona MP, Querol A, 
Suarez JE, Sundh I, Vlak J, Barizzone F, Correia S, Herman L.

The qualified presumption of safety (QPS) was developed to provide a safety 
pre-assessment within EFSA for microorganisms. Strains belonging to QPS 
taxonomic units (TUs) still require an assessment based on a specific data 
package, but QPS status facilitates fast track evaluation. QPS TUs are 
unambiguously defined biological agents assessed for the body of knowledge, 
their safety and their end use. Safety concerns are, where possible, to be 
confirmed at strain or product level, and reflected as 'qualifications'. 
Qualifications need to be evaluated at strain level by the respective EFSA 
units. The lowest QPS TU is the species level for bacteria, yeasts and 
protists/algae, and the family for viruses. The QPS concept is also applicable 
to genetically modified microorganisms used for production purposes if the 
recipient strain qualifies for the QPS status, and if the genetic modification 
does not indicate a concern. Based on the actual body of knowledge and/or an 
ambiguous taxonomic position, the following TUs were excluded from the QPS 
assessment: filamentous fungi, oomycetes, streptomycetes, Enterococcus faecium, 
Escherichia coli and bacteriophages. The list of QPS-recommended biological 
agents was reviewed and updated in the current opinion and therefore now becomes 
the valid list. For this update, reports on the safety of previously assessed 
microorganisms, including bacteria, yeasts and viruses (the latter only when 
used for plant protection purposes) were reviewed, following an Extensive 
Literature Search strategy. All TUs previously recommended for 2016 QPS list had 
their status reconfirmed as well as their qualifications. The TUs related to the 
new notifications received since the 2016 QPS opinion was periodically evaluated 
for QPS status in the Statements of the BIOHAZ Panel, and the QPS list was also 
periodically updated. In total, 14 new TUs received a QPS status between 2017 
and 2019: three yeasts, eight bacteria and three algae/protists.

© 2020 European Food Safety Authority. EFSA Journal published by John Wiley and 
Sons Ltd on behalf of European Food Safety Authority.

DOI: 10.2903/j.efsa.2020.5966
PMCID: PMC7448045
PMID: 32874212