1. Biologics. 2020 Aug 20;14:53-75. doi: 10.2147/BTT.S260754. eCollection 2020.

An Update for the Clinician on Biologics for the Treatment of Psoriatic 
Arthritis.

Chimenti MS(#)(1), D'Antonio A(#)(1), Conigliaro P(1), Ferrigno S(1), Vendola 
A(1), Ferraioli M(1), Triggianese P(1), Costa L(2), Caso F(2), Perricone R(1).

Author information:
(1)Rheumatology, Allergology and Clinical Immunology, Department of Systems 
Medicine, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.
(2)Rheumatology Unit, Department of Clinical Medicine and Surgery, School of 
Medicine and Surgery, University Federico II, Naples, Italy.
(#)Contributed equally

Psoriatic arthritis (PsA) is a chronic inflammatory arthropathy typically 
associated with psoriasis (PsO). The pathogenesis is strictly related to the 
association among the presence of genetic risk alleles and innate and acquired 
immune response with dramatic consequences on bone remodeling. Clinically, PsA 
patients may present heterogenicity of articular and periarticular 
manifestations that may be associated with the presence of comorbidities making 
treatment decision challenging in patients management. The identification of 
patient-targeted therapies is still a critical issue. Actually, several 
biological and synthetic drugs are promising in terms of efficacy and safety 
profile. National and international treatment recommendations support clinicians 
in the decision of the best treatment, although they may have limits basically 
related to updates and different outcomes included in the clinical studies 
evaluated. The aim of this narrative review is therefore to give guidance for 
clinicians for PsA patients treatment. For this purpose, we evaluated evidence 
on biological therapies efficacy used for PsA treatment. Specifically, we 
reviewed data on biological therapies, Janus kinases (JAK) inhibitors, and drugs 
with a new mechanism of action that are part of the treatment pipeline. The 
concept of "switching" and "swapping" is also described, as well as data 
concerning special populations such as pregnant women and elderly patients.

© 2020 Chimenti et al.

DOI: 10.2147/BTT.S260754
PMCID: PMC7445514
PMID: 32903867

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.