1. Transl Oncol. 2020 Dec;13(12):100852. doi: 10.1016/j.tranon.2020.100852. Epub 
2020 Sep 8.

Sensitivity of human meningioma cells to the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor, 
TG02.

von Achenbach C(1), Le Rhun E(1), Sahm F(2), Wang SS(3), Sievers P(2), Neidert 
MC(3), Rushing EJ(4), Lawhon T(5), Schneider H(1), von Deimling A(2), Weller 
M(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Neuropathology, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany; 
Clinical Cooperation Unit Neuropathology, German Consortium for Transnational 
Cancer Research (DKTK), German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, 
Germany; Hopp Children's Cancer Center, Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(4)Institute of Neuropathology, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(5)Adastra Pharmaceuticals, San Diego, CA, United States of America.
(6)Department of Neurology, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. 
Electronic address: michael.weller@usz.ch.

Standards of care for meningioma include surgical resection and radiotherapy 
whereas pharmacotherapy plays almost no role in this disease. We generated 
primary cultures from surgically removed meningiomas to explore the activity of 
a novel cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor, TG02, in meningioma cell cultures. 
Tumor and cell cultures were characterized by mutation profiling and DNA 
methylation profiling. DNA methylation data were used to allot each sample to 
one out of six previously established meningioma methylation classes: benign 
(ben)-1, 2, 3, intermediate (int)-A, B, and malignant (mal). Four tumors 
assigned to the methylation class ben-2 showed the same class in culture whereas 
cultures from five non-ben-2 tumors showed a more malignant class in four 
patients. Cell cultures were uniformly sensitive to TG02 in the nanomolar range. 
Assignment of the cell cultures to a more malignant methylation class appeared 
to be more closely associated with TG02 sensitivity than assignment to a higher 
WHO grade of the primary tumors. Primary cell cultures from meningioma 
facilitate the investigation of the anti-meningioma activity of novel agents. 
TG02, an orally available cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitor, warrants 
further exploration.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tranon.2020.100852
PMCID: PMC7490722
PMID: 32916418

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be 
considered as potential competing interests: ELR has received research grants 
from Mundipharma and Amgen and honoraria for lectures or advisory board from 
Abbvie, Daiichy Sankyo, Mundipharma and Novartis. FS has received travel support 
from Agilent und Illumina und speaker's bureau from Agilent. MW has received 
research grants from Abbvie, Adastra, Dracen, Merck, Sharp & Dohme (MSD), Merck 
(EMD), Novocure, OGD2, Piqur and Roche, and honoraria for lectures or advisory 
board participation or consulting from Abbvie, Basilea, Bristol Meyer Squibb, 
Celgene, Merck, Sharp & Dohme (MSD), Merck (EMD), Novocure, Orbus, Roche and 
Tocagen. TL is employee of Tragara Pharmaceuticals. CvA, SW, PS, MN, ER, HS, AVD 
declare no conflict of interest.