1. J Vasc Surg Venous Lymphat Disord. 2021 Jan;9(1):23-35. doi: 
10.1016/j.jvsv.2020.08.030. Epub 2020 Sep 8.

Venous thrombosis epidemiology, pathophysiology, and anticoagulant therapies and 
trials in severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 infection.

Obi AT(1), Barnes GD(2), Napolitano LM(3), Henke PK(1), Wakefield TW(4).

Author information:
(1)Section of Vascular Surgery, Department of Surgery, Samuel and Jean Frankel 
Cardiovascular Center, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Mich.
(2)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Samuel 
and Jean Frankel Cardiovascular Center, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Mich.
(3)Division of Critical Care Surgery, Department of Surgery, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Mich.
(4)Section of Vascular Surgery, Department of Surgery, Samuel and Jean Frankel 
Cardiovascular Center, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Mich. Electronic 
address: thomasww@umich.edu.

OBJECTIVE: Infection with the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 
(SARS-CoV-2) virus confers a risk of significant coagulopathy, with the 
resulting development of venous thromboembolism (VTE), potentially contributing 
to the morbidity and mortality. The purpose of the present review was to 
evaluate the potential mechanisms that contribute to this increased risk of 
coagulopathy and the role of anticoagulants in treatment.
METHODS: A literature review of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) and/or 
SARS-CoV-2 and cell-mediated inflammation, clinical coagulation abnormalities, 
hypercoagulability, pulmonary intravascular coagulopathy, and anticoagulation 
was performed. The National Clinical Trials database was queried for ongoing 
studies of anticoagulation and/or antithrombotic treatment or the incidence or 
prevalence of thrombotic events in patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection.
RESULTS: The reported rate of VTE among critically ill patients infected with 
SARS-CoV-2 has been 21% to 69%. The phenomenon of breakthrough VTE, or the acute 
development of VTE despite adequate chemoprophylaxis or treatment dose 
anticoagulation, has been shown to occur with severe infection. The 
pathophysiology of overt hypercoagulability and the development of VTE is likely 
multifactorial, with evidence supporting the role of significant cell-mediated 
responses, including neutrophils and monocytes/macrophages, endothelialitis, 
cytokine release syndrome, and dysregulation of fibrinolysis. Collectively, this 
inflammatory process contributes to the severe pulmonary pathology experienced 
by patients with COVID-19. As the infection worsens, extreme D-dimer elevations, 
significant thrombocytopenia, decreasing fibrinogen, and prolongation of 
prothrombin time and partial thromboplastin time occur, often associated with 
deep vein thrombosis, in situ pulmonary thrombi, and/or pulmonary embolism. A 
new phenomenon, termed pulmonary intravascular coagulopathy, has been associated 
with morbidity in patients with severe infection. Heparin, both unfractionated 
heparin and low-molecular-weight heparin, have emerged as agents that can 
address the viral infection, inflammation, and thrombosis in this syndrome.
CONCLUSIONS: The overwhelming inflammatory response in patients with SARS-CoV-2 
infection can lead to a hypercoagulable state, microthrombosis, large vessel 
thrombosis, and, ultimately, death. Early VTE prophylaxis should be provided to 
all admitted patients. Therapeutic anticoagulation therapy might be beneficial 
for critically ill patients and is the focus of 39 ongoing trials. Close 
monitoring for thrombotic complications is imperative, and, if confirmed, early 
transition from prophylactic to therapeutic anticoagulation should be 
instituted. The interplay between inflammation and thrombosis has been shown to 
be a hallmark of the SARS-CoV-2 viral infection.

Copyright © 2020 Society for Vascular Surgery. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jvsv.2020.08.030
PMCID: PMC7834652
PMID: 32916371 [Indexed for MEDLINE]