1. Sci Rep. 2020 Sep 14;10(1):15026. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-71693-5.

Understanding and predicting ciprofloxacin minimum inhibitory concentration in 
Escherichia coli with machine learning.

Pataki BÁ(1)(2), Matamoros S(3), van der Putten BCL(3)(4), Remondini D(5), 
Giampieri E(6), Aytan-Aktug D(7), Hendriksen RS(7), Lund O(8), Csabai I(9)(10), 
Schultsz C(3)(4); SPS COMPARE ML-AMR group.

Collaborators: Matamoros S, Janes V, Hendriksen RS, Lund O, Clausen P, Aarestrup 
FM, Koopmans M, Pataki B, Visontai D, Stéger J, Szalai-Gindl JM, Csabai I, 
Pakseresht N, Rossello M, Silvester N, Amid C, Cochrane G, Schultsz C, Pradel F, 
Westeel E, Fuchs S, Kumar SM, Xavier BB, Ngoc MN, Remondini D, Giampieri E, 
Pasquali F, Petrovska L, Ajayi D, Nielsen EM, Trung NV, Hoa NT, Ishii Y, Aoki K, 
McDermott P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physics of Complex Systems, ELTE Eötvös Loránd University, 
Budapest, Hungary. patbaa@caesar.elte.hu.
(2)Department of Computational Sciences, Wigner Research Centre for Physics of 
the HAS, Budapest, Hungary. patbaa@caesar.elte.hu.
(3)Department of Medical Microbiology, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Global Health, Amsterdam Institute for Global Health and 
Development, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Physics and Astronomy (DIFA), University of Bologna, Bologna, 
Italy.
(6)Department of Experimental, Diagnostic and Specialty Medicine (DIMES), 
University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(7)National Food Institute, Technical University of Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark.
(8)Department of Bioinformatics, Technical University of Denmark, Lyngby, 
Denmark.
(9)Department of Physics of Complex Systems, ELTE Eötvös Loránd University, 
Budapest, Hungary.
(10)Department of Computational Sciences, Wigner Research Centre for Physics of 
the HAS, Budapest, Hungary.

It is important that antibiotics prescriptions are based on antimicrobial 
susceptibility data to ensure effective treatment outcomes. The increasing 
availability of next-generation sequencing, bacterial whole genome sequencing 
(WGS) can facilitate a more reliable and faster alternative to traditional 
phenotyping for the detection and surveillance of AMR. This work proposes a 
machine learning approach that can predict the minimum inhibitory concentration 
(MIC) for a given antibiotic, here ciprofloxacin, on the basis of both 
genome-wide mutation profiles and profiles of acquired antimicrobial resistance 
genes. We analysed 704 Escherichia coli genomes combined with their respective 
MIC measurements for ciprofloxacin originating from different countries. The 
four most important predictors found by the model, mutations in gyrA residues 
Ser83 and Asp87, a mutation in parC residue Ser80 and presence of the qnrS1 
gene, have been experimentally validated before. Using only these four 
predictors in a linear regression model, 65% and 93% of the test samples' MIC 
were correctly predicted within a two- and a four-fold dilution range, 
respectively. The presented work does not treat machine learning as a black box 
model concept, but also identifies the genomic features that determine 
susceptibility. The recent progress in WGS technology in combination with 
machine learning analysis approaches indicates that in the near future WGS of 
bacteria might become cheaper and faster than a MIC measurement.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-71693-5
PMCID: PMC7490380
PMID: 32929164 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.