1. Aging Cell. 2020 Oct;19(10):e13238. doi: 10.1111/acel.13238. Epub 2020 Sep 16.

Aging-induced aberrant RAGE/PPARα axis promotes hepatic steatosis via 
dysfunctional mitochondrial β oxidation.

Wan J(1), Wu X(2), Chen H(3), Xia X(4), Song X(1), Chen S(1), Lu X(1), Jin J(3), 
Su Q(3), Cai D(5), Liu B(6), Li B(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Emergency and Critical Care Medicine, Shanghai Pudong New Area 
People's Hospital, Shanghai University of Medicine and Health Sciences, 
Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of General Surgery, XinHua Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 
School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(3)Department of Endocrinology, XinHua Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 
School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(4)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 
Affiliated Sixth People's Hospital, Shanghai, China.
(5)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Diabetes Research Center, Institute of 
Aging, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA.
(6)Hubei Key Laboratory for Kidney Disease Pathogenesis and Intervention, Hubei 
Polytechnic University School of Medicine, Huangshi, China.

Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), characterized by an increase in 
hepatic triglyceride (TG) content, is the most common liver disease worldwide. 
Aging has been shown to increase susceptibility to NAFLD; however, the 
underlying molecular mechanism remains poorly understood. In the present study, 
we examined hepatic TG content and gene expression profiles in body 
weight-matched young (3 months old), middle-aged (10 months old), and old 
(20 months old) C57BL/6 mice and found that TGs were markedly accumulated while 
mitochondrial β-oxidation-related genes, including PPARα, were downregulated in 
the liver of old mice. In addition, advanced glycation end product receptor 
(RAGE), a key regulator of glucose metabolism, was upregulated in the old mice. 
Mechanistically, suppression of RAGE upregulated PPARα and its downstream target 
genes, which in turn led to reduced TG retention. Finally, we found that hepatic 
RAGE expression was increased in aging patients, a finding that correlated with 
decreased PPARα levels. Taken together, our findings demonstrate that the 
upregulation of RAGE may play a critical role in aging-associated liver 
steatosis.

© 2020 The Authors. Aging Cell published by Anatomical Society and John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/acel.13238
PMCID: PMC7576254
PMID: 32936538 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest relevant to 
this article was reported.