1. ESC Heart Fail. 2020 Dec;7(6):3772-3781. doi: 10.1002/ehf2.12958. Epub 2020
Sep  22.

Fatal lymphocytic cardiac damage in coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19): autopsy 
reveals a ferroptosis signature.

Jacobs W(1)(2), Lammens M(3), Kerckhofs A(1), Voets E(4), Van San E(5)(6), Van 
Coillie S(5)(6), Peleman C(7)(8), Mergeay M(4), Sirimsi S(3), Matheeussen V(9), 
Jansens H(9), Baar I(10), Vanden Berghe T(5)(6)(7)(11), Jorens PG(7)(8)(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Forensic Medicine, Antwerp University Hospital, University of 
Antwerp, Edegem, Belgium.
(2)Military Hospital Queen Astrid, Crisis Unit, Belgian Defense, Brussels, 
Belgium.
(3)Department of Pathology, Antwerp University Hospital, University of Antwerp, 
Edegem, Belgium.
(4)Department of Anesthesia and Critical Care Medicine, General Hospital Sint 
Dimpna, Geel, Belgium.
(5)VIB Center for Inflammation Research, Ghent, Belgium.
(6)Department of Biomedical Molecular Biology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.
(7)Infla-Med Research Consortium of Excellence, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, 
Belgium.
(8)Department of Medicine and Health Sciences, Laboratory of Experimental 
Medicine and Pediatrics (LEMP), University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(9)Department of Microbiology, Central Laboratory, Antwerp University Hospital, 
University of Antwerp, Edegem, Belgium.
(10)Department of Intensive Care Medicine, Antwerp University Hospital, 
University of Antwerp, Wilrijkstraat 10, Edegem, B-2650, Belgium.
(11)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.

AIMS: Cardiovascular complications, including myocarditis, are observed in 
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). Major cardiac involvement is a potentially 
lethal feature in severe cases. We sought to describe the underlying 
pathophysiological mechanism in COVID-19 lethal cardiogenic shock.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We report on a 48-year-old male COVID-19 patient with 
cardiogenic shock; despite extracorporeal life support, dialysis, and massive 
pharmacological support, this rescue therapy was not successful. Severe acute 
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 RNA was detected at autopsy in the lungs and 
myocardium. Histopathological examination revealed diffuse alveolar damage, 
proliferation of type II pneumocytes, lymphocytes in the lung interstitium, and 
pulmonary microemboli. Moreover, patchy muscular, sometimes perivascular, 
interstitial mononuclear inflammatory infiltrates, dominated by lymphocytes, 
were seen in the cardiac tissue. The lymphocytes 'interlocked' the myocytes, 
resulting in myocyte degeneration and necrosis. Predominantly, T-cell 
lymphocytes with a CD4:CD8 ratio of 1.7 infiltrated the interstitial myocardium, 
reflecting true myocarditis. The myocardial tissue was examined for markers of 
ferroptosis, an iron-catalysed form of regulated cell death that occurs through 
excessive peroxidation of polyunsaturated fatty acids. Immunohistochemical 
staining with E06, a monoclonal antibody binding to oxidized phosphatidylcholine 
(reflecting lipid peroxidation during ferroptosis), was positive in 
morphologically degenerating and necrotic cardiomyocytes adjacent to the 
infiltrate of lymphocytes, near arteries, in the epicardium and myocardium. A 
similar ferroptosis signature was present in the myocardium of a COVID-19 
subject without myocarditis. In a case of sudden death due to viral myocarditis 
of unknown aetiology, however, immunohistochemical staining with E06 was 
negative. The renal proximal tubuli stained positively for E06 and also 
hydroxynonenal (4-HNE), a reactive breakdown product of the lipid peroxides that 
execute ferroptosis. In the case of myocarditis of other aetiology, the renal 
tissue displayed no positivity for E06 or 4-HNE.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings in this case are unique as this is the first report on 
accumulated oxidized phospholipids (or their breakdown products) in myocardial 
and renal tissue in COVID-19. This highlights ferroptosis, proposed to 
detrimentally contribute to some forms of ischaemia-reperfusion injury, as a 
detrimental factor in COVID-19 cardiac damage and multiple organ failure.

© 2020 The Authors. ESC Heart Failure published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on 
behalf of the European Society of Cardiology.

DOI: 10.1002/ehf2.12958
PMCID: PMC7607145
PMID: 32959998

Conflict of interest statement: The findings and conclusions in this report are 
those of the authors. The authors have nothing to disclose.