1. Dis Markers. 2020 Sep 5;2020:8820803. doi: 10.1155/2020/8820803. eCollection 
2020.

Updating a Strategy for Histone Deacetylases and Its Inhibitors in the Potential 
Treatment of Cerebral Ischemic Stroke.

Xu Y(1), Wang Q(2), Chen J(3), Ma Y(4), Liu X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital, Tongji University 
School of Medicine, No. 301 Middle Yanchang Road, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Central Laboratory, Taian City Central Hospital, Shandong First 
Medical University & Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences, Taian, Shandong 
Province, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, Jinan First People's Hospital, Shandong Traditional 
Chinese Medicine University, Jinan, Shandong Province, China.
(4)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kumamoto 
University, Kumamoto, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Cerebral ischemic stroke is one of the severe diseases with a 
pathological condition that leads to nerve cell dysfunction with seldom 
available therapy options. Currently, there are few proven effective treatments 
available for improving cerebral ischemic stroke outcome. However, recently, 
there is increasing evidence that inhibition of histone deacetylase (HDAC) 
activity exerts a strong protective effect in in vivo and vitro models of 
ischemic stroke. Review Summary. HDAC is a posttranslational modification that 
is negatively regulated by histone acetyltransferase (HATS) and histone 
deacetylase. Based on function and DNA sequence similarity, histone deacetylases 
(HDACs) are organized into four different subclasses (I-IV). Modifications of 
histones play a crucial role in cerebral ischemic affair development after 
translation by modulating disrupted acetylation homeostasis. HDAC inhibitors 
(HDACi) mainly exert neuroprotective effects by enhancing histone and nonhistone 
acetylation levels and enhancing gene expression and protein modification 
functions. This article reviews HDAC and its inhibitors, hoping to find 
meaningful therapeutic targets.
CONCLUSIONS: HDAC may be a new biological target for cerebral ischemic stroke. 
Future drug development targeting HDAC may make it a potentially effective 
anticerebral ischemic stroke drug.

Copyright © 2020 Yuzhen Xu et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2020/8820803
PMCID: PMC7492879
PMID: 32963637 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: We declare that we have no financial and 
personal relationships with other people or organizations that can 
inappropriately influence our work; there is no professional or other personal 
interest of any nature or kind in any product, service, and a company that could 
be construed as influencing the position presented in, or the review of, the 
manuscript entitled.