1. Front Bioeng Biotechnol. 2020 Aug 21;8:987. doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2020.00987. 
eCollection 2020.

An Inflamed Human Alveolar Model for Testing the Efficiency of Anti-inflammatory 
Drugs in vitro.

Drasler B(1), Karakocak BB(1), Tankus EB(1), Barosova H(1), Abe J(2), Sousa de 
Almeida M(1), Petri-Fink A(1)(3), Rothen-Rutishauser B(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut Adolphe Merkle, Faculté des Sciences et de Médecine, Université de 
Fribourg, Fribourg, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Oncology, Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Science and 
Medicine, University of Fribourg, Fribourg, Switzerland.
(3)Département de Chimie, Faculté des Sciences et de Médecine, Université de 
Fribourg, Fribourg, Switzerland.

A large number of prevalent lung diseases is associated with tissue 
inflammation. Clinically, corticosteroid therapies are applied systemically or 
via inhalation for the treatment of lung inflammation, and a number of novel 
therapies are being developed that require preclinical testing. In alveoli, 
macrophages and dendritic cells play a key role in initiating and diminishing 
pro-inflammatory reactions and, in particular, macrophage plasticity (M1 and M2 
phenotypes shifts) has been reported to play a significant role in these 
reactions. Thus far, no studies with in vitro lung epithelial models have tested 
the comparison between systemic and direct pulmonary drug delivery. Therefore, 
the aim of this study was to develop an inflamed human alveolar epithelium model 
and to test the resolution of LPS-induced inflammation in vitro with a 
corticosteroid, methylprednisolone (MP). A specific focus of the study was the 
macrophage phenotype shifts in response to these stimuli. First, human 
monocyte-derived macrophages were examined for phenotype shifts upon exposure to 
lipopolysaccharide (LPS), followed by treatment with MP. A multicellular human 
alveolar model, composed of macrophages, dendritic cells, and epithelial cells, 
was then employed for the development of inflamed models. The models were used 
to test the anti-inflammatory potency of MP by monitoring the secretion of 
pro-inflammatory mediators (interleukin [IL]-8, tumor necrosis factor-α [TNF-α], 
and IL-1β) through four different approaches, mimicking clinical scenarios of 
inflammation and treatment. In macrophage monocultures, LPS stimulation shifted 
the phenotype towards M1, as demonstrated by increased release of IL-8 and TNF-α 
and altered expression of phenotype-associated surface markers (CD86, CD206). MP 
treatment of inflamed macrophages reversed the phenotype towards M2. In 
multicellular models, increased pro-inflammatory reactions after LPS exposure 
were observed, as demonstrated by protein secretion and gene expression 
measurements. In all scenarios, among the tested mediators the most pronounced 
anti-inflammatory effect of MP was observed for IL-8. Our findings demonstrate 
that our inflamed multicellular human lung model is a promising tool for the 
evaluation of anti-inflammatory potency of drug candidates in vitro. With the 
presented setup, our model allows a meaningful comparison of the systemic vs. 
inhalation administration routes for the evaluation of the efficacy of a drug in 
vitro.

Copyright © 2020 Drasler, Karakocak, Tankus, Barosova, Abe, Sousa de Almeida, 
Petri-Fink and Rothen-Rutishauser.

DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2020.00987
PMCID: PMC7471931
PMID: 32974315