1. Antioxidants (Basel). 2020 Sep 23;9(10):905. doi: 10.3390/antiox9100905.

Diabetic Retinopathy: The Role of Mitochondria in the Neural Retina and 
Microvascular Disease.

Miller DJ(1), Cascio MA(1), Rosca MG(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Foundational Sciences, Central Michigan University College of 
Medicine, Mount Pleasant, MI 48858, USA.

Diabetic retinopathy (DR), a common chronic complication of diabetes mellitus 
and the leading cause of vision loss in the working-age population, is 
clinically defined as a microvascular disease that involves damage of the 
retinal capillaries with secondary visual impairment. While its clinical 
diagnosis is based on vascular pathology, DR is associated with early 
abnormalities in the electroretinogram, indicating alterations of the neural 
retina and impaired visual signaling. The pathogenesis of DR is complex and 
likely involves the simultaneous dysregulation of multiple metabolic and 
signaling pathways through the retinal neurovascular unit. There is evidence 
that microvascular disease in DR is caused in part by altered energetic 
metabolism in the neural retina and specifically from signals originating in the 
photoreceptors. In this review, we discuss the main pathogenic mechanisms that 
link alterations in neural retina bioenergetics with vascular regression in DR. 
We focus specifically on the recent developments related to alterations in 
mitochondrial metabolism including energetic substrate selection, mitochondrial 
function, oxidation-reduction (redox) imbalance, and oxidative stress, and 
critically discuss the mechanisms of these changes and their consequences on 
retinal function. We also acknowledge implications for emerging therapeutic 
approaches and future research directions to find novel mitochondria-targeted 
therapeutic strategies to correct bioenergetics in diabetes. We conclude that 
retinal bioenergetics is affected in the early stages of diabetes with 
consequences beyond changes in ATP content, and that maintaining mitochondrial 
integrity may alleviate retinal disease.

DOI: 10.3390/antiox9100905
PMCID: PMC7598160
PMID: 32977483

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.