1. Front Neurol. 2020 Aug 20;11:833. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2020.00833. eCollection 
2020.

The Concept of an Epilepsy Brain Bank.

Hernandez-Ronquillo L(1), Miranzadeh Mahabadi H(2), Moien-Afshari F(3), Wu A(4), 
Auer R(5), Zherebitskiy V(5), Borowsky R(6), Mickleborough M(6), Huntsman R(7), 
Vrbancic M(8), Cayabyab FS(4), Taghibiglou C(2), Carter A(1), Tellez-Zenteno 
JF(1).

Author information:
(1)Saskatchewan Epilepsy Program, Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine, 
University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada.
(2)Department of Anatomy, Physiology and Pharmacology, College of Medicine 
University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada.
(3)Epilepsy Program, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(4)Division of Neurosurgery, Department of Surgery, University of Saskatchewan, 
Saskatoon, SK, Canada.
(5)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Royal University Hospital, 
Saskatchewan Health Region, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada.
(6)Cognitive Neuroscience Laboratory, Department of Psychology, College of Arts 
and Science, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada.
(7)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, University of 
Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada.
(8)Department of Clinical Health Psychology, Ellis Hall, Royal University 
Hospital, Saskatoon, SK, Canada.

Epilepsy comprises more than 40 clinical syndromes affecting millions of 
patients and families worldwide. To decode the molecular and pathological 
framework of epilepsy researchers, need reliable human epilepsy and control 
brain samples. Brain bank organizations collecting and supplying well-documented 
clinically and pathophysiologically tissue specimens are important for 
high-quality neurophysiology and neuropharmacology studies for epilepsy and 
other neurological diseases. New development in molecular mechanism and new 
treatment methods for neurological disorders have evoked increased demands for 
human brain tissue. An epilepsy brain bank is a storage source for both the 
frozen samples as well as the formaldehyde fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissue 
from epilepsy surgery resections. In 2014, the University of Saskatchewan have 
started collecting human epilepsy brain tissues for the first time in Canada. 
This review highlights the necessity and importance of Epilepsy Brain bank that 
provides unique access for research to valuable source of brain tissue and blood 
samples from epilepsy patients.

Copyright © 2020 Hernandez-Ronquillo, Miranzadeh Mahabadi, Moien-Afshari, Wu, 
Auer, Zherebitskiy, Borowsky, Mickleborough, Huntsman, Vrbancic, Cayabyab, 
Taghibiglou, Carter and Tellez-Zenteno.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2020.00833
PMCID: PMC7468480
PMID: 32973652