1. Front Bioeng Biotechnol. 2020 Aug 25;8:1001. doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2020.01001. 
eCollection 2020.

Synergy Screening Identifies a Compound That Selectively Enhances the 
Antibacterial Activity of Nitric Oxide.

Chou WK(1), Vaikunthan M(1), Schröder HV(1), Link AJ(1)(2)(3), Kim H(2)(4), 
Brynildsen MP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Princeton University, 
Princeton, NJ, United States.
(2)Frick Chemistry Laboratory, Department of Chemistry, Princeton University, 
Princeton, NJ, United States.
(3)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, United 
States.
(4)Small Molecule Screening Center, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, United 
States.

Antibiotic resistance poses a serious threat to global health. To reinforce the 
anti-infective arsenal, many novel therapeutic strategies to fight bacterial 
infections are being explored. Among them, anti-virulence therapies, which 
target pathways important for virulence, have attracted much attention. Nitric 
oxide (NO) defense systems have been identified as critical for the pathogenesis 
of various bacteria, making them an appealing therapeutic target. In this study, 
we performed chemical screens to identify inhibitors of NO detoxification in 
Escherichia coli. We found that 2-mercaptobenzothiazole (2-MBT) can potently 
inhibit cellular detoxification of NO, achieving a level of inhibition that 
resembled the effect of genetically removing Hmp, the dominant detoxification 
enzyme under oxygenated conditions. Further analysis revealed that in the 
presence of NO, 2-MBT impaired the catalysis of Hmp and synthesis of Hmp and 
other proteins, whereas in its absence there were minimal perturbations to 
growth and protein synthesis. In addition, by studying the structure-activity 
relationship of 2-MBT, we found that both sulfur atoms in 2-MBT were vital for 
its inhibition of NO detoxification. Interestingly, when 2-mercaptothiazole 
(2-MT), which lacked the benzene ring, was used, differing biological activities 
were observed, although they too were NO dependent. Specifically, 2-MT could 
still prohibit NO detoxification, though it did not interfere with Hmp 
catalysis; rather, it was a stronger inhibitor of protein synthesis and it 
reduced the transcript levels of hmp, which was not observed with 2-MBT. 
Overall, these results provide a strong foundation for further exploration of 
2-MBT and 2-MT for therapeutic applications.

Copyright © 2020 Chou, Vaikunthan, Schröder, Link, Kim and Brynildsen.

DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2020.01001
PMCID: PMC7477088
PMID: 32984281