1. PLoS One. 2020 Sep 28;15(9):e0239677. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0239677. 
eCollection 2020.

Genomic characterization of a diazotrophic microbiota associated with maize 
aerial root mucilage.

Higdon SM(1), Pozzo T(1), Kong N(2), Huang BC(2)(3), Yang ML(2), Jeannotte R(2), 
Brown CT(2), Bennett AB(1), Weimer BC(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Sciences, University of California, Davis, California, 
United States of America.
(2)Department of Population Health and Reproduction, University of California, 
Davis, California, United States of America.
(3)100K Pathogen Genome Project, University of California, Davis, California, 
United States of America.

A geographically isolated maize landrace cultivated on nitrogen-depleted fields 
without synthetic fertilizer in the Sierra Mixe region of Oaxaca, Mexico 
utilizes nitrogen derived from the atmosphere and develops an extensive network 
of mucilage-secreting aerial roots that harbors a diazotrophic (N2-fixing) 
microbiota. Targeting these diazotrophs, we selected nearly 600 microbes of a 
collection obtained from mucilage and confirmed their ability to incorporate 
heavy nitrogen (15N2) metabolites in vitro. Sequencing their genomes and 
conducting comparative bioinformatic analyses showed that these genomes had 
substantial phylogenetic diversity. We examined each diazotroph genome for the 
presence of nif genes essential to nitrogen fixation (nifHDKENB) and 
carbohydrate utilization genes relevant to the mucilage polysaccharide 
digestion. These analyses identified diazotrophs that possessed the canonical 
nif gene operons, as well as many other operon configurations with concomitant 
fixation and release of >700 different 15N labeled metabolites. We further 
demonstrated that many diazotrophs possessed alternative nif gene operons and 
confirmed their genomic potential to derive chemical energy from mucilage 
polysaccharide to fuel nitrogen fixation. These results confirm that some 
diazotrophic bacteria associated with Sierra Mixe maize were capable of 
incorporating atmospheric nitrogen into their small molecule extracellular 
metabolites through multiple nif gene configurations while others were able to 
fix nitrogen without the canonical (nifHDKENB) genes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0239677
PMCID: PMC7521700
PMID: 32986754 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interests 
relevant to this work for employment, consultancy, patents, products in 
development, or marketed products. None of the authors are employed by the major 
funding agency of this work, MARS, Inc., but were employed by UC Davis. This 
does not alter our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.