1. Front Immunol. 2020 Sep 10;11:2121. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.02121. eCollection
 2020.

Increased Glycated Hemoglobin Levels in Patients With Helicobacter pylori 
Infection Are Associated With the Grading of Chronic Gastritis.

Maluf S(1)(2)(3), Salgado JV(4), Cysne DN(3), Camelo DMF(3), Nascimento 
JR(1)(3), Maluf BVT(3), Silva LDM(1), Belfort MRC(1), Silva LA(3)(5), Guerra 
RNM(3)(5), Salgado Filho N(6), Nascimento FRF(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)Health Science Graduate Program, Federal University of Maranhão, São Luís, 
Brazil.
(2)Gastroenterology Service of the University Hospital, Federal University of 
Maranhão, São Luís, Brazil.
(3)Immunophysiology Laboratory, Department of Pathology, Federal University of 
Maranhão, São Luís, Brazil.
(4)Department of Physiological Sciences, Federal University of Maranhão, São 
Luís, Brazil.
(5)Department of Pathology, Federal University of Maranhão, São Luís, Brazil.
(6)Department of Medicine I, Federal University of Maranhão, São Luís, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies have found an association between Helicobacter pylori 
infection and prediabetes. Whether H. pylori per se or host factors are involved 
in the disturbance of glycated hemoglobin needs further investigation. The aim 
of this study was to determine the association of glycated hemoglobin levels 
with endoscopic diagnosis and the inflammatory response in H. pylori infection.
METHODS: A cross-sectional study was carried out in 88 dyspeptic non-diabetic 
adults who underwent esophagogastroduodenoscopy. The diagnosis of H. pylori 
infection was performed through urease test and histopathological exam. Cases 
were initially distributed into two groups: control (without H. pylori 
infection, n = 22) and HP (patients with H. pylori infection, n = 66). HbA1c was 
measured to determine prediabetes status according to the American Diabetes 
Association criteria, and then the groups were subdivided into non-prediabetic 
(n = 14), prediabetic (n = 8), non-prediabetic HP (n = 26) and prediabetic HP (n 
= 40) groups. Gastric mucosa was histologically evaluated to determine H. pylori 
density and inflammatory activity according to Sydney System. To investigate the 
balance of anti-inflammatory and pro-inflammatory cytokines we measured 
interleukin 10 (anti-inflammatory) and Tumor Necrosis Factor-a 
(pro-inflammatory) in the plasma or in the gastric mucosa.
RESULTS: Patients with H. pylori infection had higher mean HbA1c levels than 
those without H. pylori infection. However, increased HbA1c levels were not 
associated with H. pylori-related factors but with the bacterial density, the 
intensity of inflammation and the activity of the chronic gastritis. In 
addition, H. pylori infection per se did not alter IL-10 and TNF-α neither in 
the plasma nor in the gastric mucosa, but the bacterial density was negatively 
correlated with systemic and local IL-10 expression. Although no correlation was 
found between systemic cytokines and HbA1c levels, local anti-inflammatory 
cytokine was correlated with HbA1c levels.
CONCLUSION: Long-term H. pylori infection is associated with prediabetes. This 
association is not related to the presence of H. pylori per se but depends on 
the extent of bacterial colonization and the degree of both local inflammation 
and activity of the chronic gastritis.

Copyright © 2020 Maluf, Salgado, Cysne, Camelo, Nascimento, Maluf, Silva, 
Belfort, Silva, Guerra, Salgado Filho and Nascimento.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.02121
PMCID: PMC7511518
PMID: 33013895 [Indexed for MEDLINE]