1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2020 Oct 2;99(40):e22442. doi: 
10.1097/MD.0000000000022442.

Delivery mode-associated gut microbiota in the first 3 months of life in a 
country with high obesity rates: A descriptive study.

Murata C(1), Gutiérrez-Castrellón P(2), Pérez-Villatoro F(3), García-Torres 
I(4), Enríquez-Flores S(4), de la Mora-de la Mora I(4), Fernández-Lainez C(5), 
Werner J(6), López-Velázquez G(4).

Author information:
(1)Research Methodology Department. National Institute of Pediatrics, Mexico.
(2)General Hospital Dr. Manuel Gea González.
(3)Winter Genomics.
(4)Group of Research on Biomolecules and Infant Health, IEM&S Lab. INP, México.
(5)Laboratory of Inborn Errors of Metabolism and Screening, INP, and 
Postgraduate in Biological Sciences, UNAM, México. Actual Address: 
Immunoendocrinology, Division of Medical Biology, Department of Pathology and 
Medical Biology, University of Groningen and University Medical Center 
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(6)Indigenous Services Canada, Thunder Bay, Ontario, Canada.

Delivery methods during childbirth and their related gut microbiota profiles 
have important impacts on health later in life, they can contribute to the 
development of diseases such as obesity, whose highest prevalence rate is found 
among the Mexican child population. Coincidentally, Mexico has one of the 
highest global average annual rate increase in cesarean births (C-section). 
Since Mexico leads the world in childhood obesity, studying the relationship 
between childbirth delivery methods and gut microbiota profiles in this 
vulnerable population may be used to identify early risk factors for obesity in 
other developed and developing countries. The objective of this study is to 
determine the association between child delivery method and gut microbiota 
profiles in healthy Mexican newborns.Fecal samples of 57 term infants who 
participated in a randomized clinical trial in 2013 to study the safety of Agave 
fructans in newborns, were used in this study. DNA samples were extracted and 
used to characterize the microbiota composition using high-throughput 16S rRNA 
gene sequencing. The samples were further divided based on childbirth delivery 
method, as well as early diet. Gut microbiota profiles were determined and 
analyzed using cluster analysis followed by multiple correspondence analysis.An 
unusual high abundance of Proteobacteria was found in the gut microbiota of all 
Mexican infants studied, regardless of delivery method. Feces from infants born 
by C-section had low levels of Bacteroidetes, high levels of Firmicutes, 
especially Clostridium and Enterococcus, and a strikingly high ratio of 
Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes (F:B). Profiles enriched in Bacteroidetes and low F:B 
ratios, were strongly associated with vaginal delivery.The profile of gut 
microbiota associated with feces from Mexican infants born by C-section, may be 
added to the list of boosting factors for the worrying obesity epidemic in 
Mexico.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000022442
PMCID: PMC7535699
PMID: 33019428 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose