1. PLoS One. 2020 Oct 7;15(10):e0239966. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0239966. 
eCollection 2020.

Analysis of mutational and proteomic heterogeneity of gastric cancer suggests an 
effective pipeline to monitor post-treatment tumor burden using circulating 
tumor DNA.

Sasaki N(1)(2)(3), Iwaya T(1)(2), Chiba T(1), Fujita M(4), Ju Z(5), Endo F(1), 
Yaegashi M(1), Hachiya T(6), Sugimoto R(7), Sugai T(7), Siwak DR(8), Liotta 
LA(9), Lu Y(8), Mills GB(8)(10), Nakagawa H(4), Nishizuka SS(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Iwate Medical University School of Medicine, Yahaba, 
Japan.
(2)Molecular Therapeutics Laboratory, Department of Surgery, Iwate Medical 
University School of Medicine, Yahaba, Japan.
(3)Division of Biomedical Research and Development, Iwate Medical University 
Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Yahaba, Japan.
(4)Laboratory for Cancer Genomics, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Science, 
Yokohama, Japan.
(5)Department of Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, The University of 
Texas, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America.
(6)Division of Biomedical Information Analysis, Iwate Tohoku Medical Megabank 
Organization, Iwate Medical University, Yahaba, Japan.
(7)Department of Molecular Diagnostic Pathology, Iwate Medical University School 
of Medicine, Yahaba, Japan.
(8)Department of Genomic Medicine, The University of Texas, MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America.
(9)Center for Applied Proteomics and Molecular Medicine, George Mason 
University, Fairfax, Virginia, United States of America.
(10)Department of Cell, Development & Cancer Biology, Knight Cancer Institute, 
Oregon Health Science University School of Medicine, Portland, Oregon, United 
States of America.

Circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) is released from tumor cells into blood in 
advanced cancer patients. Although gene mutations in individual tumors can be 
diverse and heterogenous, ctDNA has the potential to provide comprehensive 
biomarker information. Here, we performed multi-region sampling (three sites) 
per resected specimen from 10 gastric cancer patients followed by targeted 
sequencing and proteomic profiling using reverse-phase protein arrays. A total 
of 126 non-synonymous mutations were identified from 30 samples from 10 tumors. 
Of these, 16 (12.7%) were present in all three regions and were designated as 
founder mutations. Variant allele frequencies (VAFs) of founder mutations were 
significantly higher than those of non-founder mutations. Phylogenetic analysis 
also demonstrated a good concordance between founder and truncal mutations, 
defined as mutations shared by all simulated clones at the trunk of the tumor 
phylogenetic tree. These findings led us to prioritize founder mutations for 
quantitative ctDNA monitoring by digital PCR with individually-designed 
primer/probe sets. In preoperative plasma, the average ctDNA VAF of founder 
mutations was significantly higher than that of non-founder mutations (p = 
0.039). Proteomic heterogeneity was present across the tumor regions both within 
and between patients independent of mutational status. Our results suggest that, 
in practice, mutations having high VAF identified without multi-regional 
sequencing may be immediately useful for quantitative ctDNA monitoring but do 
not provide sufficient information to predict the proteomic composition of 
tumors.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0239966
PMCID: PMC7540850
PMID: 33027286 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: T. Iwaya receives research grants from Nippon 
Kayaku, Chugai Pharmaceutical, and Daiichi Sankyo. T. Hachiya is an employee and 
a Board Member of Genome Analytics Japan, Inc. G. B. Mills receives research 
grants from AstraZeneca, Karus Therapeutics, Nanostring, Pfizer, Tesaro, Adelson 
Medical Research Foundation, Breast Cancer Research Foundation, Komen Research 
Foundation, Ovarian Cancer Research Foundation, and Prospect Creek Foundation; 
serves as a consultant/scientific advisory board of AstraZeneca, Chrysalis(*), 
ImmunoMET, Ionis, Lilly USA, Mills Institute for Personalized Care(*), 
Nuevolution(*), PDX Pharma, Signalchem Lifesciences, Symphogen, and Tarveda (*, 
travel reimbursement only); is a stockowner of Catena Pharmaceuticals, 
ImmunoMet, SignalChem, Spindletop Ventures, and Tarveda; and has a relationship 
in licensed technology to HRD assay to Myriad Genetics, and DSP to Nanostring. 
S. S. Nishizuka receives research grants from Array Jet, Geninus, Taiho 
Pharmaceuticals, and Boelinger-Ingelheim, Geninus; serves as a consultant of 
CLEA Japan; receives travel expense reimbursement from Mills Institute for 
Personalized Care, Nomura Jimusyo; and receives honoraria from Chugai 
Pharmaceutical. These do not alter our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing 
data and materials.