1. Mod Pathol. 2021 Jan;34(Suppl 1):38-47. doi: 10.1038/s41379-020-00693-7. Epub 
2020 Oct 6.

Problematic breast tumors reassessed in light of novel molecular data.

Pareja F(1), Weigelt B(1), Reis-Filho JS(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, 
NY, 10021, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, 
NY, 10021, USA. reisfilj@mskcc.org.

Breast cancer is a vastly heterogeneous disease encompassing a panoply of 
special histological subtypes. Although rare breast tumors have largely not been 
investigated systematically in large scale genomics series, recent studies have 
shed light on the genetic underpinnings of special histologic subtypes of breast 
cancer. Genomic analyses of estrogen receptor-positive special histologic types 
of breast cancer have not resulted in the identification of novel pathognomonic 
genetic alterations in addition to the confirmation of the presence of CDH1 
loss-of-function mutations in invasive lobular carcinomas. By contrast, the 
analyses of triple-negative breast cancers have demonstrated that low-grade 
triple-negative breast cancers categorically differ from the common forms of 
high-grade triple-negative disease biologically and phenotypically and are 
underpinned by specific fusion genes or hotspot mutations. A subset of low-grade 
triple-negative disease has been shown to harbor highly recurrent if not 
pathognomonic genetic alterations, such as ETV6-NTRK3 fusion gene in secretory 
carcinomas, the MYB-NFIB fusion gene, MYBL1 rearrangements or MYB gene 
amplification in adenoid cystic carcinomas, and HRAS Q61 hotspot mutations 
coupled with mutations in PI3K pathway genes in estrogen receptor-negative 
adenomyoepitheliomas. A subset of these pathognomonic genetic alterations (e.g., 
NTRK1/2/3 fusion genes) now constitute an FDA approved indication for the use of 
TRK inhibitors in the advanced/metastatic setting. These studies have also 
corroborated that salivary gland-like tumors of the breast, other than acinic 
cell carcinomas, harbor the repertoire of somatic genetic alterations detected 
in their salivary gland counterparts. Reassuringly, the systematic study of 
special histologic types of breast cancer utilizing state-of-the-art sequencing 
approaches, rather than rendering pathology obsolete, has actually strengthened 
the importance of breast cancer histologic typing and is providing additional 
ancillary markers for the diagnosis of these rare but fascinating entities.

DOI: 10.1038/s41379-020-00693-7
PMCID: PMC8260146
PMID: 33024304 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest JSR-F reports receiving 
personal/consultancy fees from Goldman Sachs and REPARE Therapeutics, membership 
of the scientific advisory boards of VolitionRx and Paige.AI, and ad hoc 
membership of the scientific advisory boards of Roche Tissue Diagnostics, 
Ventana Medical Systems, Novartis, Genentech and InVicro, outside the scope of 
this study. The remaining authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.