1. J Int AIDS Soc. 2020 Oct;23(10):e25609. doi: 10.1002/jia2.25609.

Retention-in-care in the PMTCT cascade: definitions matter! Analyses from the 
INSPIRE projects in Malawi, Nigeria and Zimbabwe.

Font H(1), Rollins N(2), Essajee S(3), Becquet R(1), Foster G(4), Mangwiro 
AZ(5), Mwapasa V(6), Oyeledun B(7), Phiri S(8)(9)(10), Sam-Agudu NA(11)(12), 
Bellare NB(13), Orne-Gliemann J(1); INSPIRE group.

Author information:
(1)ISPED, Inserm, Bordeaux Population Health Research Center, UMR 1219, 
University of Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France.
(2)Department of Maternal, Newborn, Child and Adolescent Health, World Health 
Organization, Geneva, Switzerland.
(3)Data and Analytics Section, Unicef, New York, USA.
(4)Family AIDS Caring Trust, World Health Organization, Mutare, Zimbabwe.
(5)Clinton Health Access Initiative, Harare, Zimbabwe.
(6)Department of Public Health, College of Medicine, University of Malawi, 
Blantyre, Malawi.
(7)Centre for Integrated Health Programs, Abuja, Nigeria.
(8)Lighthouse Trust, Lilongwe, Malawi.
(9)Department of Medicine, University of North Carolina School of Medicine, 
Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(10)Department of Public Health, School of Public Health and Family Medicine, 
College of Medicine, University of Malawi, Lilongwe, Malawi.
(11)International Research Center of Excellence, Institute of Human Virology 
Nigeria, Abuja, Nigeria.
(12)Division of Epidemiology and Prevention, Institute of Human Virology, 
University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(13)Strategic Information Department, UNAIDS, Geneva, Switzerland.

INTRODUCTION: Definitions of retention-in-care in Prevention of Mother-to-Child 
Transmission of HIV (PMTCT) vary substantially between studies and programmes. 
Some definitions are based on visits missed/made, others on a minimum total 
number of visits, or attendance at a final clinic visit at a specific time. An 
agreed definition could contribute to developing evidence-based interventions 
for improving retention-in-care. In this paper, we estimated retention-in-care 
rates according to different definitions, and we quantified and visualized the 
degree of agreement between definitions.
METHODS: We calculated retention in care rates using nine definitions in the six 
INSPIRE PMTCT intervention studies, conducted in three sub-Saharan African 
countries between 2013 and 2017. With data from one of the studies (E4E), we 
estimated the agreement between definitions using Gwet's agreement coefficient 
(AC1) and concordance. We calculated positive predictive values (PPV) and 
negative predictive values (NPV) for all definitions considering successively 
each definition as the reference standard. Finally, we used a Multiple 
Correspondence Analysis (MCA) to examine clustering of the way different 
definitions handle retention-in-care.
RESULTS: Retention-in-care rates among 5107 women ranged from 30% to 76% in the 
complete dataset with Gwet's AC1 being 0.56 [0.53; 0.59] indicating a moderate 
agreement between all definitions together. Two pairs of definitions with high 
inner concordance and agreement had either very high PPV or very high NPV, and 
appeared distinct from the other five definitions on the MCA figures. These 
pairs of definitions were also the ones resulting in the lowest and highest 
estimates of retention-in-care. The simplest definition, that only required a 
final clinic visit to classify women as retained in care, and classified 55% of 
women as retained in care, had a PPV ranging from 0.7 to 1 and a NPV ranging 
from 0.69 to 0.98 when excluding the two pairs afore-mentioned; it resulted in a 
moderate to substantial agreement and a 70% to 90% concordance with all other 
definitions.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study highlights the variability of definitions in estimating 
retention-in-care. Some definitions are very stringent which may be required in 
some instances. A simple indicator such as attendance at a single time point may 
be sufficient for programme planning and evaluation.

© 2020 The Authors. Journal of the International AIDS Society published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of the International AIDS Society.

DOI: 10.1002/jia2.25609
PMCID: PMC7543052
PMID: 33030306 [Indexed for MEDLINE]