1. Aging Cell. 2020 Nov;19(11):e13166. doi: 10.1111/acel.13166. Epub 2020 Oct 13.

Age-induced mitochondrial DNA point mutations are inadequate to alter metabolic 
homeostasis in response to nutrient challenge.

Moore TM(1)(2), Zhou Z(2), Strumwasser AR(2), Cohn W(3), Lin AJ(2), Cory K(2), 
Whitney K(2), Ho T(2), Ho T(2), Lee JL(2), Rucker DH(2), Hoang AN(2), Widjaja 
K(2), Abrishami AD(4), Charugundla S(4), Stiles L(2), Whitelegge JP(3), Turcotte 
LP(1), Wanagat J(2), Hevener AL(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Dana & David Dornsife College of Letters, 
Arts, and Sciences, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(2)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Hypertension, Department of 
Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences & The Semel Institute for 
Neuroscience and Human Behavior, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(4)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, David Geffen School of 
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(5)Iris Cantor-UCLA Women's Health Center, University of California, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA.

Mitochondrial dysfunction is frequently associated with impairment in metabolic 
homeostasis and insulin action, and is thought to underlie cellular aging. 
However, it is unclear whether mitochondrial dysfunction is a cause or 
consequence of insulin resistance in humans. To determine the impact of 
intrinsic mitochondrial dysfunction on metabolism and insulin action, we 
performed comprehensive metabolic phenotyping of the polymerase gamma (PolG) 
D257A "mutator" mouse, a model known to accumulate supraphysiological 
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) point mutations. We utilized the heterozygous PolG 
mutator mouse (PolG+/mut ) because it accumulates mtDNA point mutations 
~ 500-fold > wild-type mice (WT), but fails to develop an overt progeria 
phenotype, unlike PolGmut/mut animals. To determine whether mtDNA point 
mutations induce metabolic dysfunction, we examined male PolG+/mut mice at 6 and 
12 months of age during normal chow feeding, after 24-hr starvation, and 
following high-fat diet (HFD) feeding. No marked differences were observed in 
glucose homeostasis, adiposity, protein/gene markers of metabolism, or oxygen 
consumption in muscle between WT and PolG+/mut mice during any of the conditions 
or ages studied. However, proteomic analyses performed on isolated mitochondria 
from 12-month-old PolG+/mut mouse muscle revealed alterations in the expression 
of mitochondrial ribosomal proteins, electron transport chain components, and 
oxidative stress-related factors compared with WT. These findings suggest that 
mtDNA point mutations at levels observed in mammalian aging are insufficient to 
disrupt metabolic homeostasis and insulin action in male mice.

© 2020 The Authors. Aging Cell published by the Anatomical Society and John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/acel.13166
PMCID: PMC7681042
PMID: 33049094 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.