1. PLoS Biol. 2020 Oct 13;18(10):e3000877. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3000877. 
eCollection 2020 Oct.

High-throughput mapping of the phage resistance landscape in E. coli.

Mutalik VK(1)(2), Adler BA(2)(3), Rishi HS(4)(5), Piya D(2)(3), Zhong C(1), 
Koskella B(6), Kutter EM(7), Calendar R(8), Novichkov PS(1), Price MN(1), 
Deutschbauer AM(1)(2)(9), Arkin AP(1)(2)(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Environmental Genomics and Systems Biology Division, Lawrence Berkeley 
National Laboratory, Berkeley, California, United States of America.
(2)Innovative Genomics Institute, Berkeley, California, United States of 
America.
(3)Department of Bioengineering, University of California - Berkeley, Berkeley, 
California, United States of America.
(4)Biophysics Graduate Group, University of California - Berkeley, Berkeley, 
California, United States of America.
(5)Designated Emphasis Program in Computational and Genomic Biology, University 
of California - Berkeley, Berkeley, California, United States of America.
(6)Department of Integrative Biology, University of California - Berkeley, 
Berkeley, California, United States of America.
(7)The Evergreen State College, Olympia, Washington, United States of America.
(8)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California - 
Berkeley, Berkeley, California, United States of America.
(9)Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, University of California - 
Berkeley, Berkeley, California, United States of America.

Bacteriophages (phages) are critical players in the dynamics and function of 
microbial communities and drive processes as diverse as global biogeochemical 
cycles and human health. Phages tend to be predators finely tuned to attack 
specific hosts, even down to the strain level, which in turn defend themselves 
using an array of mechanisms. However, to date, efforts to rapidly and 
comprehensively identify bacterial host factors important in phage infection and 
resistance have yet to be fully realized. Here, we globally map the host genetic 
determinants involved in resistance to 14 phylogenetically diverse 
double-stranded DNA phages using two model Escherichia coli strains (K-12 and 
BL21) with known sequence divergence to demonstrate strain-specific differences. 
Using genome-wide loss-of-function and gain-of-function genetic technologies, we 
are able to confirm previously described phage receptors as well as uncover a 
number of previously unknown host factors that confer resistance to one or more 
of these phages. We uncover differences in resistance factors that strongly 
align with the susceptibility of K-12 and BL21 to specific phage. We also 
identify both phage-specific mechanisms, such as the unexpected role of 
cyclic-di-GMP in host sensitivity to phage N4, and more generic defenses, such 
as the overproduction of colanic acid capsular polysaccharide that defends 
against a wide array of phages. Our results indicate that host responses to 
phages can occur via diverse cellular mechanisms. Our systematic and 
high-throughput genetic workflow to characterize phage-host interaction 
determinants can be extended to diverse bacteria to generate datasets that allow 
predictive models of how phage-mediated selection will shape bacterial phenotype 
and evolution. The results of this study and future efforts to map the phage 
resistance landscape will lead to new insights into the coevolution of hosts and 
their phage, which can ultimately be used to design better phage therapeutic 
treatments and tools for precision microbiome engineering.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3000877
PMCID: PMC7553319
PMID: 33048924 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: I have read the journal’s policy and the authors 
of this manuscript have the following competing interests: VKM, AMD, and APA 
consult for and hold equity in Felix Biotechnology, Inc.