1. Lung Cancer. 2020 Dec;150:26-35. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2020.09.023. Epub 2020
 Sep 29.

Inhibition of ACK1 delays and overcomes acquired resistance of EGFR mutant NSCLC 
cells to the third generation EGFR inhibitor, osimertinib.

Gu J(1), Qian L(1), Zhang G(2), Mahajan NP(3), Owonikoko TK(2), Ramalingam 
SS(2), Sun SY(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Jiangsu Cancer Hospital, Nanjing, Jiangsu, 
PR China; Departments of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Emory University 
School of Medicine and Winship Cancer Institute, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(2)Departments of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Emory University School of 
Medicine and Winship Cancer Institute, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(3)Department of Surgery, Siteman Cancer Center, Washington University in St. 
Louis, St. Louis, MO, USA.
(4)Departments of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Emory University School of 
Medicine and Winship Cancer Institute, Atlanta, GA, USA. Electronic address: 
ssun@emory.edu.

OBJECTIVES: The emergence of acquired resistance to the third generation EGFR 
inhibitor, osimertinib (AZD9291 or TAGRISSO™), is an unavoidable huge clinical 
challenge. The involvement of ACK1, a non-receptor tyrosine kinase with an 
oncogenic function, in regulating cell response to osimertinib has not been 
investigated and thus is the focus of this study.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Drug effects on cell growth were evaluated by measuring 
cell numbers and colony formation. Apoptosis was monitored with flow cytometry 
for annexin V-positive cells and Western blotting for protein cleavage. 
Intracellular protein and mRNA alterations were detected with Western blotting 
and qRT-PCR, respectively. Drug effects on delaying osimertinib acquired 
resistance were determined using colony formation in vitro and xenografts in 
nude mice in vivo, respectively. Cell senescence was assayed by β-galactosidase 
staining.
RESULTS: Inhibition of ACK1 with the novel ACK1 inhibitor, (R)-9b synergized 
with osimertinib in inhibiting the growth of EGFR mutant NSCLC cell lines. 
Similar results were also generated with ACK1 gene knockdown. The combination of 
osimertinib and (R)-9b enhanced induction of apoptosis. In both in vitro and in 
vivo long-term resistance delay assays, the combination of (R)-9b and 
osimertinib clearly delayed the emergence of osimertinib-resistance. Further, 
the (R)-9b and osimertinib combination was also effective in inhibiting the 
growth of EGFR mutant NSCLC cell lines with acquired resistance to osimertinib, 
which possess elevated levels of ACK1, and the growth of osimertinib-resistant 
tumors in vivo. In some resistant cell lines, the combinations induced 
senescence in addition to induction of apoptosis.
CONCLUSIONS: These novel findings suggest that ACK1 inhibition might be a 
potential and innovative strategy for delaying and overcoming osimertinb 
acquired resistance.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2020.09.023
PMCID: PMC7722235
PMID: 33049499 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest NPM is named 
as inventor on patent “Inhibitors of ACK1/TNK2 Tyrosine Kinase” (patent no. 
9,850,216 and 10,017,478), which have been licensed by TechnoGenesys, Inc.. NPM 
is a cofounder of TechnoGenesys, Inc., owns stock, and serves as consultant. SSR 
is on consulting/advisory board for AstraZeneca, BMS, Merck, Roche, Tesaro and 
Amgen. TKO is on consulting/advisory board for Novartis, Celgene, Lilly, Sandoz, 
Abbvie, Eisai, Takeda, Bristol-Myers Squibb, MedImmune, Amgen, AstraZeneca and 
Boehringer Ingelheim. Other people declare that they have no conflict of 
interest related to this work.