1. Front Microbiol. 2020 Sep 11;11:513070. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.513070. 
eCollection 2020.

Genomic Analysis Reveals the Genetic Determinants Associated With Antibiotic 
Resistance in the Zoonotic Pathogen Campylobacter spp. Distributed Globally.

Rivera-Mendoza D(1), Martínez-Flores I(2), Santamaría RI(2), Lozano L(2), 
Bustamante VH(3), Pérez-Morales D(4).

Author information:
(1)Programa de Maestría en Biotecnología, Centro de Investigación en 
Biotecnología, Universidad Autónoma del Estado de Morelos, Cuernavaca, Mexico.
(2)Programa de Genómica Evolutiva, Centro de Ciencias Genómicas, Universidad 
Nacional Autónoma de México, Cuernavaca, Mexico.
(3)Departamento de Microbiología Molecular, Instituto de Biotecnología, 
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Cuernavaca, Mexico.
(4)CONACYT-Centro de Investigación en Biotecnología, Universidad Autónoma del 
Estado de Morelos, Cuernavaca, Mexico.

The genus Campylobacter groups 32 Gram-negative bacteria species, several being 
zoonotic pathogens and a major cause of human gastroenteritis worldwide. 
Antibiotic resistant Campylobacter is considered by the World Health 
Organization as a high priority pathogen for research and development of new 
antibiotics. Genetic elements related to antibiotic resistance in the classical 
C. coli and C. jejuni species, which infect humans and livestock, have been 
analyzed in numerous studies, mainly focused on local geographical areas. 
However, the presence of these resistance determinants in other Campylobacter 
species, as well as in C. jejuni and C. coli strains distributed globally, 
remains poorly studied. In this work, we analyzed the occurrence and 
distribution of antibiotic resistance factors in 237 Campylobacter closed 
genomes available in NCBI, obtained from isolates collected worldwide, in 
different dates, from distinct hosts and comprising 22 Campylobacter species. 
Our data revealed 18 distinct genetic determinants, genes or point mutations in 
housekeeping genes, associated with resistance to antibiotics from 
aminoglycosides, β-lactams, fluoroquinolones, lincosamides, macrolides, 
phenicols or tetracyclines classes, which are differentially distributed among 
the Campylobacter species tested, on chromosomes or plasmids. Three resistance 
determinants, the bla OXA-493 and bla OXA-576 genes, putatively related to 
β-lactams resistance, as well as the lnu(AN2) gene, putatively related to 
lincosamides resistance, had not been reported in Campylobacter; thus, they 
represent novel determinants for antibiotic resistance in Campylobacter spp., 
which expands the insight on the Campylobacter resistome. Interestingly, we 
found that some of the genetic determinants associated with antibiotic 
resistance are Campylobacter species-specific; e.g., the bla OXA-493 gene and 
the T86V mutation in gyrA were found only in the C. lari group, whereas genes 
associated with aminoglycosides resistance were found only in C. jejuni and C. 
coli. Additional analyses revealed how are distributed the resistance and 
multidrug resistance Campylobacter genotypes assessed, with respect to hosts, 
geographical locations, and collection dates. Thus, our findings further expand 
the knowledge on the factors that can determine or favor the antibiotic 
resistance in Campylobacter species distributed globally, which can be useful to 
choose a suitable antibiotic treatment to control the zoonotic infections by 
these bacteria.

Copyright © 2020 Rivera-Mendoza, Martínez-Flores, Santamaría, Lozano, Bustamante 
and Pérez-Morales.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.513070
PMCID: PMC7518152
PMID: 33042043