1. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2021 Jun;278(6):1723-1732. doi: 
10.1007/s00405-020-06406-9. Epub 2020 Oct 14.

European Laryngological Society position paper on laryngeal dysplasia Part II: 
diagnosis, treatment, and follow-up.

Eckel HE(1), Simo R(2), Quer M(3), Odell E(4), Paleri V(5), Klussmann JP(6), 
Remacle M(7), Sjögren E(8), Piazza C(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oto-Rhino-Laryngology, Klagenfurt General Hospital, Klagenfurt 
am Wörthersee, Austria.
(2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Guy's and St Thomas' 
Hospital, London, UK.
(3)Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery, Hospital de la 
Santa Creu i Sant Pau. Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Department of Head and Neck Pathology, King's College London Guy's Hospital, 
London, UK.
(5)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Royal Marsden 
Hospital, London, UK.
(6)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Medical Faculty, 
University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(7)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, CH Luxembourg, 
Luxembourg, Belgium.
(8)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Leiden University 
Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands. evsjogren@lumc.nl.
(9)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, ASST Spedali Civili 
of Brescia, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy.

To give an overview of the current knowledge regarding the diagnosis, treatment, 
and follow-up of laryngeal dysplasia (LD) and to highlight the contributions of 
recent literature. The diagnosis of LD largely relies on endoscopic procedures 
and on histopathology. Diagnostic efficiency of endoscopy may be improved using 
videolaryngostroboscopy (VLS) and bioendoscopic tools such as Narrow Band 
Imaging (NBI) or Storz Professional Image Enhancement System (SPIES). Current 
histological classifications are not powerful enough to clearly predict the risk 
to carcinoma evolution and technical issues such as sampling error, variation in 
epithelial thickness and inflammation hamper pathological examination. Almost 
all dysplasia grading systems are effective in different ways. The 2017 World 
Health Organization (WHO) system should prove to be an improvement as it is 
slightly more reproducible and easier for the non-specialist pathologist to 
apply. To optimize treatment decisions, surgeons should know how their 
pathologist grades samples and preferably audit their transformation rates 
locally. Whether carcinoma in situ should be used as part of such classification 
remains contentious and pathologists should agree with their clinicians whether 
they find this additional grade useful in treatment decisions. Recently, 
different studies have defined the possible utility of different biomarkers in 
risk classification. The main treatment modality for LD is represented by 
transoral laser microsurgery. Radiotherapy may be indicated in specific 
circumstances such as multiple recurrence or wide-field lesions. Medical 
treatment currently does not have a significant role in the management of LD. 
Follow-up for patients treated with LD is a fundamental part of their care and 
investigations may be supported by the same techniques used during diagnosis 
(VLS and NBI/SPIES).

DOI: 10.1007/s00405-020-06406-9
PMCID: PMC8131286
PMID: 33058010 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare that he/she has no conflict 
of interest.