1. PLoS One. 2020 Oct 14;15(10):e0240517. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0240517. 
eCollection 2020.

AMP-independent activator of AMPK for treatment of mitochondrial disorders.

Moore T(1), Yanes RE(2), Calton MA(3), Vollrath D(3), Enns GM(4), Cowan TM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA, United States of 
America.
(2)Department of Immunology and Rheumatology, Stanford University, Palo Alto, 
CA, United States of America.
(3)Department of Genetics, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA, United States of 
America.
(4)Department of Pediatrics (Medical Genetics), Stanford University, Palo Alto, 
CA, United States of America.

Mitochondrial diseases are a clinically heterogenous group of disorders caused 
by respiratory chain dysfunction and associated with progressive, multi-systemic 
phenotype. There is no effective treatment or cure, and no FDA-approved drug for 
treating mitochondrial disease. To identify and characterize potential 
therapeutic compounds, we developed an in vitro screening assay and identified a 
group of direct AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) activators originally 
developed for the treatment of diabetes and metabolic syndrome. Unlike 
previously investigated AMPK agonists such as AICAR, these compounds 
allosterically activate AMPK in an AMP-independent manner, thereby increasing 
specificity and decreasing pleiotropic effects. The direct AMPK activator PT1 
significantly improved mitochondrial function in assays of cellular respiration, 
energy status, and cellular redox. PT1 also protected against retinal 
degeneration in a mouse model of photoreceptor degeneration associated with 
mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress, further supporting the 
therapeutic potential of AMP-independent AMPK agonists in the treatment of 
mitochondrial disease.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0240517
PMCID: PMC7556449
PMID: 33052980 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Part of this work was supported by a grant 
awarded from Raptor Pharmaceuticals. They had no role in study design, data 
collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. 
Raptor Pharmaceuticals is also not associated in anyway to the editorial board 
or committee of PLOS ONE nor have they acted as expert witness in any relevant 
legal proceedings. Our financial support from Raptor Pharmaceuticals does not 
alter our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.