1. Nutrients. 2020 Oct 13;12(10):3120. doi: 10.3390/nu12103120.

Choline Intake as Supplement or as a Component of Eggs Increases Plasma Choline 
and Reduces Interleukin-6 without Modifying Plasma Cholesterol in Participants 
with Metabolic Syndrome.

DiBella M(1), Thomas MS(1), Alyousef H(1), Millar C(1), Blesso C(1), Malysheva 
O(2), Caudill MA(2), Fernandez ML(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nutritional Sciences, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT 
06269, USA.
(2)Division of Nutritional Sciences, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA.

Metabolic syndrome (MetS) is characterized by low-grade inflammation and insulin 
resistance, which increase the risk of heart disease. Eggs have numerous 
nutrients including choline, carotenoids, and fat-soluble vitamins that may 
protect against these conditions. Egg phosphatidylcholine (PC) is a major 
contributor of dietary choline in the American diet. However, uncertainty 
remains regarding eggs due to their high concentration of cholesterol. In this 
study, we evaluated the effect of two sources of choline, whole eggs (a source 
of PC) and a choline supplement (choline bitartrate, CB), on plasma lipids, 
glucose, insulin resistance, and inflammatory biomarkers. We recruited 23 
subjects with MetS to participate in this randomized cross-over intervention. 
After a 2-week washout, with no choline intake, participants were randomly 
allocated to consume three eggs/day or CB (~400 mg choline/d for both) for 4 
weeks. After a 3-week washout period, they were allocated to the alternate 
treatment. Dietary records indicated higher concentrations of vitamin E and 
selenium during the egg period (p < 0.01). Interestingly, there were no changes 
in plasma total, low density lipoprotein (LDL)- or high density lipoprotein 
(HDL)-cholesterol, triglycerides, or glucose, compared either to baseline or 
between treatments. In contrast, interleukin-6 was reduced, with both sources of 
choline compared to baseline, while eggs also had an effect on lowering 
C-reactive protein, insulin, and insulin resistance compared to baseline. This 
study demonstrates that in a MetS population, intake of three eggs per day does 
not increase plasma LDL cholesterol, and has additional benefits on biomarkers 
of disease compared to a choline supplement, possibly due to the presence of 
other antioxidants in eggs.

DOI: 10.3390/nu12103120
PMCID: PMC7600433
PMID: 33066009 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: M.L.F., C.B. and M.A.C. have been funded by the 
American Egg Board/Egg Nutrition Center; M.D., M.S.T., C.M., H.A., O.M. declare 
no conflict of interest. The funders had no role in the design of the study; in 
the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the 
manuscript, or in the decision to publish the results.