1. Gen Hosp Psychiatry. 2020 Nov-Dec;67:83-91. doi: 
10.1016/j.genhosppsych.2020.09.003. Epub 2020 Oct 6.

Pathogenesis and management of Brugada syndrome in schizophrenia: A scoping 
review.

Rastogi A(1), Viani-Walsh D(2), Akbari S(3), Gall N(4), Gaughran F(5), Lally 
J(6).

Author information:
(1)Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, School of Medicine, Dublin, Ireland. 
Electronic address: anujrastogi@rcsi.com.
(2)Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, School of Medicine, Dublin, Ireland. 
Electronic address: dylanvianiwalsh@rcsi.com.
(3)Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, School of Medicine, Dublin, Ireland. 
Electronic address: shareefakbari@rcsi.com.
(4)Department of Cardiology, King's College Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, 
United Kingdom. Electronic address: nicholasgall@nhs.net.
(5)Department of Psychosis Studies, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & 
Neuroscience King's College London, United Kingdom. Electronic address: 
fiona.p.gaughran@kcl.ac.uk.
(6)Department of Psychosis Studies, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & 
Neuroscience King's College London, United Kingdom; Department of Psychiatry, 
Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin, Ireland; St Vincent's Hospital 
Fairview, Dublin, Ireland; Department of Psychiatry, Mater Misericordiae 
University Hospital, Dublin, Ireland. Electronic address: john.lally@kcl.ac.uk.

CONTEXT: Excess cardiovascular morbidity and an increased prevalence of sudden 
cardiac death (SCD) contributes to premature mortality in schizophrenia. Brugada 
syndrome (BrS) is an important but underrecognized cause of SCD. It is more 
commonly seen in schizophrenia than in general population controls.
METHODS: We conducted a scoping review to describe the pathogenesis of BrS in 
schizophrenia and to identify the psychotropic medications that increase the 
risk of unmasking BrS and associated ventricular arrhythmias resulting in SCD.
FINDINGS: Schizophrenia and BrS share similar calcium channel abnormalities, 
which may result in aberrant myocardial conductivity. It remains uncertain if 
there is a genetic pre-disposition for BrS in a subset of patients with 
schizophrenia. However, the unmasking of Brugada ECG patterns with the use of 
certain antipsychotics and antidepressants increases the risk of precipitating 
SCD, independent of QT prolongation.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS: Specific cardiology assessment and 
interventions may be required for the congenital or unmasked Brugada ECG pattern 
in schizophrenia. The current long-term standard of care for BrS is an 
implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD), but post-implantation 
psychological effects must be considered. Careful use of antipsychotic and other 
psychotropic medications is necessary to minimize proarrhythmic effects due to 
impact on cardiac sodium and calcium ion channels. When prescribing such drugs 
to patients with schizophrenia, clinicians should be mindful of the potentially 
fatal unmasking of Brugada ECG patterns and how to manage it. We present 
recommendations for psychiatrists managing this patient population.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.genhosppsych.2020.09.003
PMCID: PMC7537626
PMID: 33065406 [Indexed for MEDLINE]