1. J Immunol Methods. 2021 Jan;488:112901. doi: 10.1016/j.jim.2020.112901. Epub 
2020 Oct 15.

Generation of a cost-effective cell line for support of high-throughput 
isolation of primary human B cells and monoclonal neutralizing antibodies.

Whaley RE(1), Ameny S(1), Arkatkar T(1), Seese A(1), Wall A(1), Khan I(2), 
Carter JJ(3), Scherer EM(4), Rawlings DJ(5), Galloway DA(3), McElrath MJ(6), 
Cohen KW(7), McGuire AT(8).

Author information:
(1)Vaccine and Infectious Disease Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research 
Center, Seattle, WA, USA.
(2)Center for Immunity and Immunotherapies and the Program for Cell and Gene 
Therapy, Seattle Children's Research Institute, Seattle, WA, USA.
(3)Human Biology Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, 
USA.
(4)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Emory University 
School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(5)Center for Immunity and Immunotherapies and the Program for Cell and Gene 
Therapy, Seattle Children's Research Institute, Seattle, WA, USA; Departments of 
Pediatrics and Immunology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(6)Vaccine and Infectious Disease Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research 
Center, Seattle, WA, USA; Department of Medicine, University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA, USA.
(7)Vaccine and Infectious Disease Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research 
Center, Seattle, WA, USA. Electronic address: kwcohen@fredhutch.org.
(8)Vaccine and Infectious Disease Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research 
Center, Seattle, WA, USA; Department of Global Health, University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA, USA; Deparment of Laboratory Medicine and Pahthology, University of 
Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. Electronic address: amcguire@fredhutch.org.

The isolation of human monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) arising from natural 
infection with human pathogens has proven to be a powerful technology, 
facilitating the understanding of the host response to infection at a molecular 
level. mAbs can reveal sites of vulnerability on pathogens and illuminate the 
biological function of the antigenic targets. Moreover, mAbs have the potential 
to be used directly for therapeutic applications such as passive delivery to 
prevent infection in susceptible target populations, and as treatment of 
established infection. The isolation of antigen-specific B cells from vaccine 
trials can also assist in deciphering whether the desired B cells are being 
targeted by a given vaccine. Several different processes have been developed to 
isolate mAbs, but all are generally labor-intensive and result in varying 
degrees of efficiency. Here, we describe the development of a cost-effective 
feeder cell line that stably expresses CD40-ligand, interleukin-2 and 
interleukin-21. Sorting of single B cells onto a layer of irradiated feeder 
cells sustained antibody production that permits functional screening of 
secreted antibodies in a manner that enables subsequent recovery of B cells for 
recombinant antibody cloning. As a proof of concept, we show that this approach 
can be used to isolate B cells that secrete antibodies that neutralize human 
papilloma virus (HPV) from participants of an HPV vaccine study.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jim.2020.112901
PMCID: PMC7560121
PMID: 33069767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]