1. Alzheimers Dement. 2021 Jan;17(1):115-124. doi: 10.1002/alz.12192. Epub 2020
Oct  19.

Hypothesis: Tau pathology is an initiating factor in sporadic Alzheimer's 
disease.

Arnsten AFT(1), Datta D(1), Del Tredici K(2), Braak H(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut, USA.
(2)Clinical Neuroanatomy Section, Department of Neurology, Center for Biomedical 
Research, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany.

The etiology of the common, sporadic form of Alzheimer's disease (sAD) is 
unknown. We hypothesize that tau pathology within select projection neurons with 
susceptible microenvironments can initiate sAD. This postulate rests on 
extensive data demonstrating that in human brains tau pathology appears about a 
decade before the formation of Aβ plaques (Aβps), especially targeting glutamate 
projection neurons in the association cortex. Data from aging rhesus monkeys 
show abnormal tau phosphorylation within vulnerable neurons, associated with 
calcium dysregulation. Abnormally phosphorylated tau (pTau) on microtubules 
traps APP-containing endosomes, which can increase Aβ production. As Aβ 
oligomers increase abnormal phosphorylation of tau, this would drive vicious 
cycles leading to sAD pathology over a long lifespan, with genetic and 
environmental factors that may accelerate pathological events. This hypothesis 
could be testable in the aged monkey association cortex that naturally expresses 
characteristics capable of promoting and sustaining abnormal tau phosphorylation 
and Aβ production.

© 2020 The Authors. Alzheimer's & Dementia published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on 
behalf of Alzheimer's Association.

DOI: 10.1002/alz.12192
PMCID: PMC7983919
PMID: 33075193 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Amy F.T. Arnsten and Yale receive royalties from 
the USA sales of Intuniv (extended release guanfacine). They do not receive 
royalties from non‐USA or generic sales of Intuniv. The other authors have no 
actual or potential conflicts of interest to declare.