1. Foods. 2020 Oct 17;9(10):1484. doi: 10.3390/foods9101484.

Enteropathogenic Potential of Bacillus thuringiensis Isolates from Soil, 
Animals, Food and Biopesticides.

Schwenk V(1), Riegg J(1), Lacroix M(2), Märtlbauer E(1), Jessberger N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, 
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Schönleutnerstr. 8, 85764 
Oberschleißheim, Germany.
(2)Centre Armand-Frappier Santé Biotechnologie, 531, boul. des Prairies, Laval, 
QC H7V 1B7, Canada.

Despite its benefits as biological insecticide, Bacillus thuringiensis bears 
enterotoxins, which can be responsible for a diarrhoeal type of food poisoning. 
Thus, all 24 isolates from foodstuffs, animals, soil and commercially used 
biopesticides tested in this study showed the genetic prerequisites necessary to 
provoke the disease. Moreover, though highly strain-specific, various isolates 
were able to germinate and also to actively move, which are further requirements 
for the onset of the disease. Most importantly, all isolates could grow under 
simulated intestinal conditions and produce significant amounts of enterotoxins. 
Cytotoxicity assays classified 14 isolates as highly, eight as medium and only 
two as low toxic. Additionally, growth inhibition by essential oils (EOs) was 
investigated as preventive measure against putatively enteropathogenic B. 
thuringiensis. Cinnamon Chinese cassia showed the highest antimicrobial 
activity, followed by citral, oregano and winter savory. In all tests, high 
strain-specific variations appeared and must be taken into account when 
evaluating the hazardous potential of B. thuringiensis and using EOs as 
antimicrobials. Altogether, the present study shows a non-negligible pathogenic 
potential of B. thuringiensis, independently from the origin of isolation. 
Generally, biopesticide strains were indistinguishable from other isolates. 
Thus, the use of these pesticides might indeed increase the risk for consumers' 
health. Until complete information about the safety of the applied strains and 
formulations is available, consumers or manufacturers might benefit from the 
antimicrobial activity of EOs to reduce the level of contamination.

DOI: 10.3390/foods9101484
PMCID: PMC7603059
PMID: 33080854

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.