1. Front Aging Neurosci. 2020 Sep 3;12:571185. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2020.571185. 
eCollection 2020.

On the Right Track to Treat Movement Disorders: Promising Therapeutic Approaches 
for Parkinson's and Huntington's Disease.

Troncoso-Escudero P(1)(2)(3)(4), Sepulveda D(1)(2)(4), Pérez-Arancibia 
R(1)(2)(4), Parra AV(1)(2)(3)(4), Arcos J(1)(2)(4), Grunenwald F(1)(2)(4), Vidal 
RL(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Center for Integrative Biology, Faculty of Sciences, Universidad Mayor, 
Santiago, Chile.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Biomedical Neuroscience Institute, University of Chile, 
Santiago, Chile.
(3)Program of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, 
University of Chile, Santiago, Chile.
(4)Center for Geroscience, Brain Health, and Metabolism, University of Chile, 
Santiago, Chile.

Movement disorders are neurological conditions in which patients manifest a 
diverse range of movement impairments. Distinct structures within the basal 
ganglia of the brain, an area involved in movement regulation, are 
differentially affected for every disease. Among the most studied movement 
disorder conditions are Parkinson's (PD) and Huntington's disease (HD), in which 
the deregulation of the movement circuitry due to the loss of specific neuronal 
populations in basal ganglia is the underlying cause of motor symptoms. These 
symptoms are due to the loss principally of dopaminergic neurons of the 
substantia nigra (SN) par compacta and the GABAergic neurons of the striatum in 
PD and HD, respectively. Although these diseases were described in the 19th 
century, no effective treatment can slow down, reverse, or stop disease 
progression. Available pharmacological therapies have been focused on preventing 
or alleviating motor symptoms to improve the quality of life of patients, but 
these drugs are not able to mitigate the progressive neurodegeneration. 
Currently, considerable therapeutic advances have been achieved seeking a more 
efficacious and durable therapeutic effect. Here, we will focus on the new 
advances of several therapeutic approaches for PD and HD, starting with the 
available pharmacological treatments to alleviate the motor symptoms in both 
diseases. Then, we describe therapeutic strategies that aim to restore specific 
neuronal populations or their activity. Among the discussed strategies, the use 
of Neurotrophic factors (NTFs) and genetic approaches to prevent the neuronal 
loss in these diseases will be described. We will highlight strategies that have 
been evaluated in both Parkinson's and Huntington's patients, and also the ones 
with strong preclinical evidence. These current therapeutic techniques represent 
the most promising tools for the safe treatment of both diseases, specifically 
those aimed to avoid neuronal loss during disease progression.

Copyright © 2020 Troncoso-Escudero, Sepulveda, Pérez-Arancibia, Parra, Arcos, 
Grunenwald and Vidal.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2020.571185
PMCID: PMC7497570
PMID: 33101007