1. Elife. 2020 Nov 3;9:e48361. doi: 10.7554/eLife.48361.

Direct glia-to-neuron transdifferentiation gives rise to a pair of male-specific 
neurons that ensure nimble male mating.

Molina-García L(#)(1), Lloret-Fernández C(#)(1), Cook SJ(2), Kim B(3), 
Bonnington RC(1), Sammut M(1), O'Shea JM(1), Gilbert SP(1), Elliott DJ(1), Hall 
DH(3), Emmons SW(2)(3), Barrios A(1), Poole RJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University College London, 
London, United Kingdom.
(2)Dominick P. Purpura Department of Neuroscience, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, New York, United States.
(3)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, New York, United 
States.
(#)Contributed equally

Sexually dimorphic behaviours require underlying differences in the nervous 
system between males and females. The extent to which nervous systems are 
sexually dimorphic and the cellular and molecular mechanisms that regulate these 
differences are only beginning to be understood. We reveal here a novel 
mechanism by which male-specific neurons are generated in Caenorhabditis elegans 
through the direct transdifferentiation of sex-shared glial cells. This 
glia-to-neuron cell fate switch occurs during male sexual maturation under the 
cell-autonomous control of the sex-determination pathway. We show that the 
neurons generated are cholinergic, peptidergic, and ciliated putative 
proprioceptors which integrate into male-specific circuits for copulation. These 
neurons ensure coordinated backward movement along the mate's body during 
mating. One step of the mating sequence regulated by these neurons is an 
alternative readjustment movement performed when intromission becomes difficult 
to achieve. Our findings reveal programmed transdifferentiation as a 
developmental mechanism underlying flexibility in innate behaviour.

© 2020, Molina-García et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.48361
PMCID: PMC7609048
PMID: 33138916 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: LM, CL, SC, BK, RB, MS, JO, SG, DE, DH, SE, AB, 
RP No competing interests declared