1. Protein Sci. 2021 Jan;30(1):201-217. doi: 10.1002/pro.3986. Epub 2020 Nov 21.

In-depth interrogation of protein thermal unfolding data with MoltenProt.

Kotov V(1)(2)(3), Mlynek G(4), Vesper O(1)(2)(3), Pletzer M(4), Wald J(1)(2)(3), 
Teixeira-Duarte CM(5), Celia H(6), Garcia-Alai M(1)(7), Nussberger S(8), 
Buchanan SK(6), Morais-Cabral JH(5), Loew C(1)(7), Djinovic-Carugo K(4)(9), 
Marlovits TC(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Structural Systems Biology (CSSB), Hamburg, Germany.
(2)Institute for Structural and Systems Biology, University Medical Center 
Hamburg-Eppendorf (UKE), Hamburg, Germany.
(3)German Electron Synchrotron Centre (DESY), Hamburg, Germany.
(4)Department of Structural and Computational Biology, Max Perutz Labs Vienna, 
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(5)Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde (i3S) and Instituto de Biologia 
Molecular e Celular (IBMC), Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal.
(6)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institute of Diabetes & Digestive & 
Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(7)European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL), Hamburg Unit, Hamburg, Germany.
(8)Department of Biophysics, Institute of Biomaterials and Biomolecular Systems, 
University of Stuttgart, Stuttgart, Germany.
(9)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Chemistry and Chemical Technology, 
University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.

Protein stability is a key factor in successful structural and biochemical 
research. However, the approaches for systematic comparison of protein stability 
are limited by sample consumption or compatibility with sample buffer 
components. Here we describe how miniaturized measurement of intrinsic 
tryptophan fluorescence (NanoDSF assay) in combination with a simplified 
description of protein unfolding can be used to interrogate the stability of a 
protein sample. We demonstrate that improved protein stability measures, such as 
apparent Gibbs free energy of unfolding, rather than melting temperature Tm , 
should be used to rank the results of thermostability screens. The assay is 
compatible with protein samples of any composition, including protein complexes 
and membrane proteins. Our data analysis software, MoltenProt, provides an easy 
and robust way to perform characterization of multiple samples. Potential 
applications of MoltenProt and NanoDSF include buffer and construct optimization 
for X-ray crystallography and cryo-electron microscopy, screening for 
small-molecule binding partners and comparison of effects of point mutations.

© 2020 The Authors. Protein Science published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf 
of The Protein Society.

DOI: 10.1002/pro.3986
PMCID: PMC7737771
PMID: 33140490 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.