1. Diagnostics (Basel). 2020 Nov 3;10(11):902. doi: 10.3390/diagnostics10110902.

Prospective Evaluation of Single Nucleotide Variants by Two Different 
Technologies in Paraffin Samples of Advanced Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer 
Patients.

Marin E(1)(2)(3), Reyes R(1)(3), Arcocha A(1)(3), Viñolas N(1)(2)(3), Mezquita 
L(1)(2)(3), Gonzalvo E(4), Saez de Gordoa K(4), Jares P(3)(4)(5), Reguart 
N(1)(2)(3), Teixido C(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, Hospital Clínic, 08036 Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Translational Genomics and Targeted Therapeutics in Solid Tumors, Institut 
d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi I Sunyer, 08036 Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Unitat funcional de Tumors Toràcics, Hospital Clínic, 08036 Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Division of Pathology, Hospital Clínic, 08036 Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Molecular Biology Core Facility, Hospital Clínic, 08036 Barcelona, Spain.

Targeted therapies are a new paradigm in lung cancer management. Next-generation 
sequencing (NGS) techniques have allowed for simultaneous testing of several 
genes in a rapid and efficient manner; however, there are other molecular 
diagnostic tools such as the nCounter® Vantage 3D single nucleotide variants 
(SNVs) solid tumour panel which also offer important benefits regarding sample 
input and time-to-response, making them very attractive for daily clinical use. 
This study aimed to test the performance of the Vantage panel in the routine 
workup of advanced non-squamous non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients and 
to validate and compare its outputs with the Oncomine Solid Tumor (OST) panel 
DNA kit, the standard technique in our institution. Two parallel multiplexed 
approaches were performed based on DNA NGS and direct digital detection of DNA 
with nCounter® technology to evaluate SNVs. A total of 42 advanced non-squamous 
NSCLC patients were prospectively included in the study. Overall, 95% of samples 
were successfully characterized by both technologies. The Vantage panel 
accounted for a sensitivity of 95% and a specificity of 82%. In terms of 
predictive values, the probability of truly presenting the SNV variant when it 
is detected by the nCounter panel was 82%, whereas the probability of not 
presenting the SNV variant when it is not detected by the platform was 95%. 
Finally, Cohen's Kappa coefficient was 0.76, indicating a substantial 
correlation grade between OST and Vantage panels. Our results make nCounter an 
analytically sensitive, practical and cost-effective tool.

DOI: 10.3390/diagnostics10110902
PMCID: PMC7693424
PMID: 33153192

Conflict of interest statement: R.R. reports speaker’s honoraria from Roche and 
MSD, outside the submitted work; L.M. reports speaker’s honoraria from 
Bristol-Myers Squibb, Tecnofarma, Roche, Takeda; honoraria for consulting and 
advisory roles from Roche Diagnostics, Takeda, Roche; honoraria for travel, 
accommodations and expenses from Bristol-Myers Squibb, Roche; sponsored research 
from Amgen, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Boehringer Ingelheim and a mentorship program 
with key opinion leaders from AstraZeneca, outside the submitted work; N.R. 
reports speaker’s honoraria at sponsored meetings from MSD, BMS, Roche, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Guardant Health, Pfizer, Abbvie, Ipsen, Novartis, 
AstraZeneca, Lilly, Takeda, Amgen and payments for organizing educational events 
from Amgen and Roche; honoraria for attending advisory panels from MSD, BMS, 
Roche, Boehringer Ingelheim, Guardant Health, Pfizer, Abbvie, Ipsen, Novartis, 
AstraZeneca, Lilly, Takeda, Amgen; sponsorship to attend international 
scientific meetings from Boehringer Ingelheim, MSD, and Roche and research 
grants from Novartis and Pfizer, outside the submitted work; C.T reports 
personal fees from Pfizer, Novartis, Takeda, MSD, Roche, Diaceutics and 
AstraZeneca, and research funding from Pfizer and Novartis, outside the 
submitted work. The funders had no role in the design of the study; in the 
collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the 
manuscript; or in the decision to publish the results. E.M., A.A., N.V., E.G., 
K.S.G. and P.J. have declared no conflict of interest.