1. J Biol Chem. 2021 Jan-Jun;296:100054. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA120.015679. Epub 2020
 Nov 22.

Danish and British dementia ITM2b/BRI2 mutations reduce BRI2 protein stability 
and impair glutamatergic synaptic transmission.

Yin T(1), Yao W(1), Lemenze AD(2), D'Adamio L(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Physiology & Neuroscience, New Jersey Medical 
School, Brain Health Institute, Jacqueline Krieger Klein Center in Alzheimer's 
Disease and Neurodegeneration Research, Rutgers, The State University of New 
Jersey, Newark, New Jersey, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Immunology, and Laboratory Medicine, New Jersey 
Medical School, The State University of New Jersey, Newark, New Jersey, USA.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, Physiology & Neuroscience, New Jersey Medical 
School, Brain Health Institute, Jacqueline Krieger Klein Center in Alzheimer's 
Disease and Neurodegeneration Research, Rutgers, The State University of New 
Jersey, Newark, New Jersey, USA. Electronic address: 
luciano.dadamio@rutgers.edu.

Mutations in integral membrane protein 2B (ITM2b/BRI2) gene cause familial 
British and Danish dementia (FBD and FDD), autosomal dominant disorders 
characterized by progressive cognitive deterioration. Two pathogenic mechanisms, 
which may not be mutually exclusive, have been proposed for FDD and FBD: 1) loss 
of BRI2 function; 2) accumulation of amyloidogenic mutant BRI2-derived peptides, 
but the mechanistic details remain unclear. We have previously reported a 
physiological role of BRI2 in excitatory synaptic transmission at both 
presynaptic termini and postsynaptic termini. To test whether pathogenic ITM2b 
mutations affect these physiological BRI2 functions, we analyzed glutamatergic 
transmission in FDD and FBD knock-in mice, which carry pathogenic FDD and FBD 
mutations into the mouse endogenous Itm2b gene. We show that in both mutant 
lines, spontaneous glutamate release and AMPAR-mediated responses are decreased, 
while short-term synaptic facilitation is increased, effects similar to those 
observed in Itm2bKO mice. In vivo and in vitro studies show that both pathogenic 
mutations alter maturation of BRI2 resulting in reduced levels of functional 
mature BRI2 protein at synapses. Collectively, the data show that FDD and FBD 
mutations cause a reduction of BRI2 levels and function at synapses, which 
results in reduced glutamatergic transmission. Notably, other genes mutated in 
Familial dementia, such as APP, PSEN1/PSEN2, are implicated in glutamatergic 
synaptic transmission, a function that is altered by pathogenic mutations. Thus, 
defects in excitatory neurotransmitter release may represent a general and 
convergent mechanism leading to neurodegeneration. Targeting these dysfunction 
may offer a unique disease modifying method of therapeutic intervention in 
neurodegenerative disorders.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA120.015679
PMCID: PMC7948410
PMID: 33172889 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.