1. Hum Mol Genet. 2021 Jan 21;29(22):3606-3615. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddaa242.

Genomic characterization of the adolescent idiopathic scoliosis-associated 
transcriptome and regulome.

Makki N(1), Zhao J(2)(3), Liu Z(4), Eckalbar WL(2)(3), Ushiki A(2)(3), Khanshour 
AM(5), Wu J(6), Rios J(5)(7), Gray RS(4), Wise CA(5)(7), Ahituv N(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Florida, College of 
Medicine, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(2)Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences, University of 
California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(3)Institute for Human Genetics, University of California San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics and Nutritional Sciences, Dell Pediatric Research 
Institute, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA.
(5)Center for Pediatric Bone Biology and Translational Research, Texas Scottish 
Rite Hospital for Children, Dallas, TX, USA.
(6)Health Science Center Libraries, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(7)McDermott Center for Human Growth and Development and Departments of 
Orthopaedic Surgery and Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX, USA.

Adolescent idiopathic scoliosis (AIS), a sideways curvature of the spine, is the 
most common pediatric musculoskeletal disorder, affecting ~3% of the population 
worldwide. However, its genetic bases and tissues of origin remain largely 
unknown. Several genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have implicated 
nucleotide variants in non-coding sequences that control genes with important 
roles in cartilage, muscle, bone, connective tissue and intervertebral disks 
(IVDs) as drivers of AIS susceptibility. Here, we set out to define the 
expression of AIS-associated genes and active regulatory elements by performing 
RNA-seq and chromatin immunoprecipitation-sequencing against H3 lysine 27 
acetylation in these tissues in mouse and human. Our study highlights genetic 
pathways involving AIS-associated loci that regulate chondrogenesis, IVD 
development and connective tissue maintenance and homeostasis. In addition, we 
identify thousands of putative AIS-associated regulatory elements which may 
orchestrate tissue-specific expression in musculoskeletal tissues of the spine. 
Quantification of enhancer activity of several candidate regulatory elements 
from our study identifies three functional enhancers carrying AIS-associated 
GWAS SNPs at the ADGRG6 and BNC2 loci. Our findings provide a novel genome-wide 
catalog of AIS-relevant genes and regulatory elements and aid in the 
identification of novel targets for AIS causality and treatment.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddaa242
PMCID: PMC7823110
PMID: 33179741 [Indexed for MEDLINE]