1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2020 Oct 19;10:552905. doi: 
10.3389/fcimb.2020.552905. eCollection 2020.

Caprine Bactenecins as Promising Tools for Developing New Antimicrobial and 
Antitumor Drugs.

Kopeikin PM(1), Zharkova MS(1), Kolobov AA(2), Smirnova MP(2), Sukhareva MS(1), 
Umnyakova ES(1), Kokryakov VN(1), Orlov DS(1), Milman BL(1), Balandin SV(3), 
Panteleev PV(3), Ovchinnikova TV(3)(4), Komlev AS(1), Tossi A(5), Shamova OV(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Design and Synthesis of Biologically Active Peptides, 
Department of General Pathology and Pathophysiology, FSBSI Institute of 
Experimental Medicine, Saint Petersburg, Russia.
(2)Laboratory of Peptide Chemistry, State Research Institute of Highly Pure 
Biopreparations, Saint Petersburg, Russia.
(3)Science-Educational Center, M.M. Shemyakin & Yu.A. Ovchinnikov Institute of 
Bioorganic Chemistry, The Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia.
(4)Department of Biotechnology, I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical 
University, Moscow, Russia.
(5)Department of Life Sciences, University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy.

Proline-rich antimicrobial peptides (PR-AMPs) having a potent antimicrobial 
activity predominantly toward Gram-negative bacteria and negligible toxicity 
toward host cells, are attracting attention as new templates for developing 
antibiotic drugs. We have previously isolated and characterized several 
bactenecins that are promising in this respect, from the leukocytes of the 
domestic goat Capra hircus: ChBac5, miniChBac7.5N-α, and -β, as well as 
ChBac3.4. Unlike the others, ChBac3.4 shows a somewhat unusual pattern of 
activities for a mammalian PR-AMP: it is more active against bacterial membranes 
as well as tumor and, to the lesser extent, normal cells. Here we describe a SAR 
study of ChBac3.4 (RFRLPFRRPPIRIHPPPFYPPFRRFL-NH2) which elucidates its 
peculiarities and evaluates its potential as a lead for antimicrobial or 
anticancer drugs based on this peptide. A set of designed structural analogues 
of ChBac3.4 was explored for antibacterial activity toward drug-resistant 
clinical isolates and antitumor properties. The N-terminal region was found to 
be important for the antimicrobial action, but not responsible for the toxicity 
toward mammalian cells. A shortened variant with the best selectivity index 
toward bacteria demonstrated a pronounced synergy in combination with 
antibiotics against Gram-negative strains, albeit with a somewhat reduced 
ability to inhibit biofilm formation compared to native peptide. C-terminal 
amidation was examined for some analogues, which did not affect antimicrobial 
activity, but somewhat altered the cytotoxicity toward host cells. 
Interestingly, non-amidated peptides showed a slight delay in their impact on 
bacterial membrane integrity. Peptides with enhanced hydrophobicity showed 
increased toxicity, but in most cases their selectivity toward tumor cells also 
improved. While most analogues lacked hemolytic properties, a ChBac3.4 variant 
with two additional tryptophan residues demonstrated an appreciable activity 
toward human erythrocytes. The variant demonstrating the best tumor/nontumor 
cell selectivity was found to more actively initiate apoptosis in target cells, 
though its action was slower than that of the native ChBac3.4. Its antitumor 
effectiveness was successfully verified in vivo in a murine Ehrlich ascites 
carcinoma model. The obtained results demonstrate the potential of structural 
modification to manage caprine bactenecins' selectivity and activity spectrum 
and confirm that they are promising prototypes for antimicrobial and anticancer 
drugs design.

Copyright © 2020 Kopeikin, Zharkova, Kolobov, Smirnova, Sukhareva, Umnyakova, 
Kokryakov, Orlov, Milman, Balandin, Panteleev, Ovchinnikova, Komlev, Tossi and 
Shamova.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2020.552905
PMCID: PMC7604311
PMID: 33194795 [Indexed for MEDLINE]