1. Front Immunol. 2020 Oct 23;11:1725. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.01725. eCollection
 2020.

Evaluation of Leishmanization Using Iranian Lizard Leishmania Mixed With CpG-ODN 
as a Candidate Vaccine Against Experimental Murine Leishmaniasis.

Keshavarzian N(1), Noroozbeygi M(1), Haji Molla Hoseini M(1), Yeganeh F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, School of Medicine, Shahid Beheshti University of 
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

Background and Objectives: The live non-pathogenic Leishmania tarantolae has 
recently provided a promising approach as an effective vaccine candidate against 
experimental leishmaniasis (ILL). Here, we evaluated the immunoprotective 
potential of the live Iranian Lizard Leishmania mixed with CpG adjuvant against 
L. major infection in BALB/c mice. Methods: Four groups of female BALB/c mice 
were included in the study. The first and second groups received PBS and CpG, 
respectively. The immunized groups received 2 × 105 ILL promastigotes and the 
CpG-mixed ILL (ILL+CpG). Injections were performed subcutaneously in the right 
footpad. Three weeks later, all mice were challenged with 2 × 105 metacyclic 
promastigotes of Leishmania majorEGFP ; inoculation was done in the left 
footpad. The measurement of footpad swelling and in vivo fluorescent imaging 
were used to evaluate disease progress during infection course. Eight weeks 
after challenge, all mice were sacrificed and the cytokines levels (IFN-γ, IL-4, 
and IL-10) and sera antibodies concentrations (IgG2a and IgG1) using ELISA 
assay, nitric oxide production using Griess assay, and arginase activity in 
cultured splenocytes, were measured. In addition, direct fluorescent microscopy 
analysis and qPCR assay were used to quantify the splenic parasite burden. 
Result: The results showed that mice immunized with ILL+CpG were protected 
against the development of the dermal lesion. Moreover, they showed a 
significant reduction in the parasite load, in comparison to the control groups. 
The observed protection was associated with higher production of IFN-γ, as well 
as a reduction in IL-4 level. Additionally, the results demonstrated that 
arginase activity was decreased in ILL+CpG group compared to other groups. 
Conclusion: Immunization using ILL+CpG induces a protective immunity; indicating 
that ILL with an appropriate adjuvant would be a suitable choice for vaccination 
against leishmaniasis.

Copyright © 2020 Keshavarzian, Noroozbeygi, Haji Molla Hoseini and Yeganeh.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.01725
PMCID: PMC7645074
PMID: 33193290 [Indexed for MEDLINE]