1. Br J Cancer. 2021 Jan;124(1):136-141. doi: 10.1038/s41416-020-01128-5. Epub
2020  Nov 18.

Metastasis-directed therapy for oligometastasis and beyond.

Beckham TH(1), Yang TJ(1), Gomez D(1), Tsai CJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, 
Precision Radiation for Oligometastatic and Metastatic Disease (PROMISE) 
Program, New York, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Radiation Oncology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, 
Precision Radiation for Oligometastatic and Metastatic Disease (PROMISE) 
Program, New York, NY, USA. tsaic@mskcc.org.

Metastasis-directed therapy (MDT)-local therapy that is intended to eradicate 
specific metastatic lesions-has hitherto been used with varying degrees of 
clinical efficacy and acceptance as a meaningful therapy for metastatic disease. 
Over the past 25 years, however, the momentum for using MDT to manage patients 
with metastatic solid tumours has increased, driven by several factors. Among 
these factors is the recognition that patients with limited metastatic burden 
could potentially derive survival benefits from MDT. Furthermore, although 
current systemic therapies are increasingly effective, they are infrequently 
curative. In addition, technological advances have broadened the spectrum of 
metastatic lesions that can be treated with ablative intent. Here we aim to 
briefly review the status of evidence for the clinical benefit of MDT based on 
current data mainly from trials in patients with oligometastatic disease, 
discuss the myriad of clinical states that might fall under and beyond the 
definition of oligometastasis, review technological advances in MDT and their 
applications beyond oligometastasis, and discuss the need for the continued 
co-evolution of MDT and systemic therapy as we seek to understand which patients 
with metastatic cancer can achieve durable remission and how to optimally manage 
those who cannot.

DOI: 10.1038/s41416-020-01128-5
PMCID: PMC7782796
PMID: 33204024 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr Tsai serves as a consultant to Varian 
Medical, Inc. Dr Gomez reported grants from Merck, AstraZeneca, Bristol Myers 
Squibb, Varian, and Elekta, and personal fees from Merck, AstraZeneca, Bristol 
Myers Squibb, Varian, Reflexion, Vindico, WebMD, and Medscape outside the 
submitted work. Dr Yang reported research support from AstraZeneca and Kazia 
Therapeutics and personal fees from AstraZeneca, Debiopharm, Galera 
Therapeutics, and resTORbio outside the submitted work.