1. Brain Commun. 2020 Aug 19;2(2):fcaa132. doi: 10.1093/braincomms/fcaa132. 
eCollection 2020.

Cerebrovascular disease promotes tau pathology in Alzheimer's disease.

Laing KK(1), Simoes S(1), Baena-Caldas GP(2), Lao PJ(1), Kothiya M(1), Igwe 
KC(1), Chesebro AG(1), Houck AL(1), Pedraza L(2), Hernández AI(3), Li J(2), 
Zimmerman ME(4), Luchsinger JA(5), Barone FC(2), Moreno H(2), Brickman AM(1); 
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Taub Institute for Research on Alzheimer's Disease and the Aging Brain, G.H. 
Sergievsky Center, and Department of Neurology, College of Physicians and 
Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.
(2)Departments of Neurology and Physiology/Pharmacology, SUNY Downstate, 
Brooklyn, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology. SUNY Downstate, Brooklyn, NY, USA.
(4)Department of Psychology, Fordham University., Bronx, NY, USA.
(5)Department of Medicine, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Department of 
Epidemiology, Joseph P. Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia University, 
New York, NY, USA.

Small vessel cerebrovascular disease, visualized as white matter 
hyperintensities on T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging, contributes to the 
clinical presentation of Alzheimer's disease. However, the extent to which 
cerebrovascular disease represents an independent pathognomonic feature of 
Alzheimer's disease or directly promotes Alzheimer's pathology is unclear. The 
purpose of this study was to examine the association between white matter 
hyperintensities and plasma levels of tau and to determine if white matter 
hyperintensities and tau levels interact to predict Alzheimer's disease 
diagnosis. To confirm that cerebrovascular disease promotes tau pathology, we 
examined tau fluid biomarker concentrations and pathology in a mouse model of 
ischaemic injury. Three hundred ninety-one participants from the Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (74.5 ± 7.1 years of age) were included in this 
cross-sectional analysis. Participants had measurements of plasma total-tau, 
cerebrospinal fluid beta-amyloid, and white matter hyperintensities, and were 
diagnosed clinically as Alzheimer's disease (n = 97), mild cognitive impairment 
(n = 186) or cognitively normal control (n = 108). We tested the relationship 
between plasma tau concentration and white matter hyperintensity volume across 
diagnostic groups. We also examined the extent to which white matter 
hyperintensity volume, plasma tau, amyloid positivity status and the interaction 
between white matter hyperintensities and plasma tau correctly classifies 
diagnostic category. Increased white matter hyperintensity volume was associated 
with higher plasma tau concentration, particularly among those diagnosed 
clinically with Alzheimer's disease. Presence of brain amyloid and the 
interaction between plasma tau and white matter hyperintensity volume 
distinguished Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment participants 
from controls with 77.6% and 63.3% accuracy, respectively. In 63 Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative participants who came to autopsy (82.33 ± 7.18 
age at death), we found that higher degrees of arteriosclerosis were associated 
with higher Braak staging, indicating a positive relationship between 
cerebrovascular disease and neurofibrillary pathology. In a transient middle 
cerebral artery occlusion mouse model, aged mice that received transient middle 
cerebral artery occlusion, but not sham surgery, had increased plasma and 
cerebrospinal fluid tau concentrations, induced myelin loss, and 
hyperphosphorylated tau pathology in the ipsilateral hippocampus and cerebral 
hemisphere. These findings demonstrate a relationship between cerebrovascular 
disease, operationalized as white matter hyperintensities, and tau levels, 
indexed in the plasma, suggesting that hypoperfusive injury promotes tau 
pathology. This potential causal association is supported by the demonstration 
that transient cerebral artery occlusion induces white matter damage, increases 
biofluidic markers of tau, and promotes cerebral tau hyperphosphorylation in 
older-adult mice.

© The Author(s) (2020). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain.

DOI: 10.1093/braincomms/fcaa132
PMCID: PMC7660042
PMID: 33215083