1. JBMR Plus. 2020 Oct 1;4(11):e10409. doi: 10.1002/jbm4.10409. eCollection 2020 
Nov.

Macrophages Switch to an Osteo-Modulatory Profile Upon RANKL Induction in a 
Medaka (Oryzias latipes) Osteoporosis Model.

Phan QT(1), Liu R(1), Tan WH(1), Imangali N(1), Cheong B(1), Schartl M(2)(3), 
Winkler C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and Centre for Bioimaging Sciences National 
University of Singapore Singapore Singapore.
(2)Department of Developmental Biochemistry, Biocenter University of Würzburg 
Würzburg Germany.
(3)The Xiphophorus Genetic Stock Center Texas State University San Marcos Texas 
USA.

In mammals, osteoclasts differentiate from macrophages in the monocyte lineage. 
Although many factors driving osteoclast formation are known, the detailed 
processes underlying precursor recruitment, differentiation, and interaction of 
macrophages with other cell types involved in bone remodeling are poorly 
understood. Using live imaging in a transgenic medaka osteoporosis model, where 
ectopic osteoclasts are induced by RANKL expression, we show that a subset of 
macrophages is recruited to bone matrix to physically interact with bone-forming 
osteoblast progenitors. These macrophages subsequently differentiate into 
cathepsin K- (ctsk-) positive osteoclasts. One day later, other macrophages are 
recruited to clear dying osteoclasts from resorbed bone by phagocytosis. To 
better understand the molecular changes underlying these dynamic processes, we 
performed transcriptome profiling of activated macrophages upon RANKL induction. 
This revealed an upregulation of several bone-related transcripts. Besides 
osteoclast markers, we unexpectedly also found expression of 
osteoblast-promoting signals in activated macrophages, suggesting a possible 
non-cell autonomous role in osteogenesis. Finally, we show that macrophage 
differentiation into osteoclasts is dependent on inflammatory signals. Medaka 
deficient for TNFα or treated with the TNFα-inhibitor pentoxifylline exhibited 
impaired macrophage recruitment and osteoclast differentiation. These results 
show the involvement of inflammatory signals and the dynamics of a distinct 
subset of macrophages during osteoclast formation. © 2020 The Authors. JBMR Plus 
published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of American Society for Bone and 
Mineral Research.

© 2020 The Authors. JBMR Plus published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of 
American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

DOI: 10.1002/jbm4.10409
PMCID: PMC7657398
PMID: 33210062