1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2020 Nov 3;7:584728. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2020.584728. 
eCollection 2020.

Bibliometric Analysis of ATAC-Seq and Its Use in Cancer Biology via Nucleic Acid 
Detection.

Zhao Y(1), Zhang X(2), Song Z(3), Wei D(3), Wang H(4)(5), Chen W(6), Sun G(7), 
Ma W(8), Chen K(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Southern Medical 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)School of Basic Medical Sciences, Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese 
Medicine, Chengdu, China.
(3)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Bone and Joint Degeneration Disease, 
Department of Treatment Center for Traumatic Injuries, The Third Affiliated 
Hospital of Southern Medical University (Academy of Orthopedics of Guangdong 
Province), Guangzhou, China.
(4)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Bone and Joint Degeneration Disease, 
The Third Affiliated Hospital of Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(5)Academy of Orthopedics of Guangdong Province, Guangzhou, China.
(6)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Bone and Joint Degeneration Disease, 
Department of Musculoskeletal Oncology, The Third Affiliated Hospital of 
Southern Medical University (Academy of Orthopedics of Guangdong Province), 
Guangzhou, China.
(7)Department of Orthopedics, The First Affiliated Hospital of Jinan University, 
Guangzhou, China.
(8)Department of Anesthesiology, Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital, Guangzhou, 
China.
(9)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Bone and Joint Degeneration Disease, 
Department of Spine Surgery, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Southern Medical 
University (Academy of Orthopedics of Guangdong Province), Guangzhou, China.

Assay for transposase-accessible chromatin using sequencing (ATAC-seq) is 
associated with significant progress in biological research and has attracted 
increasing attention. However, the impact of ATAC-seq on cancer biology has not 
been objectively analyzed. We categorized 440 ATAC-seq publications according to 
the publication date, type, field, and country. R 3.6.2 was used to analyze the 
distribution of research fields. VOSviewer was used for country co-authorship 
and author co-authorship analyses, and GraphPad Prism 8 was used for correlation 
analyses of the factors that may affect the number of articles published in 
different countries. We found that ATAC-seq plays roles in carcinogenesis, 
anticancer immunity, targeted therapy, and metastasis risk predictions and is 
most frequently used in studies of leukemia among all types of cancer. We found 
a significantly strong correlation between the top 10 countries in terms of the 
number of publications and the gross expenditure on research and development 
(R&D), the number of universities, and the number of researchers. At present, 
ATAC-seq technology is undergoing a period of rapid development, making it 
inseparable from the emphasis and investment in scientific research by many 
countries. Collectively, ATAC-seq has advantages in the study of the cancer 
mechanisms because it can detect nucleic acids and thus has good application 
prospects in the field of cancer, especially in leukemia studies. As a country's 
economic strength increases and the emphasis on scientific research deepens, 
ATAC-seq will definitely play a more significant role in the field of cancer 
biology.

Copyright © 2020 Zhao, Zhang, Song, Wei, Wang, Chen, Sun, Ma and Chen.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2020.584728
PMCID: PMC7670091
PMID: 33224964