1. J Biol Chem. 2021 Jan-Jun;296:100123. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA120.016115. Epub 2020
 Dec 2.

A second mechanism employed by artemisinins to suppress Plasmodium falciparum 
hinges on inhibition of hematin crystallization.

Ma W(1), Balta VA(2), West R(2), Newlin KN(1), Miljanić OŠ(3), Sullivan DJ(4), 
Vekilov PG(5), Rimer JD(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of Houston, 
Houston, Texas, USA.
(2)W. Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, 
Malaria Research Institute, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, 
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(3)Department of Chemistry, University of Houston, Houston, Texas, USA.
(4)W. Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, 
Malaria Research Institute, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, 
Baltimore, Maryland, USA. Electronic address: dsulliv7@jhmi.edu.
(5)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of Houston, 
Houston, Texas, USA; Department of Chemistry, University of Houston, Houston, 
Texas, USA. Electronic address: %20vekilov@uh.edu.
(6)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of Houston, 
Houston, Texas, USA; Department of Chemistry, University of Houston, Houston, 
Texas, USA. Electronic address: jrimer@central.uh.edu.

Malaria is a pervasive disease that affects millions of lives each year in 
equatorial regions of the world. During the erythrocytic phase of the parasite 
life cycle, Plasmodium falciparum invades red blood cells, where it catabolizes 
hemoglobin and sequesters the released toxic heme as innocuous hemozoin 
crystals. Artemisinin (ART)-class drugs are activated in vivo by newly released 
heme, which creates a carbon-centered radical that markedly reduces parasite 
density. Radical damage to parasite lipids and proteins is perceived to be ARTs' 
dominant mechanism of action. By contrast, quinoline-class antimalarials inhibit 
the formation of hemozoin and in this way suppress heme detoxification. Here, we 
combine malaria parasite assays and scanning probe microscopy of growing 
β-hematin crystals to elucidate an unexpected mechanism employed by two widely 
administered antimalarials, ART, and artesunate to subdue the erythrocytic phase 
of the parasite life cycle. We demonstrate that heme-drug adducts, produced 
after the radical activation of ARTs and largely believed to be benign 
bystanders, potently kills P. falciparum at low exogenous concentrations. We 
show that these adducts inhibit β-hematin crystallization and heme 
detoxification, a pathway which complements the deleterious effect of radicals 
generated via parent drug activation. Our findings reveal an irreversible 
mechanism of heme-ART adduct inhibition of heme crystallization, unique among 
antimalarials and common crystal growth inhibitors, that opens new avenues for 
evaluating drug dosing regimens and understanding growing resistance of 
P. falciparum to ART.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA120.016115
PMCID: PMC7949059
PMID: 33239360 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.