1. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2021 Jul;87(7):2645-2662. doi: 10.1111/bcp.14676. Epub
2020  Dec 30.

Riociguat: Clinical research and evolving role in therapy.

Klinger JR(1), Chakinala MM(2), Langleben D(3), Rosenkranz S(4)(5), Sitbon 
O(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Sleep, and Critical Care Medicine, Rhode Island 
Hospital, Alpert Medical School of Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island, 
USA.
(2)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Washington University 
School of Medicine, St Louis, Missouri, USA.
(3)Center for Pulmonary Vascular Disease and Lady Davis Institute, Jewish 
General Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, Canada.
(4)Clinic III for Internal Medicine (Cardiology), and Center for Molecular 
Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(5)Cologne Cardiovascular Research Center (CCRC), University of Cologne, 
Cologne, Germany.
(6)Universite Paris-Sud, Faculté de Médecine, Université Paris-Saclay, Le 
Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.
(7)AP-HP, Service de Pneumologie, Centre de Référence de l'Hypertension 
Pulmonaire Sévère, Hôpital Bicêtre, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.
(8)INSERM UMR_S 999, Hôpital Marie-Lannelongue, Le Plessis-Robinson, France.

Riociguat is a first-in-class soluble guanylate cyclase stimulator, approved for 
the treatment of adults with pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH), inoperable 
chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension (CTEPH), or persistent or 
recurrent CTEPH after pulmonary endarterectomy. Approval was based on the 
results of the phase III PATENT-1 (PAH) and CHEST-1 (CTEPH) studies, with 
significant improvements in the primary endpoint of 6-minute walk distance vs 
placebo of +36 m and +46 m, respectively, as well as improvements in secondary 
endpoints such as pulmonary vascular resistance and World Health Organization 
functional class. Riociguat acts as a stimulator of cyclic guanosine 
monophosphate synthesis rather than as an inhibitor of cGMP metabolism. As with 
other approved therapies for PAH, riociguat has antifibrotic, antiproliferative 
and anti-inflammatory effects, in addition to vasodilatory properties. This has 
led to further clinical studies in patients who do not achieve a satisfactory 
clinical response with phosphodiesterase type-5 inhibitors. Riociguat has also 
been evaluated in patients with World Health Organization group 2 and 3 
pulmonary hypertension, and other conditions including diffuse cutaneous 
systemic sclerosis, Raynaud's phenomenon and cystic fibrosis. This review 
evaluates the results of the original clinical trials of riociguat for the 
treatment of PAH and CTEPH, and summarises the body of work that has examined 
the safety and efficacy of riociguat for the treatment of other types of 
pulmonary hypertension.

© 2020 The Authors. British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of British Pharmacological Society..

DOI: 10.1111/bcp.14676
PMCID: PMC8359233
PMID: 33242341 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: J.R.K. reports research support to his 
institution from Actelion, Bayer AG, Lung Biotechnology and United Therapeutics. 
M.M.C. has received research support from Actelion, Eiger BioPharmaceuticals, 
GeNO LLC, Gilead, GlaxoSmithKline, Medtronic and Reata Pharmaceuticals; 
consulting fees from Actelion, Express Scripts Holding Company, Gilead, 
SteadyMed Therapeutics, United Therapeutics and WebMD LLC (Medscape); and 
honoraria for speaking for Bayer AG and Gilead. D.L. reports honoraria, 
consultation fees, research support and/or travel expenses from Actelion, Arena, 
Bayer AG, Northern Therapeutics, PhaseBio and United Therapeutics. S.R. reports 
grants and personal fees from Abbott, Actelion, Arena, Bayer AG, Ferrer, Gilead, 
GlaxoSmithKline, MSD, Novartis, Pfizer and United Therapeutics, and research 
support from Actelion, Bayer, Novartis, Pfizer and United Therapeutics. O.S. 
reports grants, personal fees and nonfinancial support from Actelion, Bayer AG, 
GlaxoSmithKline and Merck, and personal fees from Arena.