1. Am J Case Rep. 2020 Nov 29;21:e928224. doi: 10.12659/AJCR.928224.

A 37-Year-Old Saudi Man with a Calcified Intraventricular Astrocytoma.

Al Saleem MA(1), Alsafwani NS(1), ElSharkawy TM(1), Al-Suhibani SS(2), Essawi 
W(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, King Fahd Hospital of University, College of 
Medicine, Imam Abdulrahman Bin Faisal University, Khobar, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Department of Radiodiagnosis, King Fahd Hospital of University, College of 
Medicine, Imam Abdulrahman Bin Faisal University, Khobar, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, King Fahd Hospital of University, College of 
Medicine, Imam Abdulrahman Bin Faisal University, Khobar, Saudi Arabia.

BACKGROUND Pilocytic astrocytoma is a low-grade glioma that is common in 
children. Pilocytic astrocytoma is a slow-growing neoplasm that may calcify and 
occurs throughout the central nervous system, but it has a preference to be 
located infratentorial in children. CASE REPORT Herein, we report an unusual 
intraventricular location of pilocytic astrocytoma with extensive calcification 
in a 37-year-old Saudi man who mainly presented with a headache. Although 
pilocytic astrocytoma can arise throughout the central nervous system, it very 
rarely arises from the ventricles, especially the lateral ventricle. CONCLUSIONS 
The majority of intraventricular tumors arise within the third and fourth 
ventricles. The unusual intraventricular location and the unexpected age group 
are the main difficulties in diagnosing an adult with intraventricular pilocytic 
astrocytoma. Intraventricular pilocytic astrocytoma can be missed radiologically 
and misled pathologically; therefore, it should be considered within the 
differential diagnosis of intraventricular tumors. To the best of our knowledge, 
this is the first case to be reported in Saudi Arabia.

DOI: 10.12659/AJCR.928224
PMCID: PMC7709083
PMID: 33249419 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: None declared Conflict of 
interest None.