1. J Clin Med. 2020 Nov 24;9(12):3794. doi: 10.3390/jcm9123794.

Pathogenetic Mechanisms Implicated in Sjögren's Syndrome Lymphomagenesis: A 
Review of the Literature.

Stergiou IE(1), Poulaki A(1), Voulgarelis M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, School of Medicine, National and Kapodistrian 
University of Athens, 11527 Athens, Greece.

Sjögren's Syndrome (SS) is a chronic autoimmune disorder characterized by focal 
mononuclear cell infiltrates that surround the ducts of the exocrine glands, 
impairing the function of their secretory units. Compared to other autoimmune 
disorders, SS is associated with a notably high incidence of non-Hodgkin 
lymphoma (NHL) and more frequently mucosa associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) 
lymphoma, leading to increased morbidity and mortality rates. High risk features 
of lymphoma development include systemic extraepithelial manifestations, low 
serum levels of complement component C4 and mixed type II cryoglobulinemia. The 
discrimination between reactive and neoplastic lymphoepithelial lesion (LEL) is 
challenging, probably reflecting a continuum in the evolution from purely 
inflammatory lymphoid infiltration to the clonal neoplastic evolution. Early 
lesions display a predominance of activated T cells, while B cells prevail in 
severe histologic lesions. This strong B cell infiltration is not only a 
morphologic phenomenon, but it is also progressively associated with the 
presence of ectopic germinal centers (GCs). Ectopic formation of GCs in SS 
represents a complex process regulated by an array of cytokines, adhesion 
molecules and chemokines. Chronic antigenic stimulation is the major driver of 
specific B cell proliferation and increases the frequency of their 
transformation in the ectopic GCs and marginal zone (MZ) equivalents. B cells 
expressing cell surface rheumatoid factor (RF) are frequently detected in the 
salivary glands, suggesting that clonal expansion might arise from antigen 
selection of RF-expressing B cells. Abnormal stimulation and incomplete control 
mechanisms within ectopic lymphoid structures predispose RF MZ like cells to 
lymphoma development. Immunoglobulin recombination, somatic mutation and isotype 
switching during B cell development are events that may increase the 
translocation of oncogenes to immunoglobulin loci or tumor suppressor gene 
inactivation, leading to monoclonal B cell proliferation and lymphoma 
development. Concerning chronic antigenic stimulation, conclusive data is so far 
lacking. However immune complexes containing DNA or RNA are the most likely 
candidates. Whether additional molecular oncogenic events contribute to the 
malignant overgrowth remains to be proved.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm9123794
PMCID: PMC7759999
PMID: 33255258

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.