1. Elife. 2020 Nov 30;9:e59831. doi: 10.7554/eLife.59831.

Evolved bacterial resistance against fluoropyrimidines can lower chemotherapy 
impact in the Caenorhabditis elegans host.

Rosener B(1), Sayin S(1), Oluoch PO(1), García González AP(1), Mori H(2), 
Walhout AJ(1)(3), Mitchell A(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Program in Systems Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 
Worcester, United States.
(2)Data Science Center, Nara Institute of Science and Technology, Ikoma, Japan.
(3)Program in Molecular Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 
Worcester, United States.
(4)Department of Molecular, Cell and Cancer Biology, University of Massachusetts 
Medical School, Worcester, United States.

Metabolism of host-targeted drugs by the microbiome can substantially impact 
host treatment success. However, since many host-targeted drugs inadvertently 
hamper microbiome growth, repeated drug administration can lead to microbiome 
evolutionary adaptation. We tested if evolved bacterial resistance against 
host-targeted drugs alters their drug metabolism and impacts host treatment 
success. We used a model system of Caenorhabditis elegans, its bacterial diet, 
and two fluoropyrimidine chemotherapies. Genetic screens revealed that most of 
loss-of-function resistance mutations in Escherichia coli also reduced drug 
toxicity in the host. We found that resistance rapidly emerged in E. coli under 
natural selection and converged to a handful of resistance mechanisms. 
Surprisingly, we discovered that nutrient availability during bacterial 
evolution dictated the dietary effect on the host - only bacteria evolving in 
nutrient-poor media reduced host drug toxicity. Our work suggests that bacteria 
can rapidly adapt to host-targeted drugs and by doing so may also impact the 
host.

© 2020, Rosener et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.59831
PMCID: PMC7725501
PMID: 33252330 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: BR, SS, PO, AG, HM, AW, AM No competing 
interests declared