1. Elife. 2020 Dec 2;9:e61271. doi: 10.7554/eLife.61271.

Fitness variation across subtle environmental perturbations reveals local 
modularity and global pleiotropy of adaptation.

Kinsler G(#)(1), Geiler-Samerotte K(#)(1)(2), Petrov DA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, United States.
(2)Center for Mechanisms of Evolution, School of Life Sciences, Arizona State 
University, Tempe, United States.
(#)Contributed equally

Building a genotype-phenotype-fitness map of adaptation is a central goal in 
evolutionary biology. It is difficult even when adaptive mutations are known 
because it is hard to enumerate which phenotypes make these mutations adaptive. 
We address this problem by first quantifying how the fitness of hundreds of 
adaptive yeast mutants responds to subtle environmental shifts. We then model 
the number of phenotypes these mutations collectively influence by decomposing 
these patterns of fitness variation. We find that a small number of inferred 
phenotypes can predict fitness of the adaptive mutations near their original 
glucose-limited evolution condition. Importantly, inferred phenotypes that 
matter little to fitness at or near the evolution condition can matter strongly 
in distant environments. This suggests that adaptive mutations are locally 
modular - affecting a small number of phenotypes that matter to fitness in the 
environment where they evolved - yet globally pleiotropic - affecting additional 
phenotypes that may reduce or improve fitness in new environments.

Plain Language Summary: One of the goals of evolutionary biology is to 
understand the relationship between genotype, phenotype, and fitness. An 
organism's genes – its genotype – determine its physical and behavioral traits – 
its phenotype. Phenotypes, in turn, affect the organisms’ chances of survival 
and reproduction – its fitness. However, mapping the relationships among these 
three variables is far from easy. Recently researchers have become able to 
identify many genetic mutations that increase an organism's fitness, but it is 
more difficult to work out how these mutations affect an organism’s phenotype, 
and why they are beneficial. The mutations that help organisms thrive in a 
particular environment are often limited to a handful of genes that affect 
similar biological processes. For example, microbes that grow in environments 
with limited sugar tend to accumulate mutations in genes involved in systems 
that determine whether to grow fast and carelessly or to be careful in case the 
sugar is never replenished. It is possible that these mutations all affect the 
same one or two phenotypes, such as the decision to grow or to hunker down. If 
this were the case, researchers should be able to easily predict how well these 
organisms adapt to new environments. However, it is possible that specific 
mutations affect several phenotypes, but these extra effects remain invisible 
until the environment changes and these phenotypes are revealed. To explore this 
possibility, Kinsler, Geiler-Samerotte, and Petrov obtained hundreds of 
individual yeast strains that each contained a different mutation that improved 
the yeast's fitness in a low sugar environment. They placed these strains into 
similar environments and measured their fitness. The patterns observed were used 
to build several models that predicted how many phenotypes each mutation must 
affect to explain the changes in fitness. Kinsler, Geiler-Samerotte and Petrov 
found that the model in which only five phenotypes were affected by the 
mutations was able to predict the fitness of the yeast in low-sugar 
environments. However, to predict the fitness of the same mutations in 
environments that were very different, the model had to include eight 
phenotypes. This suggests that although the mutations that helped yeast do well 
in the low sugar environment were similar in their benefits in this environment, 
they were not truly all the same. In fact, some mutations were quite different 
from the others in terms of their hidden phenotypic effects. The hidden effects 
of mutations can be positive or negative. One mutation might cause an organism 
to die in a new environment, whereas another might allow it to thrive. 
Understanding how this works has implications not only for evolutionary biology, 
but also for medical research. Pathogens that cause infection, and cells that 
cause cancer, often accumulate mutations in small numbers of crucial genes. 
Understanding how these mutations affect phenotypes that become important as the 
environment changes – for instance as the cells encounter new challenges as a 
tumor grows – and whether different mutations have different hidden effects, 
could improve treatments in the future.

© 2020, Kinsler et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.61271
PMCID: PMC7880691
PMID: 33263280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: GK, KG, DP No competing interests declared