1. Int J Parasitol Drugs Drug Resist. 2020 Dec;14:249-256. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijpddr.2020.10.010. Epub 2020 Nov 2.

An ELISA method to assess HDAC inhibitor-induced alterations to P. falciparum 
histone lysine acetylation.

Hesping E(1), Skinner-Adams TS(1), Fisher GM(1), Kurz T(2), Andrews KT(3).

Author information:
(1)Griffith Institute for Drug Discovery, Griffith University, Brisbane, 
Australia.
(2)Institut für Pharmazeutische und Medizinische Chemie, Heinrich Heine 
Universität, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(3)Griffith Institute for Drug Discovery, Griffith University, Brisbane, 
Australia. Electronic address: k.andrews@griffith.edu.au.

The prevention and treatment of malaria requires a multi-pronged approach, 
including the development of drugs that have novel modes of action. Histone 
deacetylases (HDACs), enzymes involved in post-translational protein 
modification, are potential new drug targets for malaria. However, the lack of 
recombinant P. falciparum HDACs and suitable activity assays, has made the 
investigation of compounds designed to target these enzymes challenging. Current 
approaches are indirect and include assessing total deacetylase activity and 
protein hyperacetylation via Western blot. These approaches either do not allow 
differential compound effects to be determined or suffer from low throughput. 
Here we investigated dot blot and ELISA methods as new, higher throughput assays 
to detect histone lysine acetylation changes in P. falciparum parasites. As the 
ELISA method was found to be superior to the dot blot assay using the control 
HDAC inhibitor vorinostat, it was used to evaluate the histone H3 and H4 lysine 
acetylation changes mediated by a panel of six HDAC inhibitors that were shown 
to inhibit P. falciparum deacetylase activity. Vorinostat, panobinostat, 
trichostatin A, romidepsin and entinostat all caused an ~3-fold increase in 
histone H4 acetylation using a tetra-acetyl lysine antibody. Tubastatin A, the 
only human HDAC6-specific inhibitor tested, also caused H4 hyperacetylation, but 
to a lesser extent than the other compounds. Further investigation revealed that 
all compounds, except tubastatin A, caused hyperacetylation of the individual 
N-terminal H4 lysines 5, 8, 12 and 16. These data indicate that tubastatin A 
impacts P. falciparum H4 acetylation differently to the other HDAC inhibitors 
tested. In contrast, all compounds caused hyperacetylation of histone H3. In 
summary, the ELISA developed in this study provides a higher throughput approach 
to assessing differential effects of antiplasmodial compounds on histone 
acetylation levels and is therefore a useful new tool in the investigation of 
HDAC inhibitors for malaria.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpddr.2020.10.010
PMCID: PMC7724001
PMID: 33279862 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None.