1. Pharmgenomics Pers Med. 2020 Nov 26;13:655-663. doi: 10.2147/PGPM.S277952. 
eCollection 2020.

Impact of APOE Alleles-by-Diet Interactions on Glycemic and Lipid Features- A 
Cross-Sectional Study of a Cohort of Type 2 Diabetes Patients from Western 
Mexico: Implications for Personalized Medicine.

Torres-Valadez R(#)(1)(2), Ramos-Lopez O(#)(3), Frías Delgadillo KJ(1), 
Flores-García A(1), Rojas Carrillo E(4), Aguiar-García P(1), Bernal Pérez JA(4), 
Martinez-Lopez E(5), Martínez JA(6)(7), Zepeda-Carrillo EA(1)(8).

Author information:
(1)Specialized Unit in Research, Development and Innovation in Genomic Medicine, 
Nayarit Center for Innovation and Technology Transfer, Autonomous University of 
Nayarit, Tepic, Nayarit, Mexico.
(2)Integral Health Academic Unit, Autonomous University of Nayarit, Tepic, 
Nayarit, Mexico.
(3)Faculty of Medicine and Psychology, Autonomous University of Baja California, 
Tijuana, Baja California, Mexico.
(4)Family Medicine Unit No. 24 "Ignacio García Tellez", Mexican Social Security 
Institute, Tepic, Nayarit, Mexico.
(5)Institute of Translational Nutrigenetics and Nutrigenomics, Department of 
Molecular and Genomic Biology, University Center of Health Sciences, University 
of Guadalajara, Guadalajara, Jalisco, Mexico.
(6)Precision Nutrition and Cardiometabolic Health, IMDEA-Food Institute (Madrid 
Institute for Advanced Studies), Madrid, Spain.
(7)CIBERobn, Fisiopatología De La Obesidad y La Nutrición, Carlos III Health 
Institute, Madrid, Spain.
(8)Tepic Civil Hospital "Dr. Antonio González Guevara", Health Services in 
Nayarit, Tepic, Nayarit, Mexico.
(#)Contributed equally

PURPOSE: To analyze clinically relevant interactions between the apolipoprotein 
E (APOE) ε2, ε3 and ε4 alleles and nutritional factors on glycemic control and 
lipid levels in a cohort of type 2 diabetes (T2D) patients from western Mexico.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: In this cross-sectional study of the cohort of T2D 
patients, a total of 224 individuals were selected for interaction studies. 
Clinical and anthropometric data were obtained from pre-designed medical 
records. Dietary intake was assessed by validated three-day food consumption 
records. Biochemical measurements were determined by automated methods. APOE 
genotyping was performed by a real-time allelic discrimination assay. Gene-diet 
interactions were tested by corrected multiple linear regression analyses, which 
were adjusted by potential confounding factors such as age, sex, energy intake, 
BMI and anti-hyperglycemic therapy (Metformin, Glibenclamide or Insulin), and 
years with T2D.
RESULTS: Seventy-six percent of patients with T2D were on Metformin therapy. The 
frequencies of the APOE alleles were ε2 (5.8%), ε3 (74.1%) and ε4 (20.1%). After 
statistical settings, significant APOE alleles-by-diet interactions in relation 
to the metabolic profile were found. Interestingly, higher blood levels of total 
cholesterol (p int. = 0.016), non-HDL-c (p int. = 0.024), and LDL-c (p int. = 
0.030) were found only in carriers of the APOE ε2 allele with a low consumption 
of MUFA. In contrast, carriers of the APOE ε4 allele with a high ω-6:ω-3 PUFA 
ratio in the diet had higher %HbA1c blood concentrations (p int. = 0.035).
CONCLUSION: This study suggests a differential metabolic impact of APOE alleles 
on lipid/glycemic phenotypes depending on the dietary intake, with important 
potential implications in the personalized medicine and nutritional management 
of patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus.

© 2020 Torres-Valadez et al.

DOI: 10.2147/PGPM.S277952
PMCID: PMC7705254
PMID: 33273843

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial or non-financial interests or personal relationships that 
could have appeared to influence the work reported in this research.