1. J Biol Chem. 2021 Jan-Jun;296:100146. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA120.016738. Epub 2020
 Dec 10.

Alternative pathways utilize or circumvent putrescine for biosynthesis of 
putrescine-containing rhizoferrin.

Li B(1), Deng X(1), Kim SH(1), Buhrow L(1), Tomchick DR(2), Phillips MA(1), 
Michael AJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, 
USA.
(2)Department of Biophysics, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, 
USA. Electronic address: anthony.michael@utsouthwestern.edu.

The siderophore rhizoferrin (N1,N4-dicitrylputrescine) is produced in fungi and 
bacteria to scavenge iron. Putrescine-producing bacterium Ralstonia pickettii 
synthesizes rhizoferrin and encodes a single nonribosomal peptide 
synthetase-independent siderophore (NIS) synthetase. From biosynthetic logic, we 
hypothesized that this single enzyme is sufficient for rhizoferrin biosynthesis. 
We confirmed this by expression of R. pickettii NIS synthetase in Escherichia 
coli, resulting in rhizoferrin production. This was further confirmed in vitro 
using the recombinant NIS synthetase, synthesizing rhizoferrin from putrescine 
and citrate. Heterologous expression of homologous lbtA from Legionella 
pneumophila, required for rhizoferrin biosynthesis in that species, produced 
siderophore activity in E. coli. Rhizoferrin is also synthesized by Francisella 
tularensis and Francisella novicida, but unlike R. pickettii or L. pneumophila, 
Francisella species lack putrescine biosynthetic pathways because of genomic 
decay. Francisella encodes a NIS synthetase FslA/FigA and an ornithine 
decarboxylase homolog FslC/FigC, required for rhizoferrin biosynthesis. 
Ornithine decarboxylase produces putrescine from ornithine, but we show here 
in vitro that FigA synthesizes N-citrylornithine, and FigC is an 
N-citrylornithine decarboxylase that together synthesize rhizoferrin without 
using putrescine. We co-expressed F. novicida figA and figC in E. coli and 
produced rhizoferrin. A 2.1 Å X-ray crystal structure of the FigC 
N-citrylornithine decarboxylase reveals how the larger substrate is accommodated 
and how active site residues have changed to recognize N-citrylornithine. FigC 
belongs to a new subfamily of alanine racemase-fold PLP-dependent decarboxylases 
that are not involved in polyamine biosynthesis. These data reveal a natural 
product biosynthetic workaround that evolved to bypass a missing precursor and 
re-establish it in the final structure.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA120.016738
PMCID: PMC7857480
PMID: 33277357 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest All authors confirm that 
they have no conflict of interest with the contents of the article.