1. Entropy (Basel). 2020 May 14;22(5):550. doi: 10.3390/e22050550.

Molecular Mean-Field Theory of Ionic Solutions: A Poisson-Nernst-Planck-Bikerman 
Model.

Liu JL(1), Eisenberg B(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Computational and Modeling Science, National Tsing Hua 
University, Hsinchu 300, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Rush University, Chicago, IL 60612, 
USA.
(3)Department of Applied Mathematics, Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, 
IL 60616, USA.

We have developed a molecular mean-field theory-fourth-order 
Poisson-Nernst-Planck-Bikerman theory-for modeling ionic and water flows in 
biological ion channels by treating ions and water molecules of any volume and 
shape with interstitial voids, polarization of water, and ion-ion and ion-water 
correlations. The theory can also be used to study thermodynamic and 
electrokinetic properties of electrolyte solutions in batteries, fuel cells, 
nanopores, porous media including cement, geothermal brines, the oceanic system, 
etc. The theory can compute electric and steric energies from all atoms in a 
protein and all ions and water molecules in a channel pore while keeping 
electrolyte solutions in the extra- and intracellular baths as a continuum 
dielectric medium with complex properties that mimic experimental data. The 
theory has been verified with experiments and molecular dynamics data from the 
gramicidin A channel, L-type calcium channel, potassium channel, and 
sodium/calcium exchanger with real structures from the Protein Data Bank. It was 
also verified with the experimental or Monte Carlo data of electric double-layer 
differential capacitance and ion activities in aqueous electrolyte solutions. We 
give an in-depth review of the literature about the most novel properties of the 
theory, namely Fermi distributions of water and ions as classical particles with 
excluded volumes and dynamic correlations that depend on salt concentration, 
composition, temperature, pressure, far-field boundary conditions etc. in a 
complex and complicated way as reported in a wide range of experiments. The 
dynamic correlations are self-consistent output functions from a fourth-order 
differential operator that describes ion-ion and ion-water correlations, the 
dielectric response (permittivity) of ionic solutions, and the polarization of 
water molecules with a single correlation length parameter.

DOI: 10.3390/e22050550
PMCID: PMC7517072
PMID: 33286322

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.