1. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2021 Oct;110(4):975-985. doi: 10.1002/cpt.2135. Epub 2021
 Jan 1.

Transferability of Ancestry-Specific and Cross-Ancestry CYP2A6 Activity Genetic 
Risk Scores in African and European Populations.

El-Boraie A(1)(2), Chenoweth MJ(1)(2), Pouget JG(2)(3), Benowitz NL(4), Fukunaga 
K(5), Mushiroda T(5), Kubo M(5), Nollen NL(6), Sanderson Cox L(6), Lerman C(7), 
Knight J(8), Tyndale RF(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology & Toxicology, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada.
(2)Campbell Family Mental Health Research Institute, Centre for Addiction and 
Mental Health and Division of Brain and Therapeutics, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Clinical Pharmacology Research Program, Division of Cardiology, Department of 
Medicine and Center for Tobacco Control Research and Education, University of 
California San Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA.
(5)Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, RIKEN, Kanagawa, Japan.
(6)Department of Population Health, School of Medicine, University of Kansas, 
Kansas City, Kansas, USA.
(7)Department of Psychiatry and USC Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, 
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(8)Data Science Institute and Medical School, Lancaster University, Lancaster, 
UK.

The Nicotine Metabolite Ratio (NMR; 3-hydroxycotinine/cotinine), a highly 
heritable index of nicotine metabolic inactivation by the CYP2A6 enzyme, is 
associated with numerous smoking behaviors and diseases, as well as unique 
cessation outcomes. However, the NMR cannot be measured in nonsmokers, former 
smokers, or intermittent smokers, for example, in evaluating tobacco-related 
disease risk. Traditional pharmacogenetic groupings based on CYP2A6 * alleles 
capture a modest portion of NMR variation. We previously created a CYP2A6 
weighted genetic risk score (wGRS) for European (EUR)-ancestry populations by 
incorporating independent signals from genome-wide association studies to 
capture a larger proportion of NMR variation. However, CYP2A6 genetic 
architecture is unique to ancestral populations. In this study, we developed and 
replicated an African-ancestry (AFR) wGRS, which captured 30-35% of the 
variation in NMR. We demonstrated model robustness against known environmental 
sources of NMR variation. Furthermore, despite the vast diversity within AFR 
populations, we showed that the AFR wGRS was consistent between different US 
geographical regions and unaltered by fine AFR population substructure. The AFR 
and EUR wGRSs can distinguish slow from normal metabolizers in their respective 
populations, and were able to reflect unique smoking cessation pharmacotherapy 
outcomes previously observed for the NMR. Additionally, we evaluated the utility 
of a cross-ancestry wGRS, and the capacity of EUR, AFR, and cross-ancestry wGRSs 
to predict the NMR within stratified or admixed AFR-EUR populations. Overall, 
our findings establish the clinical benefit of applying ancestry-specific wGRSs, 
demonstrating superiority of the AFR wGRS in AFRs.

© 2020 The Authors. Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics © 2020 American Society 
for Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1002/cpt.2135
PMCID: PMC8187466
PMID: 33300144 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: R.F.T. has consulted for 
Quinn Emanuel and Ethismos on unrelated topics. All other authors declared no 
competing interests for this work.