1. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 4;38(5):1792-1808. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa320.

Convergent Rewiring of the Virulence Regulatory Network Promotes Adaptation of 
Ralstonia solanacearum on Resistant Tomato.

Gopalan-Nair R(1), Jardinaud MF(1), Legrand L(1), Landry D(1), Barlet X(1), 
Lopez-Roques C(2), Vandecasteele C(2), Bouchez O(2), Genin S(1), Guidot A(1).

Author information:
(1)LIPME, Université de Toulouse, INRAE, CNRS, Castanet-Tolosan, France.
(2)GeT-PlaGe, Genotoul, INRAE, US 1426, Castanet-Tolosan, France.

The evolutionary and adaptive potential of a pathogen is a key determinant for 
successful host colonization and proliferation but remains poorly known for most 
of the pathogens. Here, we used experimental evolution combined with 
phenotyping, genomics, and transcriptomics to estimate the adaptive potential of 
the bacterial plant pathogen Ralstonia solanacearum to overcome the quantitative 
resistance of the tomato cultivar Hawaii 7996. After serial passaging over 300 
generations, we observed pathogen adaptation to within-plant environment of the 
resistant cultivar but no plant resistance breakdown. Genomic sequence analysis 
of the adapted clones revealed few genetic alterations, but we provide evidence 
that all but one were gain of function mutations. Transcriptomic analyses 
revealed that even if different adaptive events occurred in independently 
evolved clones, there is convergence toward a global rewiring of the virulence 
regulatory network as evidenced by largely overlapping gene expression profiles. 
A subset of four transcription regulators, including HrpB, the activator of the 
type 3 secretion system regulon and EfpR, a global regulator of virulence and 
metabolic functions, emerged as key nodes of this regulatory network that are 
frequently targeted to redirect the pathogen's physiology and improve its 
fitness in adverse conditions. Significant transcriptomic variations were also 
detected in evolved clones showing no genomic polymorphism, suggesting that 
epigenetic modifications regulate expression of some of the virulence network 
components and play a major role in adaptation as well.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa320
PMCID: PMC8097285
PMID: 33306125 [Indexed for MEDLINE]