1. Front Pharmacol. 2020 Nov 26;11:584184. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2020.584184. 
eCollection 2020.

Upregulation of Nucleotide-Binding Oligomerization Domain-, LRR- and Pyrin 
Domain-Containing Protein 3 in Motoneurons Following Peripheral Nerve Injury in 
Mice.

Nógrádi B(1)(2), Nyúl-Tóth Á(1)(3), Kozma M(1)(4), Molnár K(1)(4), Patai R(1), 
Siklós L(1), Wilhelm I(1)(5), Krizbai IA(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biophysics, Biological Research Centre, Szeged, Hungary.
(2)Foundation for the Future of Biomedical Sciences in Szeged, Szeged Scientists 
Academy, Szeged, Hungary.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Vascular Cognitive 
Impairment and Neurodegeneration Program, Reynolds Oklahoma Center on 
Aging/Oklahoma Center for Geroscience, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences 
Center, Oklahoma City, OK, United States.
(4)Theoretical Medicine Doctoral School, University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary.
(5)Institute of Life Sciences, Vasile Goldiş Western University of Arad, Arad, 
Romania.

Neuronal injuries are accompanied by release and accumulation of 
damage-associated molecules, which in turn may contribute to activation of the 
immune system. Since a wide range of danger signals (including endogenous ones) 
are detected by the nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-, LRR- and pyrin 
domain-containing protein 3 (NLRP3) pattern recognition receptor, we 
hypothesized that NLRP3 may become activated in response to motor neuron injury. 
Here we show that peripheral injury of the oculomotor and the hypoglossal nerves 
results in upregulation of NLRP3 in corresponding motor nuclei in the brainstem 
of mice. Although basal expression of NLRP3 was observed in microglia, astroglia 
and neurons as well, its upregulation and co-localization with 
apoptosis-associated speck-like protein containing a caspase activation and 
recruitment domain, suggesting inflammasome activation, was only detected in 
neurons. Consequently, increased production of active pro-inflammatory cytokines 
interleukin-1β and interleukin-18 were detected after hypoglossal nerve axotomy. 
Injury-sensitive hypoglossal neurons responded with a more pronounced NLRP3 
upregulation than injury-resistant motor neurons of the oculomotor nucleus. We 
further demonstrated that the mitochondrial protector diazoxide was able to 
reduce NLRP3 upregulation in a post-operative treatment paradigm. Our results 
indicate that NLRP3 is activated in motoneurons following acute nerve injury. 
Blockade of NLRP3 activation might contribute to the previously observed 
anti-inflammatory and neuroprotective effects of diazoxide.

Copyright © 2020 Nógrádi, Nyúl-Tóth, Kozma, Molnár, Patai, Siklós, Wilhelm and 
Krizbai.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2020.584184
PMCID: PMC7732612
PMID: 33328988

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.