1. Front Genet. 2020 Nov 27;11:598976. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2020.598976.
eCollection  2020.

Recent Advances in the Pathophysiology of Fatty Acid Oxidation Defects: 
Secondary Alterations of Bioenergetics and Mitochondrial Calcium Homeostasis 
Caused by the Accumulating Fatty Acids.

Amaral AU(1)(2), Wajner M(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Ciências Biológicas: Bioquímica, Instituto de 
Ciências Básicas da Saúde, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto 
Alegre, Brazil.
(2)Departamento de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade Regional Integrada do Alto 
Uruguai e das Missões, Erechim, Brazil.
(3)Departamento de Bioquímica, Instituto de Ciências Básicas da Saúde, 
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil.
(4)Serviço de Genética Médica, Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre, Porto 
Alegre, Brazil.

Deficiencies of medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase, mitochondrial trifunctional 
protein, isolated long-chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase, and very 
long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase activities are considered the most frequent 
fatty acid oxidation defects (FAOD). They are biochemically characterized by the 
accumulation of medium-chain, long-chain hydroxyl, and long-chain fatty acids 
and derivatives, respectively, in tissues and biological fluids of the affected 
patients. Clinical manifestations commonly include hypoglycemia, cardiomyopathy, 
and recurrent rhabdomyolysis. Although the pathogenesis of these diseases is 
still poorly understood, energy deprivation secondary to blockage of fatty acid 
degradation seems to play an important role. However, recent evidence indicates 
that the predominant fatty acids accumulating in these disorders disrupt 
mitochondrial functions and are involved in their pathophysiology, possibly 
explaining the lactic acidosis, mitochondrial morphological alterations, and 
altered mitochondrial biochemical parameters found in tissues and cultured 
fibroblasts from some affected patients and also in animal models of these 
diseases. In this review, we will update the present knowledge on disturbances 
of mitochondrial bioenergetics, calcium homeostasis, uncoupling of oxidative 
phosphorylation, and mitochondrial permeability transition induction provoked by 
the major fatty acids accumulating in prevalent FAOD. It is emphasized that 
further in vivo studies carried out in tissues from affected patients and from 
animal genetic models of these disorders are necessary to confirm the present 
evidence mostly achieved from in vitro experiments.

Copyright © 2020 Amaral and Wajner.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2020.598976
PMCID: PMC7729159
PMID: 33329744

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.