1. J Exp Med. 2021 Mar 1;218(3):e20200547. doi: 10.1084/jem.20200547.

CD4+ follicular regulatory T cells optimize the influenza virus-specific B cell 
response.

Lu Y(1), Jiang R(1)(2), Freyn AW(3), Wang J(2), Strohmeier S(3), Lederer K(4), 
Locci M(4), Zhao H(2)(5), Angeletti D(6), O'Connor KC(1)(7), Kleinstein 
SH(1)(2)(8), Nachbagauer R(3), Craft J(1)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
CT.
(2)Interdepartmental Program in Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Yale 
University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, NY.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.
(5)Department of Biostatistics, Yale School of Public Health, New Haven, CT.
(6)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Gothenburg, 
Gothenburg, Sweden.
(7)Department of Neurology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT.
(8)Department of Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT.
(9)Department of Internal Medicine (Rheumatology, Allergy, and Immunology), Yale 
University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT.

CD4+ follicular regulatory T (Tfr) cells control B cell responses through the 
modulation of follicular helper T (Tfh) cells and germinal center development 
while suppressing autoreactivity; however, their role in the regulation of 
productive germinal center B cell responses and humoral memory is incompletely 
defined. We show that Tfr cells promote antigen-specific germinal center B cell 
responses upon influenza virus infection. Following viral challenge, we found 
that Tfr cells are necessary for robust generation of virus-specific, long-lived 
plasma cells, antibody production against both hemagglutinin (HA) and 
neuraminidase (NA), the two major influenza virus glycoproteins, and appropriate 
regulation of the BCR repertoire. To further investigate the functional 
relevance of Tfr cells during viral challenge, we used a sequential immunization 
model with repeated exposure of antigenically partially conserved strains of 
influenza viruses, revealing that Tfr cells promote recall antibody responses 
against the conserved HA stalk region. Thus, Tfr cells promote antigen-specific 
B cell responses and are essential for the development of long-term humoral 
memory.

© 2020 Lu et al.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.20200547
PMCID: PMC7748821
PMID: 33326020 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures: K.C. O’Connor reported personal 
fees from Alexion and grants from Ra Pharma outside the submitted work; is the 
recipient of a sponsored research subaward from the University of Pennsylvania, 
the primary financial sponsor of which is Cabaletta Bio; and is a consultant and 
equity shareholder of Cabaletta Bio. No other disclosures were reported.