1. Immunol Rev. 2021 Mar;300(1):82-99. doi: 10.1111/imr.12936. Epub 2020 Dec 17.

Established and emergent roles for Ikaros transcription factors in lymphoid cell 
development and function.

Read KA(1)(2), Jones DM(1)(2), Freud AG(1)(3), Oestreich KJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbial Infection and Immunity, The Ohio State University 
College of Medicine and Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, OH, USA.
(2)Biomedical Sciences Graduate Program, Columbus, OH, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, The Ohio State University College of Medicine and 
Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, OH, USA.

Ikaros zinc finger transcription factors are important regulators of the gene 
programs underlying the development of hematopoietic cell lineages. The family 
consists of five members: Ikaros, Helios, Aiolos, Eos, and Pegasus, which engage 
in both homo- and heterotypic intrafamilial interactions to exert diverse 
functional effects. Pioneering studies focused on the role of these factors in 
early lymphoid development, as their absence resulted in severe defects in 
lymphocyte populations. More recent work has now begun to define nuanced, 
stage-specific roles for Ikaros family members in the differentiation and 
function of mature T, B, and innate lymphoid cell populations including natural 
killer (NK) cells. The precise transcriptional mechanisms by which these factors 
function, both independently and collaboratively, is an area of active 
investigation. However, several key themes appear to be emerging regarding the 
pathways influenced by Ikaros family members, including the end-to-end 
regulation of cytokine signaling. Here, we review roles for Ikaros factors in 
lymphoid cell development, differentiation, and function, including a discussion 
of the current understanding of the transcriptional mechanisms they employ and 
considerations for the future study of this important transcription factor 
family.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/imr.12936
PMCID: PMC8015388
PMID: 33331000 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare no 
competing interests.