1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2020 Dec 17;15(1):349. doi: 10.1186/s13023-020-01637-9.

Eye movement biomarkers allow for the definition of phenotypes in Gaucher 
Disease.

Donald A(1), Tan CY(2), Chakrapani A(3), Hughes DA(4), Sharma R(5), Cole D(6), 
Bardins S(7), Gorges M(8), Jones SA(9), Schneider E(8).

Author information:
(1)Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, St Mary's Hospital, Manchester, UK. 
Aimee.donald@nhs.net.
(2)Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, UK.
(3)Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, UK.
(4)Royal Free Hospital, London, UK.
(5)Salford Royal Foundation Trust, Salford, UK.
(6)Cardiff and Vale University Health Board, Cardiff, Wales, UK.
(7)Ludwig-Maximillans-Univesitat Munchen, Munich, Germany.
(8)Institute of Medical Technology, Brandenburg University of Technology Cottbus 
- Senftenberg, Cottbus, Germany.
(9)Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, St Mary's Hospital, Manchester, UK.

BACKGROUND: Neurological forms of Gaucher disease, the inherited disorder of 
β-Glucosylceramidase caused by bi-allelic variants in GBA1, is a progressive 
disorder which lacks a disease-modifying therapy. Systemic manifestations of 
disease are effectively treated with enzyme replacement therapy, however, 
molecules which cross the blood-brain barrier are still under investigation. 
Clinical trials of such therapeutics require robust, reproducible clinical 
endpoints to demonstrate efficacy and clear phenotypic definitions to identify 
suitable patients for inclusion in trials. The single consistent clinical 
feature in all patients with neuronopathic disease is the presence of a 
supranuclear saccadic gaze palsy, in the presence of Gaucher disease this 
finding serves as diagnostic of 'type 3' Gaucher disease.
METHODS: We undertook a study to evaluate saccadic eye movements in Gaucher 
patients and to assess the role of the EyeSeeCam in measuring saccades. The 
EyeSeeCam is a video-oculography device which was used to run a protocol of 
saccade measures. We studied 39 patients with non-neurological Gaucher disease 
(type 1), 21 patients with type 3 (neurological) disease and a series of 35 
healthy controls. Mean saccade parameters were compared across disease 
subgroups.
RESULTS: We confirmed the saccadic abnormality in patients with type 3 Gaucher 
disease and identified an unexpected subgroup of patients with type 1 Gaucher 
disease who demonstrated significant saccade parameter abnormalities. These 
patients also showed subtle neurological findings and shared a GBA1 variant.
CONCLUSIONS: This striking novel finding of a potentially attenuated type 3 
Gaucher phenotype associated with a specific GBA1 variant and detectable 
saccadic abnormality prompts review of current disease classification. Further, 
this finding highlights the broad spectrum of neuronopathic Gaucher phenotypes 
relevant when designing inclusion criteria for clinical trials.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-020-01637-9
PMCID: PMC7745364
PMID: 33334373 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No authors have any conflicts of interest with 
the study sponsors. ES is general manager and shareholder of EyeSeeTec GmbH.