1. Int J Biol Macromol. 2021 Feb 15;170:406-414. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.12.141. Epub 2020 Dec 30.

Yarrowia lipolytica L-asparaginase inhibits the growth and migration of lung 
(A549) and breast (MCF7) cancer cells.

Mazloum-Ravasan S(1), Madadi E(1), Mohammadi A(2), Mansoori B(3), Amini M(3), 
Mokhtarzadeh A(4), Baradaran B(5), Darvishi F(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Rabe Rashid Institute, Tabriz, Iran; Immunology 
Research Center, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran.
(2)Immunology Research Center, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, 
Iran; Student Research Committee, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, 
Iran; Department of Cancer and Inflammation Research, Institute for Molecular 
Medicine, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark.
(3)Immunology Research Center, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, 
Iran.
(4)Immunology Research Center, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, 
Iran. Electronic address: Mokhtarzadehah@tbzmed.ac.ir.
(5)Immunology Research Center, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, 
Iran. Electronic address: Baradaranb@tbzmed.ac.ir.
(6)Microbial Biotechnology and Bioprocess Engineering (MBBE) Group, Department 
of Microbiology, Faculty of Science, University of Maragheh, Maragheh, Iran; 
Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Alzahra University, 
Tehran, Iran. Electronic address: f.darvishi@ymail.com.

L-asparaginase is an enzyme capable of hydrolyzing the asparagine to aspartic 
acid and ammonia. L-asparaginase is widely used in the treatment of acute 
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and other cancers. Here, for the first time, the 
effects of a novel yeast L-asparaginase from Yarrowia lipolytica were studied on 
human lung (A549) and breast cancer (MCF7) cell lines as the solid cancer cell 
lines in terms of cell growth and metastasis inhibition. Functional analysis 
showed the L-asparagine deprivation mediated anti-proliferation effects by 
apoptosis induction and changes in the expression of target genes involved in 
apoptosis and migration pathways. The qRT-PCR analysis showed the higher 
expression levels of pro-apoptosis genes, including Bax, P53, caspase 3, caspase 
8, and down-regulation of Bcl-2 anti-apoptotic gene in treated cells. On the 
other hand, there was no increase in ROS production in the treated cells. 
However, L-asparaginase treatment was able to significantly induce autophagy 
activation in A549 cells. Besides, wound healing assay showed that 
L-asparaginase could considerably inhibit the migration of A549 and MCF7 cells. 
Taken together, our results suggested that Yarrowia lipolytica L-asparaginase 
might be considered for enzyme therapy against breast and lung cancers.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.12.141
PMID: 33358949 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare no conflict of interest.