1. mSphere. 2020 Dec 23;5(6):e00884-20. doi: 10.1128/mSphere.00884-20.

Analysis of Serial Multidrug-Resistant Tuberculosis Strains Causing Treatment 
Failure and Within-Host Evolution by Whole-Genome Sequencing.

Chen X(#)(1), He G(#)(2), Lin S(1), Wang S(1), Sun F(1), Chen J(#)(3), Zhang 
W(#)(3)(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, 
Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, Wenzhou Central Hospital, Affiliated 
Dingli Clinical Institute of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, China.
(3)Department of Infectious Diseases, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, 
Shanghai, China jiazhen_chen@163.com zhangwenhong@fudan.edu.cn.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, School of Life Science, Fudan 
University, Shanghai, China.
(5)National Clinical Research Center for Aging and Medicine, Huashan Hospital, 
Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(6)Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Virology (MOE/MOH) and Institutes of 
Biomedical Sciences, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, 
China.
(#)Contributed equally

The cure rate of multidrug-resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB) is relatively low in 
China. The reasons for the treatment failure and within-host evolution during 
treatment have not been sufficiently studied. All MDR-TB patients receiving 
standard treatment from January 2014 to September 2016 at a designated TB 
Hospital in Zhejiang Province were retrospectively included and grouped 
according to their known treatment outcome. Clinical information was collected. 
Baseline strains of all patients and serial strains of treatment-failure 
patients were revived. Drug susceptibility tests (DSTs) of 14 drugs and single 
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) analysis based on whole-genome sequencing (WGS) 
were performed. The genetic distance and within-host evolution were investigated 
based on SNPs. In total, 20 treatment failure patients and 74 patients who 
succeeded in treatment were included. The number of effective drugs for patients 
who failed treatment was no more than three. Eighteen (90.0%) treatment-failure 
patients were characterized by a continuous infection of the primary strain, of 
which 14 patients (77.8%) developed phenotypic or genotypic acquired drug 
resistance under ineffective treatment. Acquired resistance to amikacin and 
moxifloxacin (2.0 mg/ml) was detected most frequently, in 5 and 4 patients, 
respectively. The insufficient number of effective drugs in the combined 
treatment regimen was the main reason for MDR-TB treatment failure. The study 
emphasizes the importance of DST for second-line drugs when implementing the 
second-line drug regimen in MDR-TB patients. For patients with risk factors for 
MDR-TB, DST of second-line antituberculosis drugs should be performed at 
initiation of treatment. Second-line drugs should be selected based on the 
results of DST to avoid acquired resistance. WGS detects low-frequency 
resistance mutations and heterogeneous resistance with high sensitivity, which 
is of great significance for guiding clinical treatment and preventing acquired 
resistance.IMPORTANCE Few studies have focused on the reasons for the low cure 
rate of multidrug-resistant tuberculosis in China and within-host evolution 
during treatment, which is of great significance for improving clinical 
treatment regimens. Acquired resistance events were common during the 
ineffective treatment, among which resistance to amikacin and high-level 
moxifloxacin were the most common. The main reason for the treatment failure of 
MDR-TB patients was insufficient effective drugs, which may lead to higher 
levels of drug resistance in MDR-TB strains. Therefore, the study emphasizes the 
importance of DST in the development of second-line treatment regimen when there 
is a risk of MDR. By performing whole-genome sequencing of serial strains from 
patients with treatment failure, we found that WGS can detect low-frequency 
resistance mutations and heterogeneous resistance with high sensitivity. It is 
thus recommended to conduct drug susceptibility tests at the beginning of 
treatment and repeat the DST when the sputum bacteria remain positive.

Copyright © 2020 Chen et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mSphere.00884-20
PMCID: PMC7763549
PMID: 33361124 [Indexed for MEDLINE]