1. Circulation. 2021 Mar 2;143(9):949-958. doi:
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.120.049514.  Epub 2021 Jan 7.

Challenges of Cardio-Kidney Composite Outcomes in Large-Scale Clinical Trials.

Patel RB(#)(1), Ter Maaten JM(#)(2), Ferreira JP(3), McCausland FR(4), Shah 
SJ(1), Rossignol P(3), Solomon SD(5), Vaduganathan M(5), Packer M(6), Thompson 
A(7), Stockbridge N(7), Zannad F(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Northwestern University 
Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL (R.B.P., S.J.S.).
(2)Department of Cardiology, University of Groningen, University Medical Centre, 
the Netherlands (J.M.T.M.).
(3)Université de Lorraine, INSERM, Centre d'Investigations Cliniques, INI CRCT, 
and INSERM U1116, CHRU Nancy, France (J.P.F., P.R., F.Z.).
(4)Renal Division, Department of Medicine (F.R.M.), Brigham and Women's Hospital 
and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.
(5)Heart and Vascular Center (S.D.S., M.V.), Brigham and Women's Hospital and 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.
(6)Baylor Heart and Vascular Institute, Baylor University Medical Center, 
Dallas, TX (M.P.).
(7)Division of Cardiology and Nephrology, Office of New Drugs, Center for Drug 
Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, MD (A.T., 
N.S.).
(#)Contributed equally

Patients with chronic cardiovascular or metabolic diseases, including diabetes, 
hypertension, obesity, and heart failure, often have comorbid kidney disease. 
Long-term outcomes are worse in the setting of both cardiac and kidney disease 
compared with either disease in isolation. In addition, the clinical 
presentations of certain acute cardiovascular events (such as heart failure) and 
worsening kidney function overlap and may be challenging to distinguish. 
Recently, certain novel treatments have demonstrated beneficial effects on both 
cardiac and kidney outcomes. Sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 inhibitors have 
exhibited concordant risk reduction and clinically important benefits in chronic 
kidney disease with and without diabetes, diabetes and established 
cardiovascular disease or multiple atherosclerotic vascular disease risk 
factors, and heart failure with reduced ejection fraction with and without 
diabetes. Primary trial results have revealed that sacubitril-valsartan therapy 
improves cardiovascular outcomes in patients with chronic heart failure with 
reduced ejection fraction and post hoc analyses suggest favorable kidney 
effects. A concordant pattern of kidney benefit with sacubitril-valsartan has 
also been observed in chronic heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. 
Given the complex interplay between cardiac and kidney disease and the 
possibility that treatments may show concordant cardio-kidney benefits, there 
has been recent interest in formally acknowledging, defining, and using 
composite cardio-kidney outcomes in future cardiovascular trials. This review 
describes potential challenges in use of such outcomes that should be considered 
and addressed before their incorporation into such trials.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.120.049514
PMCID: PMC7920916
PMID: 33406882 [Indexed for MEDLINE]