1. JCI Insight. 2021 Feb 8;6(3):e145761. doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.145761.

Restoration of type I interferon signaling in intrahepatically primed CD8+ T 
cells promotes functional differentiation.

Kawashima K(1)(2), Isogawa M(1)(3), Onishi M(1)(4), Baudi I(1), Saito S(2), 
Nakajima A(2), Fujita T(5)(6), Tanaka Y(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Virology and Liver Unit, Nagoya City University Graduate School 
of Medical Sciences, Nagoya, Japan.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Yokohama City University 
School of Medicine, Yokohama, Japan.
(3)Department of Immunology, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology/Internal Medicine, Gifu University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Gifu, Japan.
(5)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Institute for Frontier Life and Medical 
Science, and.
(6)Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Immunology, Graduate School of 
Biostudies, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.
(7)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Graduate School of Medical 
Sciences, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan.

Hepatitis B virus-specific (HBV-specific) CD8+ T cells fail to acquire effector 
functions after priming in the liver, but the molecular basis for the 
dysfunction is poorly understood. By comparing the gene expression profile of 
intrahepatically primed, dysfunctional HBV-specific CD8+ T cells with that of 
systemically primed, functional effector counterparts, we found that the 
expression of interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) is selectively suppressed in 
the dysfunctional CD8+ T cells. The ISG suppression was associated with impaired 
phosphorylation of STAT1 in response to IFN-α treatment. Importantly, a strong 
induction of type I interferons (IFN-Is) in the liver facilitated the functional 
differentiation of intrahepatically primed HBV-specific CD8+ T cells in 
association with the restoration of ISGs' expression in the T cells. These 
results suggest that intrahepatic priming suppresses IFN-I signaling in CD8+ T 
cells, which may contribute to the dysfunction. The data also suggest a 
therapeutic value of the robust induction of intrahepatic IFN-Is for the 
treatment of chronic HBV infection.

DOI: 10.1172/jci.insight.145761
PMCID: PMC7934883
PMID: 33400688 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors have declared 
that no conflict of interest exists.