1. Am J Med Genet A. 2021 Apr;185(4):1195-1203. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62067. Epub 
2021 Jan 9.

Interfamilial clinical variability in four Polish families with cranioectodermal 
dysplasia and identical compound heterozygous variants in WDR35.

Walczak-Sztulpa J(1), Wawrocka A(1), Stańczyk M(2), Pesz K(3), Dudarewicz L(4), 
Chrul S(2), Bukowska-Olech E(1), Wieczorek-Cichecka N(4), Arts HH(5)(6), Oud 
MM(7)(8), Śmigiel R(9), Grenda R(10), Obersztyn E(11), Chrzanowska KH(12), 
Latos-Bieleńska A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, 
Poznan, Poland.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Immunology and Nephrology, Polish Mother's Memorial 
Hospital Research Institute, Lodz, Poland.
(3)Department of Genetics, Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland.
(4)Department of Genetics, Polish Mother's Memorial Hospital Research Institute, 
Lodz, Poland.
(5)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Dalhousie University, 
Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.
(6)IWK Health Centre, Clinical Genomics Laboratory, Halifax, Nova Scotia, 
Canada.
(7)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands.
(8)Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behavior, Radboud University 
Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(9)Division of Pediatrics and Rare Disorders, Department of Pediatrics, Wroclaw 
Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland.
(10)Department of Nephrology, Kidney Transplantation and Hypertension, The 
Children's Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland.
(11)Department of Medical Genetics, Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, 
Poland.
(12)Department of Medical Genetics, The Children's Memorial Health Institute, 
Warsaw, Poland.

Cranioectodermal dysplasia (CED) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder 
primarily characterized by craniofacial, skeletal, and ectodermal abnormalities. 
CED is a chondrodysplasia, which is part of a spectrum of clinically and 
genetically heterogeneous diseases that result from disruptions in cilia. 
Pathogenic variants in genes encoding components of the ciliary transport 
machinery are known to cause CED. Intra- and interfamilial clinical variability 
has been reported in a few CED studies and the findings of this study align with 
these observations. Here, we report on five CED patients from four Polish 
families with identical compound heterozygous variants [c.1922T>G p.(Leu641Ter) 
and c.2522A>T; p.(Asp841Val)] in WDR35. The frequent occurrence of both 
identified changes in Polish CED families suggests that these variants may be 
founder mutations. Clinical evaluation of the CED patients revealed 
interfamilial clinical variability among the patients. This includes differences 
in skeletal and ectodermal features as well as variability in development, 
progression, and severity of renal and liver insufficiency. This is the first 
report showing significant interfamilial clinical variability in a series of CED 
patients from unrelated families with identical compound heterozygous variants 
in WDR35. Our findings strongly indicate that other genetic and non-genetic 
factors may modulate the progression and expression of the patients' phenotypes.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62067
PMID: 33421337 [Indexed for MEDLINE]