1. mSphere. 2021 Jan 13;6(1):e00979-20. doi: 10.1128/mSphere.00979-20.

An Observational Laboratory-Based Assessment of SARS-CoV-2 Molecular Diagnostics 
in Benin, Western Africa.

Sander AL(#)(1), Yadouleton A(#)(2)(3), Moreira-Soto A(#)(1), Tchibozo C(2), 
Hounkanrin G(2), Badou Y(2), Fischer C(1), Krause N(1), Akogbeto P(4), F de 
Oliveira Filho E(1), Dossou A(4), Brünink S(1), Drosten C(#)(1)(5), Aïssi 
MAJ(6), Harouna Djingarey M(7), Hounkpatin B(4), Nagel M(8), Drexler JF(9)(5).

Author information:
(1)Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie Universität 
Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, 
Germany.
(2)Laboratoire des Fièvres Hémorragiques Virales du Benin, Cotonou, Benin.
(3)Ecole Normale Supérieure de Natitingou, Université Nationale des Sciences, 
Technologies, Ingénierie et Mathématiques (UNSTIM), Natitingou, Benin.
(4)Ministry of Health, Cotonou, Benin.
(5)German Centre for Infection Research (DZIF), associated partner 
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(6)Conseil National de Lutte contre le VIH-Sida, la Tuberculose, le Paludisme, 
les IST et les Epidémies, Cotonou, Benin.
(7)World Health Organization, Regional Office for Africa, Health Emergencies 
Programme, Brazzaville, Congo.
(8)Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) GmbH, Bonn, 
Germany.
(9)Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie Universität 
Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, 
Germany felix.drexler@charite.de.
(#)Contributed equally

Information on severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) 
spread in Africa is limited by insufficient diagnostic capacity. Here, we 
assessed the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)-related diagnostic workload during 
the onset of the pandemic in the central laboratory of Benin, Western Africa; 
characterized 12 SARS-CoV-2 genomes from returning travelers; and validated the 
Da An RT-PCR-based diagnostic kit that is widely used across Africa. We found a 
15-fold increase in the monthly laboratory workload due to COVID-19, dealt with 
at the cost of routine activities. Genomic surveillance showed near-simultaneous 
introduction of distinct SARS-CoV-2 lineages termed A.4 and B.1, including the 
D614G spike protein variant potentially associated with higher transmissibility 
from travelers from six different European and African countries during 
March-April 2020. We decoded the target regions within the ORF1ab and N genes of 
the Da An dual-target kit by MinION-based amplicon sequencing. Despite 
relatively high similarity between SARS-CoV-2 and endemic human coronaviruses 
(HCoVs) within the ORF1ab target domain, no cross-detection of high-titered cell 
culture supernatants of HCoVs was observed, suggesting high analytical 
specificity. The Da An kit was highly sensitive, detecting 3.2 to 9.0 copies of 
target-specific in vitro transcripts/reaction. Although discrepant test results 
were observed in low-titered clinical samples, clinical sensitivity of the Da An 
kit was at least comparable to that of commercial kits from affluent settings. 
In sum, virologic diagnostics are achievable in a resource-limited setting, but 
unprecedented pressure resulting from COVID-19-related diagnostics requires 
rapid and sustainable support of national and supranational stakeholders 
addressing limited laboratory capacity.IMPORTANCE Months after the start of the 
COVID-19 pandemic, case numbers from Africa are surprisingly low, potentially 
because the number of SARS-CoV-2 tests performed in Africa is lower than in 
other regions. Here, we show an overload of COVID-19-related diagnostics in the 
central laboratory of Benin, Western Africa, with a stagnating average number of 
positive samples irrespective of daily sample counts. SARS-CoV-2 genomic 
surveillance confirmed a high genomic diversity in Benin introduced by travelers 
returning from Europe and other African countries, including early circulation 
of the D614G spike mutation associated with potentially higher transmissibility. 
We validated a widely used RT-PCR kit donated by the Chinese Jack Ma Foundation 
and confirmed high analytical specificity and clinical sensitivity equivalent to 
tests used in affluent settings. Our assessment shows that although achievable 
in an African setting, the burden from COVID-19-related diagnostics on national 
reference laboratories is very high.

Copyright © 2021 Sander et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mSphere.00979-20
PMCID: PMC7845609
PMID: 33441410 [Indexed for MEDLINE]