1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2021 Jan;44(1):226-239. doi: 10.1002/jimd.12302. Epub
2020  Sep 7.

Effects of acute nutritional ketosis during exercise in adults with glycogen 
storage disease type IIIa are phenotype-specific: An investigator-initiated, 
randomized, crossover study.

Hoogeveen IJ(1), de Boer F(1), Boonstra WF(1), van der Schaaf CJ(1), Steuerwald 
U(2), Sibeijn-Kuiper AJ(3), Vegter RJK(4), van der Hoeven JH(5), Heiner-Fokkema 
MR(6), Clarke KC(7), Cox PJ(7), Derks TGJ(1), Jeneson JAL(3)(8).

Author information:
(1)Section of Metabolic Diseases, Beatrix Children's Hospital, University of 
Groningen, University Medical Center of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(2)National Hospital of the Faroe Islands, Medical Center, Tórshavn, Faroe 
Islands.
(3)Neuroimaging Center, Department of Neuroscience, University Medical Center 
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(4)Center for Human Movement Sciences, University Medical Center Groningen, 
University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Neurology, University Medical Centre Groningen, University of 
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Laboratory of Metabolic Diseases, 
University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, The 
Netherlands.
(7)Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
UK.
(8)Center for Child Development and Exercise, Wilhelmina Children's Hospital, 
University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Glycogen storage disease type IIIa (GSDIIIa) is an inborn error of carbohydrate 
metabolism caused by a debranching enzyme deficiency. A subgroup of GSDIIIa 
patients develops severe myopathy. The purpose of this study was to investigate 
whether acute nutritional ketosis (ANK) in response to ketone-ester (KE) 
ingestion is effective to deliver oxidative substrate to exercising muscle in 
GSDIIIa patients. This was an investigator-initiated, researcher-blinded, 
randomized, crossover study in six adult GSDIIIa patients. Prior to exercise 
subjects ingested a carbohydrate drink (~66 g, CHO) or a ketone-ester 
(395 mg/kg, KE) + carbohydrate drink (30 g, KE + CHO). Subjects performed 
15-minute cycling exercise on an upright ergometer followed by 10-minute supine 
cycling in a magnetic resonance (MR) scanner at two submaximal workloads (30% 
and 60% of individual maximum, respectively). Blood metabolites, indirect 
calorimetry data, and in vivo 31 P-MR spectra from quadriceps muscle were 
collected during exercise. KE + CHO induced ANK in all six subjects with median 
peak βHB concentration of 2.6 mmol/L (range: 1.6-3.1). Subjects remained 
normoglycemic in both study arms, but delta glucose concentration was 2-fold 
lower in the KE + CHO arm. The respiratory exchange ratio did not increase in 
the KE + CHO arm when workload was doubled in subjects with overt myopathy. 
In vivo 31 P MR spectra showed a favorable change in quadriceps energetic state 
during exercise in the KE + CHO arm compared to CHO in subjects with overt 
myopathy. Effects of ANK during exercise are phenotype-specific in adult GSDIIIa 
patients. ANK presents a promising therapy in GSDIIIa patients with a severe 
myopathic phenotype. TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: 
NCT03011203.

© 2020 The Authors. Journal of Inherited Metabolic Disease published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jimd.12302
PMCID: PMC7891643
PMID: 33448466 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The intellectual property and patents covering 
the uses of ketone bodies and esters are owned by BTG Ltd., The University of 
Oxford, the NIH and TdeltaS Ltd. Should royalties ever accrue from these 
patents, Kieran C. Clarke and Pete J. Cox as named inventors may receive a share 
of royalties as determined by the terms of the respective institutions. Kieran 
C. Clarke is director of TdeltaS Ltd., a spin out company of the University of 
Oxford, to develop and commercialize products based on the ketone‐ester. Irene 
J. Hoogeveen, Foekje de Boer, Willemijn F. Boonstra, Caroline J. van der Schaaf, 
Riemer J. K. Vegter, Johannes H. van der Hoeven, M. Rebecca Heiner‐Fokkema, 
Terry G. J. Derks, and Jeroen A. L. Jeneson declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.