1. Prog Mol Biol Transl Sci. 2021;177:1-48. doi: 10.1016/bs.pmbts.2020.07.007.
Epub  2020 Aug 24.

Relevance of transgenic mouse models for Alzheimer's disease.

Tai LM(1), Maldonado Weng J(1), LaDu MJ(2), Brady ST(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Illinois at Chicago, 
Chicago, IL, United States.
(2)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Illinois at Chicago, 
Chicago, IL, United States. Electronic address: mladu@uic.edu.

Over the last several decades, a number of mouse models have been generated for 
mechanistic and preclinical therapeutic research on Alzheimer's disease 
(AD)-like behavioral impairments and pathology. Acceptance or rejection of these 
models by the scientific community is playing a prominent role in how research 
findings are viewed and whether grants get funded and manuscripts published. The 
question of whether models are useful has become an exceptionally contentious 
issue. Much time and effort have gone into investigators debating comments such 
as "there are no mouse models of AD," "…nice work but needs to be tested in 
another mouse model," or "only data from humans is valid." This leads to 
extensive written justifications for the choice of a model in grant 
applications, to the point of almost apologizing for the use of models. These 
debates also lead to initiatives to create new, better models of AD without 
consideration of what "better" may mean in this context. On the "other side," an 
argument supporting the use of mouse models is one cannot dissect a biological 
mechanism in postmortem human tissue. In this chapter, we examine issues that we 
believe must be addressed if in vivo AD research is to progress. We opine that 
it is not the models that are the issue, but rather a lack of understanding the 
aspects of AD-like pathology the models were designed to mimic. The goal here is 
to improve the utilization of models to address critical issues, not to offer a 
critique of existing models or make endorsements.

© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.pmbts.2020.07.007
PMCID: PMC8163103
PMID: 33453936 [Indexed for MEDLINE]