1. Blood. 1988 Mar;71(3):613-8.

Fibrinogen Birmingham: a heterozygous dysfibrinogenemia (A alpha 16 Arg----His) 
containing heterodimeric molecules.

Siebenlist KR(1), Prchal JT, Mosesson MW.

Author information:
(1)Mount Sinai Medical Center, University of Wisconsin Medical School, Milwaukee 
53233.

Fibrinogen was isolated from the plasma of a 25-year-old female with a history 
of mild bleeding and several recent moderate to severe hemorrhagic episodes. 
Coagulability with thrombin approached 100% and varied directly with the time of 
incubation with the enzyme. High-performance liquid chromatography analysis of 
thrombin-induced fibrinopeptide release demonstrated retarded fibrinopeptide A 
(FPA) and fibrinopeptide B (FPB) release and the presence of an abnormal A 
peptide (FPA) amounting to 50% of the total. The same biochemical abnormalities 
were found in her asymptomatic father. Amino acid analysis and carboxypeptidase 
digestion of FPA demonstrated the substitution of His for Arg at A alpha 16. In 
contrast to the thrombin- and reptilase-sensitive Arg-Gly bond in the normal A 
alpha chain, the abnormal A alpha chain (A alpha) sequence is resistant to 
reptilase attack but is slowly cleaved by thrombin. To evaluate whether 
Birmingham A alpha and A alpha chains had been assembled nonselectively into 
heterodimeric (ie, 50% A alpha, A alpha) and homodimeric (ie, 25% A alpha, A 
alpha; 25% A alpha, A alpha) species, the clot and the clot liquor resulting 
from reptilase treatment of normal or Birmingham fibrinogen were separated, and 
each was then further incubated with thrombin to release remaining 
fibrinopeptides. Assuming that fibrinogen Birmingham contained heterodimeric 
molecules and that these and the normal molecules were completely incorporated 
into a reptilase clot, the expected coagulability would be 75%. In addition, 
subsequent thrombin treatment of the reptilase clot would release 50% of the 
total FPA and 75% of the total FPB present in the original sample. On the other 
hand, if only homodimeric fibrinogen species (50% A alpha, A alpha; 50% A alpha, 
A alpha) existed, the maximum reptilase coagulability would be 50%, and after 
thrombin treatment, 50% of the total FPB and no FPA would be recovered from the 
reptilase clot. We found the propositus's fibrinogen to be 68% coagulable, and 
we recovered 45% of the FPA and 70% of the FPB from the reptilase clot. 
Essentially the same coagulability and distribution of fibrinopeptides was found 
in the reptilase clot from her father's fibrinogen. We therefore conclude that 
fibrinogen Birmingham contains heterodimeric species (A alpha, A alpha) 
amounting to approximately 50% of the circulating fibrinogen molecules. The 
existence of heterodimers is consistent with a nonselective intracellular 
process of constituent chain assembly of dimeric plasma fibrinogen molecules.

PMID: 3345340 [Indexed for MEDLINE]