1. Immunology. 2021 Jun;163(2):155-168. doi: 10.1111/imm.13306. Epub 2021 Feb 7.

Thyrotrophin and thyroxine support immune homeostasis in humans.

Jaeger M(1)(2)(3), Sloot YJE(1)(3), Horst RT(2), Chu X(4), Koenen HJPM(3)(5), 
Koeken VACM(2)(3), Moorlag SJCFM(2), de Bree CJ(2)(6)(7), Mourits VP(2)(3), 
Lemmers H(2), Dijkstra H(2), Medici M(1), van Herwaarden AE(8), Joosten I(3)(5), 
Joosten LAB(2), Li Y(2)(4), Smit JWA(1), Netea MG(2)(9), Netea-Maier RT(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Radboud 
University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine and Radboud Center for Infectious Diseases, 
Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(3)Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences (RIMLS), Radboud University 
Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, University of 
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Laboratory of Medical Immunology (LMI), 
Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(6)Research Center for Vitamins and Vaccines, Bandim Health Project, Statens 
Serum Institut, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(7)Odense Patient Data Explorative Network, University of Southern 
Denmark/Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark.
(8)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Radboud Laboratory for Diagnostics (RLD), 
Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(9)Department for Immunology & Metabolism, Life and Medical Sciences Institute 
(LIMES), University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

The endocrine and the immune systems interact by sharing receptors for hormones 
and cytokines, cross-control and feedback mechanisms. To date, no comprehensive 
study has assessed the impact of thyroid hormones on immune homeostasis. By 
studying immune phenotype (cell populations, antibody concentrations, 
circulating cytokines, adipokines and acute-phase proteins, monocyte-platelet 
interactions and cytokine production capacity) in two large independent cohorts 
of healthy volunteers of Western European descent from the Human Functional 
Genomics Project (500FG and 300BCG cohorts), we identified a crucial role of the 
thyroid hormone thyroxin (T4) and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) on the 
homeostasis of lymphocyte populations. TSH concentrations were strongly 
associated with multiple populations of both effector and regulatory T cells, 
whereas B-cell populations were significantly associated with free T4 (fT4). In 
contrast, fT4 and TSH had little impact on myeloid cell populations and cytokine 
production capacity. Mendelian randomization further supported the role of fT4 
for lymphocyte homeostasis. Subsequently, using a genomics approach, we 
identified genetic variants that influence both fT4 and TSH concentrations and 
immune responses, and gene set enrichment pathway analysis showed enrichment of 
fT4-affected gene expression in B-cell function pathways, including the CD40 
pathway, further supporting the importance of fT4 in the regulation of B-cell 
function. In conclusion, we show that thyroid function controls the homeostasis 
of the lymphoid cell compartment. These findings improve our understanding of 
the immune responses and open the door for exploring and understanding the role 
of thyroid hormones in the lymphocyte function during disease.

© 2021 The Authors. Immunology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/imm.13306
PMCID: PMC8114202
PMID: 33454989 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.