1. Viruses. 2021 Jan 18;13(1):129. doi: 10.3390/v13010129.

Effect of Small Polyanions on In Vitro Assembly of Selected Members of Alpha-, 
Beta- and Gammaretroviruses.

Dost치lkov치 A(1), Vokat치 B(2), Kaufman F(1), Ulbrich P(2), Ruml T(2), Rumlov치 
M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, University of Chemistry and Technology, 166 28 
Prague, Czech Republic.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Chemistry and 
Technology, 166 28 Prague, Czech Republic.

The assembly of a hexameric lattice of retroviral immature particles requires 
the involvement of cell factors such as proteins and small molecules. A small, 
negatively charged polyanionic molecule, myo-inositol hexaphosphate (IP6), was 
identified to stimulate the assembly of immature particles of HIV-1 and other 
lentiviruses. Interestingly, cryo-electron tomography analysis of the immature 
particles of two lentiviruses, HIV-1 and equine infectious anemia virus (EIAV), 
revealed that the IP6 binding site is similar. Based on this amino acid 
conservation of the IP6 interacting site, it is presumed that the assembly of 
immature particles of all lentiviruses is stimulated by IP6. Although this 
specific region for IP6 binding may be unique for lentiviruses, it is plausible 
that other retroviral species also recruit some small polyanion to facilitate 
the assembly of their immature particles. To study whether the assembly of 
retroviruses other than lentiviruses can be stimulated by polyanionic molecules, 
we measured the effect of various polyanions on the assembly of immature 
virus-like particles of Rous sarcoma virus (RSV), a member of alpharetroviruses, 
Mason-Pfizer monkey virus (M-PMV) representative of betaretroviruses, and murine 
leukemia virus (MLV), a member of gammaretroviruses. RSV, M-PMV and MLV immature 
virus-like particles were assembled in vitro from truncated Gag molecules and 
the effect of selected polyanions, myo-inostol hexaphosphate, myo-inositol, 
glucose-1,6-bisphosphate, myo-inositol hexasulphate, and mellitic acid, on the 
particles assembly was quantified. Our results suggest that the assembly of 
immature particles of RSV and MLV was indeed stimulated by the presence of 
myo-inostol hexaphosphate and myo-inositol, respectively. In contrast, no effect 
on the assembly of M-PMV as a betaretrovirus member was observed.

DOI: 10.3390/v13010129
PMCID: PMC7831069
PMID: 33477490 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.