1. FASEB J. 2021 Feb;35(2):e21275. doi: 10.1096/fj.202001489R.

New structural insights reveal an expanded reaction cycle for inositol 
pyrophosphate hydrolysis by human DIPP1.

Zong G(1), Jork N(2), Hostachy S(3), Fiedler D(3), Jessen HJ(2), Shears SB(1), 
Wang H(1).

Author information:
(1)Signal Transduction Laboratory, National Institute of Environmental Health 
Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.
(2)Institute of Organic Chemistry, CIBSS - Center for Integrative Biological 
Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(3)Leibniz-Forschungsinstitut für Molekulare Pharmakologie, Berlin, Germany.

Nudix hydrolases attract considerable attention for their wide range of 
specialized activities in all domains of life. One particular group of Nudix 
phosphohydrolases (DIPPs), through their metabolism of diphosphoinositol 
polyphosphates (PP-InsPs), regulates the actions of these polyphosphates upon 
bioenergetic homeostasis. In the current study, we describe, at an atomic level, 
hitherto unknown properties of human DIPP1.We provide X-ray analysis of the 
catalytic core of DIPP1 in crystals complexed with either natural PP-InsPs, 
alternative PP-InsP stereoisomers, or non-hydrolysable methylene bisphosphonate 
analogs ("PCP-InsPs"). The conclusions that we draw from these data are 
interrogated by studying the impact upon catalytic activity upon mutagenesis of 
certain key residues. We present a picture of a V-shaped catalytic furrow with 
overhanging ridges constructed from flexible positively charged side chains; 
within this cavity, the labile phosphoanhydride bond is appropriately positioned 
at the catalytic site by an extensive series of interlocking polar contacts 
which we analogize as "suspension cables." We demonstrate functionality for a 
triglycine peptide within a β-strand which represents a non-canonical addition 
to the standard Nudix catalytic core structure. We describe pre-reaction 
enzyme/substrate states which we posit to reflect a role for electrostatic 
steering in substrate capture. Finally, through time-resolved analysis, we 
uncover a chronological sequence of DIPP1/product post-reaction states, one of 
which may rationalize a role for InsP6 as an inhibitor of catalytic activity.

© 2021 Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.202001489R
PMCID: PMC7839254
PMID: 33475202 [Indexed for MEDLINE]