1. PLoS One. 2021 Jan 22;16(1):e0245548. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0245548. 
eCollection 2021.

In situ kinetic measurements of α-synuclein aggregation reveal large population 
of short-lived oligomers.

Zurlo E(1), Kumar P(1), Meisl G(2), Dear AJ(2), Mondal D(1), Claessens MMAE(3), 
Knowles TPJ(2)(4), Huber M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physics, Huygens-Kamerlingh Onnes Laboratory, Leiden 
University, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(2)Centre for Misfolding Diseases, Department of Chemistry, University of 
Cambridge, Lensfield Road, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(3)Nanobiophysics Group, Department of Science and Technology, University 
Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands.
(4)Cavendish Laboratory, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Knowledge of the mechanisms of assembly of amyloid proteins into aggregates is 
of central importance in building an understanding of neurodegenerative disease. 
Given that oligomeric intermediates formed during the aggregation reaction are 
believed to be the major toxic species, methods to track such intermediates are 
clearly needed. Here we present a method, electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR), 
by which the amount of intermediates can be measured over the course of the 
aggregation, directly in the reacting solution, without the need for separation. 
We use this approach to investigate the aggregation of α-synuclein (αS), a 
synaptic protein implicated in Parkinson's disease and find a large population 
of oligomeric species. Our results show that these are primary oligomers, formed 
directly from monomeric species, rather than oligomers formed by secondary 
nucleation processes, and that they are short-lived, the majority of them 
dissociates rather than converts to fibrils. As demonstrated here, EPR offers 
the means to detect such short-lived intermediate species directly in situ. As 
it relies only on the change in size of the detected species, it will be 
applicable to a wide range of self-assembling systems, making accessible the 
kinetics of intermediates and thus allowing the determination of their rates of 
formation and conversion, key processes in the self-assembly reaction.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0245548
PMCID: PMC7822277
PMID: 33481908 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.