1. Mol Cancer. 2021 Jan 23;20(1):20. doi: 10.1186/s12943-021-01315-9.

PARP inhibitor Olaparib overcomes Sorafenib resistance through reshaping the 
pluripotent transcriptome in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Yang XD(#)(1)(2)(3), Kong FE(#)(1)(2), Qi L(#)(1)(2), Lin JX(#)(1)(2), Yan 
Q(3)(4), Loong JHC(5), Xi SY(6), Zhao Y(7), Zhang Y(8), Yuan YF(6), Ma 
NF(1)(2)(9), Ma S(5), Guan XY(10)(11), Liu M(12)(13)(14).

Author information:
(1)Department of Core Medical Laboratory, The Sixth Affiliated Hospital of 
Guangzhou Medical University, Qingyuan People's Hospital, Guangzhou Medical 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Guangzhou Municipal and Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Protein 
Modification and Degradation, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Guangzhou 
Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Clinical Oncology, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, State Key 
Laboratory of Liver Research, University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
(4)Guangdong Provincial People's Hospital, Guangdong Academy of Medical 
Sciences, Guangzhou, China.
(5)School of Biomedical Sciences, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, State Key 
Laboratory of Liver Research, University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
(6)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in Southern China, Collaborative Innovation 
Center for Cancer Medicine, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, 
China.
(7)General, Visceral and Cancer Surgery, University Hospital of Cologne, 
Cologne, Germany.
(8)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Guangzhou Institute of Pediatrics, Guangzhou 
Women and Children's Medical Center, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, 
China.
(9)Affiliated Cancer Hospital and Institute of Guangzhou Medical University, 
Guangzhou, 510095, China.
(10)Department of Clinical Oncology, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, State Key 
Laboratory of Liver Research, University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong. 
xyguan@hkucc.hku.hk.
(11)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in Southern China, Collaborative Innovation 
Center for Cancer Medicine, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, 
China. xyguan@hkucc.hku.hk.
(12)Department of Core Medical Laboratory, The Sixth Affiliated Hospital of 
Guangzhou Medical University, Qingyuan People's Hospital, Guangzhou Medical 
University, Guangzhou, China. liuming@gzhmu.edu.cn.
(13)Guangzhou Municipal and Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Protein 
Modification and Degradation, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Guangzhou 
Medical University, Guangzhou, China. liuming@gzhmu.edu.cn.
(14)Affiliated Cancer Hospital and Institute of Guangzhou Medical University, 
Guangzhou, 510095, China. liuming@gzhmu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most common human malignancies 
worldwide with very poor prognosis. Resistance to targeted therapeutic drugs 
such as sorafenib remains one of the major challenges in clinical treatment. In 
the present study, PARP1 was found to be highly expressed in human embryonic 
stem cells, but progressively decreased upon specified hepatic differentiation. 
Reactivation of PARP1 expression was also detected in HCC residual tumors after 
sorafenib treatment in xenograft mouse model, indicating the potential important 
roles of PARP1 in stem cell pluripotency and HCC sorafenib treatment resistance. 
Overexpression of PARP1 was frequently observed in HCC patients, and closely 
associated with poor clinical outcome. Treatment of Sorafenib induced activation 
of DNA damage repair signaling, which is highly active and essential for 
maintenance of stem cell pluripotency in HCC residual tumors. PARP inhibitor 
Olaparib extensively suppressed the DNA damage repair signaling, and 
significantly inhibited the global pluripotent transcriptional network. The 
repression of key pluripotent transcriptional factors and DNA damage repair 
signaling by Olaparib was mainly through CHD1L-mediated condensation of the 
chromatin structure at their promotor regions. The global reshaping of the 
pluripotent transcriptome by Olaparib might reinforce Sorafenib in eliminating 
HCC residual tumors and enhance therapeutic efficiency.

DOI: 10.1186/s12943-021-01315-9
PMCID: PMC7824946
PMID: 33485358 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.