1. J Cardiovasc Dev Dis. 2021 Jan 22;8(2):8. doi: 10.3390/jcdd8020008.

Zebrafish Models of Cancer Therapy-Induced Cardiovascular Toxicity.

Lane S(1), More LA(1), Asnani A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)CardioVascular Institute, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA 
02215, USA.
(2)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Both traditional and novel cancer therapies can cause 
cardiovascular toxicity in patients. In vivo models integrating both 
cardiovascular and cancer phenotypes allow for the study of on- and off-target 
mechanisms of toxicity arising from these agents. The zebrafish is the optimal 
whole organism model to screen for cardiotoxicity in a high throughput manner, 
while simultaneously assessing the role of cardiotoxicity pathways on the cancer 
therapy's antitumor effect. Here we highlight established zebrafish models of 
human cardiovascular disease and cancer, the unique advantages of zebrafish to 
study mechanisms of cancer therapy-associated cardiovascular toxicity, and 
finally, important limitations to consider when using the zebrafish to study 
toxicity.
RECENT FINDINGS: Cancer therapy-associated cardiovascular toxicities range from 
cardiomyopathy with traditional agents to arrhythmias and thrombotic 
complications associated with newer targeted therapies. The zebrafish can be 
used to identify novel therapeutic strategies that selectively protect the heart 
from cancer therapy without affecting antitumor activity. Advances in genome 
editing technology have enabled the creation of several transgenic zebrafish 
lines valuable to the study of cardiovascular and cancer pathophysiology.
SUMMARY: The high degree of genetic conservation between zebrafish and humans, 
as well as the ability to recapitulate cardiotoxic phenotypes observed in 
patients with cancer, make the zebrafish an effective model to study cancer 
therapy-associated cardiovascular toxicity. Though this model provides several 
key benefits over existing in vitro and in vivo models, limitations of the 
zebrafish model include the early developmental stage required for most 
high-throughput applications.

DOI: 10.3390/jcdd8020008
PMCID: PMC7911266
PMID: 33499052

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.