1. Sci Rep. 2021 Jan 28;11(1):2478. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-81058-1.

Comparison of DNA repair and radiosensitivity of different blood cell 
populations.

Heylmann D(1)(2), Ponath V(1)(3), Kindler T(4), Kaina B(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Toxicology, University Medical Center, Johannes 
Gutenberg-University Mainz, Obere Zahlbacher Straße 67, 55131, Mainz, Germany.
(2)Rudolf Buchheim Institute of Pharmacology, Justus Liebig University, Giessen, 
Germany.
(3)Center for Tumor Biology and Immunology, Institute for Tumor Immunology, 
Philipps University, Marburg, Germany.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology and Pneumology, University Medical Center, 
Johannes Gutenberg-University, Mainz, Germany.
(5)Institute of Toxicology, University Medical Center, Johannes 
Gutenberg-University Mainz, Obere Zahlbacher Straße 67, 55131, Mainz, Germany. 
kaina@uni-mainz.de.

Despite the frequent use of ionising radiation (IR) in therapy and diagnostics 
and the unavoidable exposure to external radiation sources, our knowledge 
regarding the radiosensitivity of human blood cell populations is limited and 
published data, obtained under different experimental conditions, are 
heterogeneous. To compare the radiosensitivity of different hematopoietic cell 
populations, we set out to determine the responses of cells obtained from 
peripheral blood of healthy volunteers under identical conditions (resting, 
non-stimulated cells). First, we measured the radiation response of T cells 
(Treg, Th, CTL), B cells, NK cells, CD34+ progenitor cells and monocytes 
obtained from peripheral blood and monocyte-derived macrophages (Mph) and 
immature dendritic cells (iDC) ex vivo and show that T and B cells are highly 
sensitive, starting to undergo apoptosis following IR with a dose as low as 
0.125 Gy. Importantly, there was no clear threshold dose and cell 
death/apoptosis increased up to a saturation level with a dose of 2 Gy. The 
sensitivity decreased in the order of T cells > NK and B 
cells > monocytes > macrophages and iDC. The data confirm a previous report that 
Mph and iDC are radiation-resistant compared to their progenitor monocytes. 
Although non-stimulated T and B cells were highly radiation-sensitive compared 
to monocytes and macrophages, they were competent in the repair of DNA 
double-strand breaks, as shown by a decline in γH2AX foci in the post-exposure 
period. CD34+ cells obtained from peripheral blood also showed γH2AX decline 
post-exposure, indicating they are repair competent. Granulocytes (CD15+) did 
not display any γH2AX staining following IR. Although peripheral blood 
lymphocytes, the main fraction are T cells, were significantly more 
radiation-sensitive than monocytes, they displayed the expression of the repair 
proteins XRCC1, ligase III and PARP-1, which were nearly non-expressed in 
monocytes. To assess whether monocytes are depleted in vivo following IR, we 
measured the amount of T cells and monocytes in cancer patients who received 
total-body radiation (TBR, 6 × 2 Gy). We observed that the number of T cells in 
the peripheral blood significantly declined already after the first day of TBR 
and remained at a low level, which was accompanied by an increase in the number 
of γH2AX foci in the surviving CD3+ T cell fraction. In contrast, the number of 
monocytes did not decline extensively, reflecting their radiation resistance 
compared to T cells. Monocytes also showed an accumulation of γH2AX foci in 
vivo, but the levels were significantly lower than in T cells. CD56+ NK cells 
displayed a response similar to T cells. The data support the notion that 
unstimulated T cell subfractions are nearly equally radiation sensitive. There 
are, however, remarkable differences in the radiation sensitivity between the 
lymphoid and the myeloid lineage, with lymphoid cells being significantly more 
sensitive than cells of the myeloid lineage. In the myeloid lineage, macrophages 
and iDCs were the most radio-resistant cell types.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-81058-1
PMCID: PMC7843614
PMID: 33510180 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.