1. Pharmaceutics. 2021 Jan 28;13(2):177. doi: 10.3390/pharmaceutics13020177.

Inhaled RNA Therapeutics for Obstructive Airway Diseases: Recent Advances and 
Future Prospects.

Xu Y(1), Thakur A(1), Zhang Y(1)(2), Foged C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of 
Copenhagen, 2100 Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutics, School of Pharmacy, Jiangsu University, 
Zhenjiang 212013, China.

Obstructive airway diseases, e.g., chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) 
and asthma, represent leading causes of morbidity and mortality worldwide. 
However, the efficacy of currently available inhaled therapeutics is not 
sufficient for arresting disease progression and decreasing mortality, hence 
providing an urgent need for development of novel therapeutics. Local delivery 
to the airways via inhalation is promising for novel drugs, because it allows 
for delivery directly to the target site of action and minimizes systemic drug 
exposure. In addition, novel drug modalities like RNA therapeutics provide 
entirely new opportunities for highly specific treatment of airway diseases. 
Here, we review state of the art of conventional inhaled drugs used for the 
treatment of COPD and asthma with focus on quality attributes of inhaled 
medicines, and we outline the therapeutic potential and safety of novel drugs. 
Subsequently, we present recent advances in manufacturing of thermostable solid 
dosage forms for pulmonary administration, important quality attributes of 
inhalable dry powder formulations, and obstacles for the translation of 
inhalable solid dosage forms to the clinic. Delivery challenges for inhaled RNA 
therapeutics and delivery technologies used to overcome them are also discussed. 
Finally, we present future prospects of novel inhaled RNA-based therapeutics for 
treatment of obstructive airways diseases, and highlight major knowledge gaps, 
which require further investigation to advance RNA-based medicine towards the 
bedside.

DOI: 10.3390/pharmaceutics13020177
PMCID: PMC7912103
PMID: 33525500

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.