1. Sci Rep. 2021 Feb 2;11(1):2751. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-81895-0.

Anti-CfaE nanobodies provide broad cross-protection against major pathogenic 
enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli strains, with implications for vaccine design.

Amcheslavsky A(1), Wallace AL(1), Ejemel M(1), Li Q(1), McMahon CT(2), Stoppato 
M(1), Giuntini S(1), Schiller ZA(1), Pondish JR(1), Toomey JR(1), Schneider 
RM(1), Meisinger J(1), Heukers R(3), Kruse AC(2), Barry EM(4), Pierce BG(5), 
Klempner MS(1), Cavacini LA(1), Wang Y(6).

Author information:
(1)MassBiologics, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 460 Walk Hill 
Road, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Blavatnik 
Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)QVQ Holdings BV, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(4)Center for Vaccine Development, University of Maryland School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(5)University of Maryland Institute for Bioscience and Biotechnology Research, 
Rockville, MD, USA.
(6)MassBiologics, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 460 Walk Hill 
Road, Boston, MA, USA. Yang.Wang@umassmed.edu.

Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli (ETEC) is estimated to cause approximately 
380,000 deaths annually during sporadic or epidemic outbreaks worldwide. 
Development of vaccines against ETEC is very challenging due to the vast 
heterogeneity of the ETEC strains. An effective vaccines would have to be 
multicomponent to provide coverage of over ten ETEC strains with genetic 
variabilities. There is currently no vaccine licensed to prevent ETEC. 
Nanobodies are successful new biologics in treating mucosal infectious disease 
as they recognize conserved epitopes on hypervariable pathogens. Cocktails 
consisting of multiple nanobodies could provide even broader epitope coverage at 
a lower cost compared to monoclonal antibodies. Identification of conserved 
epitopes by nanobodies can also assist reverse engineering of an effective 
vaccine against ETEC. By screening nanobodies from immunized llamas and a naïve 
yeast display library against adhesins of colonization factors, we identified 
single nanobodies that show cross-protective potency against eleven major 
pathogenic ETEC strains in vitro. Oral administration of nanobodies led to a 
significant reduction of bacterial colonization in animals. Moreover, 
nanobody-IgA fusion showed extended inhibitory activity in mouse colonization 
compared to commercial hyperimmune bovine colostrum product used for prevention 
of ETEC-induced diarrhea. Structural analysis revealed that nanobodies 
recognized a highly-conserved epitope within the putative receptor binding 
region of ETEC adhesins. Our findings support further rational design of a 
pan-ETEC vaccine to elicit robust immune responses targeting this conserved 
epitope.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-81895-0
PMCID: PMC7854682
PMID: 33531570 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Y.W., L.A.C., M.S.K., and A.A are listed as 
inventors on patent application related to this work. A.L.W., M.E., Q.L., 
C.T.M., M.S., S.G., Z.A.S., J.R.P., J.R.T., R.M.S., J.M., R.H., A.C.K., E.M.B., 
B.G.P. do not have any conflict of interest.