1. Mol Oncol. 2021 Apr;15(4):1054-1068. doi: 10.1002/1878-0261.12919. Epub 2021
Feb  20.

A novel diphtheria toxin-based bivalent human EGF fusion toxin for treatment of 
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.

Qi Z(1)(2), Qiu Y(3), Wang Z(1)(2), Zhang H(1)(2), Lu L(3), Liu Y(3), Mathes 
D(1), Pomfret EA(2), Gao D(4), Lu SL(3), Wang Z(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Department of Surgery, School 
of Medicine, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA.
(2)Division of Transplant Surgery, Department of Surgery, School of Medicine, 
University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology, School of Medicine, University of Colorado 
Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA.
(4)Department of Biostatics, School of Medicine, University of Colorado Anschutz 
Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is often overexpressed in head and neck 
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) and represents a top candidate for targeted 
HNSCC therapy. However, the clinical effectiveness of current Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA)-approved drugs targeting EGFR is moderate, and the overall 
survival rate for HNSCC patients remains low. Therefore, more effective 
treatments are urgently needed. In this study, we generated a novel diphtheria 
toxin-based bivalent human epidermal growth factor fusion toxin (bi-EGF-IT) to 
treat EGFR-expressing HNSCC. Bi-EGF-IT was tested for in vitro binding affinity, 
cytotoxicity, and specificity using 14 human EGFR-expressing HNSCC cell lines 
and three human EGFR-negative cancer cell lines. Bi-EGF-IT had increased binding 
affinity for EGFR-expressing HNSCC compared with the monovalent version 
(mono-EGF-IT), and both versions specifically depleted EGFR-positive HNSCC, but 
not EGFR-negative cell lines, in vitro. Bi-EGF-IT exhibited a comparable potency 
to that of the FDA-approved EGFR inhibitor, erlotinib, for inhibiting HNSCC 
tumor growth in vivo using both subcutaneous and orthotopic HNSCC xenograft 
mouse models. When tested in an experimental metastasis model, survival was 
significantly longer in the bi-EGF-IT treatment group than the erlotinib 
treatment group, with a significantly reduced number of metastases compared with 
mono-EGF-IT. In addition, in vivo off-target toxicities were significantly 
reduced in the bi-EGF-IT treatment group compared with the mono-EGF-IT group. 
These results demonstrate that bi-EGF-IT is more effective and markedly less 
toxic at inhibiting primary HNSCC tumor growth and metastasis than mono-EGF-IT 
and erlotinib. Thus, the novel bi-EGF-IT is a promising drug candidate for 
further development.

© 2021 The Authors. Molecular Oncology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on 
behalf of Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1002/1878-0261.12919
PMCID: PMC8024719
PMID: 33540470 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.