1. Cancers (Basel). 2021 Feb 4;13(4):607. doi: 10.3390/cancers13040607.

Paediatric Gliomas: BRAF and Histone H3 as Biomarkers, Therapy and Perspective 
of Liquid Biopsies.

Tan JY(1), Wijesinghe IVS(1), Alfarizal Kamarudin MN(1), Parhar I(1).

Author information:
(1)Brain Research Institute Monash Sunway, Jeffrey Cheah School of Medicine and 
Health Science, Monash University Malaysia, Bandar Sunway 47500, Selangor, 
Malaysia.

Paediatric gliomas categorised as low- or high-grade vary markedly from their 
adult counterparts, and denoted as the second most prevalent childhood cancers 
after leukaemia. As compared to adult gliomas, the studies of diagnostic and 
prognostic biomarkers, as well as the development of therapy in paediatric 
gliomas, are still in their infancy. A body of evidence demonstrates that B-Raf 
Proto-Oncogene or V-Raf Murine Sarcoma Viral Oncogene Homolog B (BRAF) and 
histone H3 mutations are valuable biomarkers for paediatric low-grade gliomas 
(pLGGs) and high-grade gliomas (pHGGs). Various diagnostic methods involving 
fluorescence in situ hybridisation, whole-genomic sequencing, PCR, 
next-generation sequencing and NanoString are currently used for detecting BRAF 
and histone H3 mutations. Additionally, liquid biopsies are gaining popularity 
as an alternative to tumour materials in detecting these biomarkers, but still, 
they cannot fully replace solid biopsies due to several limitations. Although 
histone H3 mutations are reliable prognosis biomarkers in pHGGs, children with 
these mutations have a dismal prognosis. Conversely, the role of BRAF 
alterations as prognostic biomarkers in pLGGs is still in doubt due to 
contradictory findings. The BRAF V600E mutation is seen in the majority of pLGGs 
(as seen in pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma and gangliomas). By contrast, the 
H3K27M mutation is found in the majority of paediatric diffuse intrinsic pontine 
glioma and other midline gliomas in pHGGs. pLGG patients with a BRAF V600E 
mutation often have a lower progression-free survival rate in comparison to 
wild-type pLGGs when treated with conventional therapies. BRAF inhibitors 
(Dabrafenib and Vemurafenib), however, show higher overall survival and tumour 
response in BRAF V600E mutated pLGGs than conventional therapies in some 
studies. To date, targeted therapy and precision medicine are promising avenues 
for paediatric gliomas with BRAF V600E and diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma with 
the H3K27M mutations. Given these shortcomings in the current treatments of 
paediatric gliomas, there is a dire need for novel therapies that yield a better 
therapeutic response. The present review discusses the diagnostic tools and the 
perspective of liquid biopsies in the detection of BRAF V600E and H3K27M 
mutations. An in-depth understanding of these biomarkers and the therapeutics 
associated with the respective challenges will bridge the gap between paediatric 
glioma patients and the development of effective therapies.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers13040607
PMCID: PMC7913734
PMID: 33557011

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.