1. Hepatol Commun. 2020 Oct 31;5(2):158-167. doi: 10.1002/hep4.1618. eCollection 
2021 Feb.

Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease Screening in Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus Patients 
in the Primary Care Setting.

Vieira Barbosa J(1)(2), Lai M(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and HepatologyBeth Israel Deaconess Medical 
CenterHarvard Medical SchoolBostonMAUSA.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology and HepatologyUniversity Hospital of Lausanne 
and University of LausanneLausanneSwitzerland.

Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is a major public health problem 
worldwide and the most common chronic liver disease. NAFLD currently affects 
approximately one in every four people in the United States, and its global 
burden is expected to rise in the next decades. Despite being a prevalent 
disease in the general population, only a minority of patients with NAFLD will 
develop nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) with advanced liver fibrosis (stage 
3-4 fibrosis) and liver-related complications. Certain populations, such as 
patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), are recognized to be at the 
highest risk for developing NASH and advanced fibrosis. Both the American 
Diabetes Association and the European Association for the Study of Diabetes 
recommend screening of all T2DM for NAFLD. Incorporating a simple noninvasive 
algorithm into the existing diabetic care checklists in the primary care 
practice or diabetologist's office would efficiently identify patients at high 
risk who should be referred to specialists. The proposed algorithm involves a 
first-step annual fibrosis-4 score (FIB-4) followed by vibration-controlled 
transient elastography (VCTE) for those with indeterminate or high-risk score 
(FIB-4 ≥1.3). Patients at low-risk (FIB-4 <1.3 or VCTE <8 kPa) can be followed 
up by primary care providers for lifestyle changes and yearly calculation of 
FIB-4, while patients at high risk (FIB-4 ≥1.3 and VCTE ≥8 kPa) should be 
referred to a liver-specialized center. Conclusion: Patients with T2DM or 
prediabetes should be screened for NASH and advanced fibrosis. The proposed 
simple algorithm can be easily incorporated into the existing workflow in the 
primary care or diabetology clinic to identify patients at high risk for NASH 
and advanced fibrosis who should be referred to liver specialists.

© 2020 The Authors. Hepatology Communications published by Wiley Periodicals LLC 
on behalf of American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/hep4.1618
PMCID: PMC7850314
PMID: 33553966 [Indexed for MEDLINE]