1. Biomedicines. 2021 Feb 5;9(2):155. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines9020155.

Cardiopulmonary and Neurologic Dysfunctions in Fibrodysplasia Ossificans 
Progressiva.

Khan F(1), Yu X(2), Hsiao EC(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, Frank H. Netter MD School of Medicine at 
Quinnipiac University, North Haven, CT 06518, USA.
(2)Department of Anesthesia and Perioperative Care, University of California San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, the 
Institute for Human Genetics, and the Program in Craniofacial Biology, 
University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

Fibrodysplasia Ossificans Progressiva (FOP) is an ultra-rare but debilitating 
disorder characterized by spontaneous, progressive, and irreversible heterotopic 
ossifications (HO) at extraskeletal sites. FOP is caused by gain-of-function 
mutations in the Activin receptor Ia/Activin-like kinase 2 gene (Acvr1/Alk2), 
with increased receptor sensitivity to bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) and a 
neoceptor response to Activin A. There is extensive literature on the skeletal 
phenotypes in FOP, but a much more limited understanding of non-skeletal 
manifestations of this disease. Emerging evidence reveals important 
cardiopulmonary and neurologic dysfunctions in FOP including thoracic 
insufficiency syndrome, pulmonary hypertension, conduction abnormalities, 
neuropathic pain, and demyelination of the central nervous system (CNS). Here, 
we review the recent research and discuss unanswered questions regarding the 
cardiopulmonary and neurologic phenotypes in FOP.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines9020155
PMCID: PMC7915901
PMID: 33562570

Conflict of interest statement: ECH serves in a volunteer capacity on the 
registry advisory board of the International Fibrodysplasia Ossificans 
Progressiva Association, the International Clinical Council on FOP, and on the 
Fibrous Dysplasia Foundation Medical Advisory Board. ECH receives clinical 
trials research support through his institution from Clementia Pharmaceuticals 
Inc., an Ipsen company, and Neurocrine Biosciences, Inc. ECH has received prior 
clinical trials funding through his institution from Regeneron Pharmaceuticals. 
These pose no conflicts for this study.