1. Ann Transl Med. 2021 Jan;9(2):183. doi: 10.21037/atm-20-8223.

Prenatal diagnosis of harlequin ichthyosis by ultrasonography: a case report.

Zhou XJ(1), Lin YJ(2), Chen XW(1), Zheng JH(3), Zhou YJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Seven Section of Department of Gynaecology, the Second Hospital of Hebei 
Medical University, Shijiazhuang, China.
(2)Department of Ultrasound, the Julu County Hospital, Xingtai, China.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, the Second Hospital of Hebei Medical 
University, Shijiazhuang, China.

Autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis is a genetically and phenotypically 
heterogeneous group of skin disorders, including harlequin ichthyosis (HI), 
lamellar ichthyosis, and bullous congenital ichthyosiform erythroderma. HI is 
the most phenotypically severe autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis 
associated with the mutation of the adenosine triphosphate-binding cassette 
subfamily A member 12 (ABCA12) gene. The clinical manifestations include 
generalized hyperkeratotic plaques and deep fissures, ectropion, eclabium, and 
contractures. However, the severe HI may easily be misdiagnosed as epidermolysis 
bullosa or syndromic ichthyosis. Meanwhile, no consensus exists about the best 
used in clinical trials or clinical practice when more elaborate scoring systems 
have been proposed to evaluate skin xerosis, palmoplantar keratoderma, and 
disease extension an accurate prenatal diagnosis is necessary. Until the ABCA12 
gene was identified as the pathogenic gene, prenatal diagnosis of HI had been 
performed by the invasive techniques of fetal skin biopsy. Now, advances in 
ultrasound technology and fetal DNA-based analysis have replaced it. The 
mortality rate is markedly high and prompt; prenatal diagnosis of neonate HI is 
critical for appropriate perinatal and postnatal management. It is also 
essential to prepare parents for future pregnancies and reduce the family's 
physical and mental distress and financial burden. This report presents a rare 
case of harlequin ichthyosis diagnosed by the ultrasound and discusses the 
significance of prenatal ultrasound diagnosis and molecular diagnosis in the 
prenatal diagnosis of HI.

2021 Annals of Translational Medicine. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/atm-20-8223
PMCID: PMC7867921
PMID: 33569485

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: All authors have 
completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at 
http://dx.doi.org/10.21037/atm-20-8223). The authors have no conflicts of 
interest to declare.