1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2021 Feb 1;62(2):30. doi: 10.1167/iovs.62.2.30.

Degradation of Photoreceptor Outer Segments by the Retinal Pigment Epithelium 
Requires Pigment Epithelium-Derived Factor Receptor (PEDF-R).

Bullock J(1)(2), Polato F(1), Abu-Asab M(3), Bernardo-Colón A(1), Aflaki E(1), 
Agbaga MP(4), Becerra SP(1).

Author information:
(1)Section of Protein Structure and Function, Laboratory of Retinal Cell and 
Molecular Biology, National Eye Institute, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland, United States.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular & Cellular Biology, Georgetown 
University Medical Center, Washington DC, United States.
(3)Section of Histopathology, National Eye Institute, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States.
(4)Departments of Cell Biology and Ophthalmology, Dean McGee Eye Institute, 
University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, United 
States.

PURPOSE: To examine the contribution of pigment epithelium-derived factor 
receptor (PEDF-R) to the phagocytosis process. Previously, we identified PEDF-R, 
the protein encoded by the PNPLA2 gene, as a phospholipase A2 in the retinal 
pigment epithelium (RPE). During phagocytosis, RPE cells ingest abundant 
phospholipids and protein in the form of photoreceptor outer segment (POS) tips, 
which are then hydrolyzed. The role of PEDF-R in RPE phagocytosis is not known.
METHODS: Mice in which PNPLA2 was conditionally knocked out (cKO) in the RPE 
were generated. Mouse RPE/choroid explants were cultured. Human ARPE-19 cells 
were transfected with siPNPLA2 silencing duplexes. POSs were isolated from 
bovine retinas. The phospholipase A2 inhibitor bromoenol lactone was used. 
Transmission electron microscopy, immunofluorescence, lipid labeling, 
pulse-chase experiments, western blots, and free fatty acid and 
β-hydroxybutyrate assays were performed.
RESULTS: The RPE of the cKO mice accumulated lipids, as well as more abundant 
and larger rhodopsin particles, compared to littermate controls. Upon POS 
exposure, RPE explants from cKO mice released less β-hydroxybutyrate compared to 
controls. After POS ingestion during phagocytosis, rhodopsin degradation was 
stalled both in cells treated with bromoenol lactone and in PNPLA2-knocked-down 
cells relative to their corresponding controls. Phospholipase A2 inhibition 
lowered β-hydroxybutyrate release from phagocytic RPE cells. PNPLA2 knockdown 
also resulted in a decline in fatty acids and β-hydroxybutyrate release from 
phagocytic RPE cells.
CONCLUSIONS: PEDF-R downregulation delayed POS digestion during phagocytosis. 
The findings imply that the efficiency of RPE phagocytosis depends on PEDF-R, 
thus identifying a novel contribution of this protein to POS degradation in the 
RPE.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.62.2.30
PMCID: PMC7900850
PMID: 33605986 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: J. Bullock, None; F. Polato, None; 
M. Abu-Asab, None; A. Bernardo-Colón, None; E. Aflaki, None; M.P. Agbaga, None; 
S.P. Becerra, None