1. Front Bioeng Biotechnol. 2021 Feb 5;9:632269. doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2021.632269. 
eCollection 2021.

Recent Advances in Metabolic Engineering, Protein Engineering, and 
Transcriptome-Guided Insights Toward Synthetic Production of Taxol.

Mutanda I(1), Li J(1), Xu F(1)(2)(3), Wang Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Synthetic Biology, CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular 
Plant Sciences, Institute of Plant Physiology and Ecology, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Shanghai, China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Plant Stress Biology, State Key Laboratory of Cotton 
Biology, School of Life Sciences, He'nan University, Kaifeng, China.

The diterpenoid paclitaxel (Taxol®) is a blockbuster anticancer agent that was 
originally isolated from the Pacific yew (Taxus brevifolia) five decades ago. 
Despite the wealth of information gained over the years on Taxol research, there 
still remains supply issues to meet increasing clinical demand. Although 
alternative Taxol production methods have been developed, they still face 
several drawbacks that cause supply shortages and high production costs. It is 
highly desired to develop biotechnological production platforms for Taxol, 
however, there are still gaps in our understanding of the biosynthetic pathway, 
catalytic enzymes, regulatory and control mechanisms that hamper production of 
this critical drug by synthetic biology approaches. Over the past 5 years, 
significant advances were made in metabolic engineering and optimization of the 
Taxol pathway in different hosts, leading to accumulation of taxane 
intermediates. Computational and experimental approaches were leveraged to gain 
mechanistic insights into the catalytic cycle of pathway enzymes and guide 
rational protein engineering efforts to improve catalytic fitness and 
substrate/product specificity, especially of the cytochrome P450s (CYP450s). 
Notable breakthroughs were also realized in engineering the pathway in plant 
hosts that are more promising in addressing the challenging CYP450 chemistry. 
Here, we review these recent advances and in addition, we summarize recent 
transcriptomic data sets of Taxus species and elicited culture cells, and give a 
bird's-eye view of the information that can be gleaned from these publicly 
available resources. Recent mining of transcriptome data sets led to discovery 
of two putative pathway enzymes, provided many lead candidates for the missing 
steps and provided new insights on the regulatory mechanisms governing Taxol 
biosynthesis. All these inferences are relevant to future biotechnological 
production of Taxol.

Copyright © 2021 Mutanda, Li, Xu and Wang.

DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2021.632269
PMCID: PMC7892896
PMID: 33614616

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.