1. PeerJ. 2021 Feb 16;9:e10828. doi: 10.7717/peerj.10828. eCollection 2021.

Lower Locus Coeruleus MRI intensity in patients with late-life major depression.

Guinea-Izquierdo A(#)(1)(2), Giménez M(#)(2), Martínez-Zalacaín I(1)(2), Del 
Cerro I(1)(2)(3), Canal-Noguer P(4)(5)(6), Blasco G(7), Gascón J(8), Reñé R(8), 
Rico I(8), Camins A(7), Aguilera C(7), Urretavizcaya M(1)(2)(3), Ferrer 
I(9)(10)(11), Menchón JM(1)(2)(3), Soria V(1)(2)(3), Soriano-Mas C(2)(3)(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences/School of Medicine, University of Barcelona, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Department of Psychiatry/Bellvitge University Hospital, Bellvitge Biomedical 
Research Institute (IDIBELL), Hospitalet de Llobregat (Barcelona), Spain.
(3)Network Center for Biomedical Research on Mental Health (CIBERSAM), Madrid, 
Spain.
(4)B2SLab/Departament d'Enginyeria de Sistemes, Automàtica i Informàtica 
Industrial, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Networking Biomedical Research Centre in the subject area of Bioengineering, 
Biomaterials and Nanomedicine (CIBER-BBN), Madrid, Spain.
(6)Institut de Recerca Pediàtrica, Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Esplugues de 
Llobregat (Barcelona), Spain.
(7)Imaging Diagnostic Institute (IDI), Bellvitge University Hospital, Hospitalet 
de Llobregat (Barcelona), Spain.
(8)Dementia Diagnostic and Treatment Unit/Department of Neurology, Bellvitge 
University Hospital, Hospitalet de Llobregat (Barcelona), Spain.
(9)Department of Pathology and Experimental Therapeutics/Institute of 
Neurosciences, University of Barcelona, Hospitalet de Llobregat (Barcelona), 
Spain.
(10)Department of Pathologic Anatomy/Bellvitge University Hospital, Bellvitge 
Biomedical Research Institute-IDIBELL, Hospitalet de Llobregat (Barcelona), 
Spain.
(11)Network Center for Biomedical Research on Neurodegenerative diseases 
(CIBERNED), Madrid, Spain.
(12)Department of Psychobiology and Methodology in Health Sciences, Universitat 
Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra (Barcelona), Spain.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: The locus coeruleus (LC) is the major noradrenergic source in the 
central nervous system. Structural alterations in the LC contribute to the 
pathophysiology of different neuropsychiatric disorders, which may increase to a 
variable extent the likelihood of developing neurodegenerative conditions. The 
characterization of such alterations may therefore help to predict progression 
to neurodegenerative disorders. Despite the LC cannot be visualized with 
conventional magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), specific MRI sequences have been 
developed to infer its structural integrity.
METHODS: We quantified LC signal Contrast Ratios (LCCRs) in late-life major 
depressive disorder (MDD) (n = 37, 9 with comorbid aMCI), amnestic Mild 
Cognitive Impairment (aMCI) (n = 21, without comorbid MDD), and healthy controls 
(HCs) (n = 31), and also assessed the putative modulatory effects of 
comorbidities and other clinical variables.
RESULTS: LCCRs were lower in MDD compared to aMCI and HCs. While no effects of 
aMCI comorbidity were observed, lower LCCRs were specifically observed in 
patients taking serotonin/norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs).
CONCLUSION: Our results do not support the hypothesis that lower LCCRs 
characterize the different clinical groups that may eventually develop a 
neurodegenerative disorder. Conversely, our results were specifically observed 
in patients with late-life MDD taking SNRIs. Further research with larger 
samples is warranted to ascertain whether medication or particular clinical 
features of patients taking SNRIs are associated with changes in LC neurons.

©2021 Guinea-Izquierdo et al.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.10828
PMCID: PMC7894108
PMID: 33628639

Conflict of interest statement: These authors report no biomedical financial 
interests or potential conflicts of interest regarding this work. Virginia Soria 
has received grants and served as a consultant or continuing medical education 
(CME) speaker for Lundbeck, Otsuka, Janssen-Cilag, Exeltis and the Institute of 
Health Carlos III through the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness. 
Mikel Urretavizcaya has been funded by the Institute of Health Carlos III 
through the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness and has received 
compensation for lectures, advisories, or grants from Janssen-Cilagand Lundbeck. 
José Manuel Menchón has received grants and served as a consultant, advisor or 
CME speaker for Janssen-Cilag, Lundbeck, Medtronic, Otsuka, and the Spanish 
Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness (CIBERSAM). The rest of authors have 
nothing to disclose nor have any financial relationships with commercial 
interests.