1. Cureus. 2021 Feb 18;13(2):e13422. doi: 10.7759/cureus.13422.

Recurrent Hypoglycemia in Diabetic Patient With Hypopituitarism: The Houssay 
Phenomenon.

Gaffar Mohammed M(1), Baloch J(2), Alsahhar AM(3), Alhabashi BM(1).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, Dr. Sulaiman Al Habib Hospital, Riyadh, SAU.
(2)Internal Medicine, College of Medicine, Alfaisal University, Riyadh, SAU.
(3)Internal Medicine/General, Sulaiman Alrajhi University, Al Bukairiyah, SAU.

The association of treatment of diabetes mellitus and hypoglycemia is well 
described in the literature. However, the association of recurrent hypoglycemia 
in diabetic patients with hypopituitarism has been rarely described. This 
phenomenon, called Houssay phenomenon, usually occurs in individuals with a long 
diabetes evolution. It is caused by the failure of counter-regulatory hormones 
produced by the anterior pituitary gland to correct hypoglycemia. We describe 
this phenomenon in an elderly female known with type 2 diabetes mellitus taking 
insulin and oral diabetes medications. Workup showed partially empty sella on 
pituitary imaging. Hormonal assessment showed very low morning cortisol, low 
adrenocorticotropin hormone (ACTH) and zero response to synacthen. Loss of these 
counter-regulatory hormones leads to hypoglycemia (Houssay phenomenon). 
Hypopituitarism has several causes, including pituitary adenoma and traumatic 
brain injury as common causes among the others. In our reported case, we 
correlate our patient's condition to Houssay phenomenon, for the implication of 
refractory hypoglycemic episodes and cortisol deficiency, all of which are the 
consequences of hypopituitarism. Clinicians should be aware of the link between 
diabetes and hypopituitarism to avoid deleterious consequences of hypoglycemia.

Copyright © 2021, Gaffar Mohammed et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.13422
PMCID: PMC7894213
PMID: 33628705

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.