1. Cancer Med. 2021 Mar;10(6):1955-1963. doi: 10.1002/cam4.3732. Epub 2021 Feb
23.

Does biomarker use in oncology improve clinical trial failure risk? A 
large-scale analysis.

Parker JL(1), Kuzulugil SS(2), Pereverzev K(1), Mac S(3), Lopes G(4), Shah Z(1), 
Weerasinghe A(5), Rubinger D(1), Falconi A(6), Bener A(7), Caglayan B(7), Tangri 
R(1), Mitsakakis N(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Toronto Mississauga, Mississauga, ON, 
Canada.
(2)St Michael's Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(3)Institute of Health Policy, Management and Evaluation, University of Toronto, 
Mississauga, ON, Canada.
(4)University of Miami, Miller School of Medicine, Coral Gables, FL, USA.
(5)Prevention and Cancer Control, Cancer Care Ontario, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(6)Department of Pharmacy, Leslie Dan Faculty of Pharmacy, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(7)Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, Ryerson University, Toronto, ON, 
Canada.
(8)Institute of Health Policy, Management and Evaluation, and Division of 
Biostatistics, Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, ON, Canada.

PURPOSE: To date there has not been an extensive analysis of the outcomes of 
biomarker use in oncology.
METHODS: Data were pooled across four indications in oncology drawing upon trial 
outcomes from www.clinicaltrials.gov: breast cancer, non-small cell lung cancer 
(NSCLC), melanoma and colorectal cancer from 1998 to 2017. We compared the 
likelihood drugs would progress through the stages of clinical trial testing to 
approval based on biomarker status. This was done with multi-state Markov 
models, tools that describe the stochastic process in which subjects move among 
a finite number of states.
RESULTS: Over 10000 trials were screened, which yielded 745 drugs. The inclusion 
of biomarker status as a covariate significantly improved the fit of the Markov 
model in describing the drug trajectories through clinical trial testing stages. 
Hazard ratios based on the Markov models revealed the likelihood of drug 
approval with biomarkers having nearly a fivefold increase for all indications 
combined. A 12, 8 and 7-fold hazard ratio was observed for breast cancer, 
melanoma and NSCLC, respectively. Markov models with exploratory biomarkers 
outperformed Markov models with no biomarkers.
CONCLUSION: This is the first systematic statistical evidence that biomarkers 
clearly increase clinical trial success rates in three different indications in 
oncology. Also, exploratory biomarkers, long before they are properly validated, 
appear to improve success rates in oncology. This supports early and aggressive 
adoption of biomarkers in oncology clinical trials.

© 2021 The Authors. Cancer Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/cam4.3732
PMCID: PMC7957156
PMID: 33620160 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Parker has worked in the pharmaceutical 
industry. Dr. Lopes has received honoraria, has had a consultant role and has 
received research funding from Pfizer, Merck Serono, Roche, AstraZeneca and Eli 
Lilly in the past.