1. Front Surg. 2021 Feb 9;7:610758. doi: 10.3389/fsurg.2020.610758. eCollection 
2020.

Cell Populations Expressing Stemness-Associated Markers in Vascular Anomalies.

Kilmister EJ(1), Hansen L(1), Davis PF(1), Hall SRR(1), Tan ST(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Gillies McIndoe Research Institute, Wellington, New Zealand.
(2)Wellington Regional Plastic, Maxillofacial and Burns Unit, Hutt Hospital, 
Wellington, New Zealand.
(3)Department of Surgery, The Royal Melbourne Hospital, The University of 
Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.

Treatment of vascular anomalies (VAs) is mostly empirical and, in many instances 
unsatisfactory, as the pathogeneses of these heterogeneous conditions remain 
largely unknown. There is emerging evidence of the presence of cell populations 
expressing stemness-associated markers within many types of vascular tumors and 
vascular malformations. The presence of these populations in VAs is supported, 
in part, by the observed clinical effect of the mTOR inhibitor, sirolimus, that 
regulates differentiation of embryonic stem cells (ESCs). The discovery of the 
central role of the renin-angiotensin system (RAS) in regulating stem cells in 
infantile hemangioma (IH) provides a plausible explanation for its spontaneous 
and accelerated involution induced by β-blockers and ACE inhibitors. Recent work 
on targeting IH stem cells by inhibiting the transcription factor SOX18 using 
the stereoisomer R(+) propranolol, independent of β-adrenergic blockade, opens 
up exciting opportunities for novel treatment of IH without the β-adrenergic 
blockade-related side effects. Gene mutations have been identified in several 
VAs, involving mainly the PI3K/AKT/mTOR and/or the Ras/RAF/MEK/ERK pathways. 
Existing cancer therapies that target these pathways engenders the exciting 
possibility of repurposing these agents for challenging VAs, with early results 
demonstrating clinical efficacy. However, there are several shortcomings with 
this approach, including the treatment cost, side effects, emergence of 
treatment resistance and unknown long-term effects in young patients. The 
presence of populations expressing stemness-associated markers, including 
transcription factors involved in the generation of induced pluripotent stem 
cells (iPSCs), in different types of VAs, suggests the possible role of stem 
cell pathways in their pathogenesis. Components of the RAS are expressed by cell 
populations expressing stemness-associated markers in different types of VAs. 
The gene mutations affecting the PI3K/AKT/mTOR and/or the Ras/RAF/MEK/ERK 
pathways interact with different components of the RAS, which may influence cell 
populations expressing stemness-associated markers within VAs. The potential of 
targeting these populations by manipulating the RAS using repurposed, low-cost 
and commonly available oral medications, warrants further investigation. This 
review presents the accumulating evidence demonstrating the presence of 
stemness-associated markers in VAs, their expression of the RAS, and their 
interaction with gene mutations affecting the PI3K/AKT/mTOR and/or the 
Ras/RAF/MEK/ERK pathways, in the pathogenesis of VAs.

Copyright © 2021 Kilmister, Hansen, Davis, Hall and Tan.

DOI: 10.3389/fsurg.2020.610758
PMCID: PMC7900499
PMID: 33634164

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.