1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Feb 10;12:633946. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.633946. 
eCollection 2021.

Codon Usage and Adenovirus Fitness: Implications for Vaccine Development.

Giménez-Roig J(1), Núñez-Manchón E(1), Alemany R(2), Villanueva E(3), Fillat 
C(1)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), 
Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Procure Program, Institut Català d'Oncologia- Oncobell Program, IDIBELL, 
L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Cambridge Centre for Proteomics, Department of Biochemistry, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(4)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), 
Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Facultat de Medicina i Ciències de la Salut, Universitat de Barcelona (UB), 
Barcelona, Spain.

Vaccination is the most effective method to date to prevent viral diseases. It 
intends to mimic a naturally occurring infection while avoiding the disease, 
exposing our bodies to viral antigens to trigger an immune response that will 
protect us from future infections. Among different strategies for vaccine 
development, recombinant vaccines are one of the most efficient ones. 
Recombinant vaccines use safe viral vectors as vehicles and incorporate a 
transgenic antigen of the pathogen against which we intend to generate an immune 
response. These vaccines can be based on replication-deficient viruses or 
replication-competent viruses. While the most effective strategy involves 
replication-competent viruses, they must be attenuated to prevent any health 
hazard while guaranteeing a strong humoral and cellular immune response. Several 
attenuation strategies for adenoviral-based vaccine development have been 
contemplated over time. In this paper, we will review them and discuss novel 
approaches based on the principle that protein synthesis from individual genes 
can be modulated by codon usage bias manipulation. We will summarize vaccine 
approaches that consider recoding of viral proteins to produce adenoviral 
attenuation and recoding of the transgene antigens for both viral attenuation 
and efficient viral epitope expression.

Copyright © 2021 Giménez-Roig, Núñez-Manchón, Alemany, Villanueva and Fillat.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.633946
PMCID: PMC7902882
PMID: 33643266

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.