1. Cancer Immunol Res. 2021 May;9(5):554-567. doi: 10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-20-0905.
 Epub 2021 Mar 2.

Targeted Therapy Given after Anti-PD-1 Leads to Prolonged Responses in Mouse 
Melanoma Models through Sustained Antitumor Immunity.

Phadke MS(1), Chen Z(2), Li J(2), Mohamed E(3), Davies MA(4), Smalley I(1), 
Duckett DR(5), Palve V(5), Czerniecki BJ(3), Forsyth PA(6), Noyes D(7), Adeegbe 
DO(3), Eroglu Z(8), Nguyen KT(1), Tsai KY(1)(8), Rix U(5), Burd CE(9), Chen 
YA(2), Rodriguez PC(3), Smalley KSM(10)(8).

Author information:
(1)The Department of Tumor Biology, The Moffitt Cancer Center and Research 
Institute, Tampa, Florida.
(2)The Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, The Moffitt Cancer Center 
and Research Institute, Tampa, Florida.
(3)The Department of Immunology, The Moffitt Cancer Center and Research 
Institute, Tampa, Florida.
(4)The Department of Melanoma Medical Oncology, Division of Cancer Medicine, The 
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas.
(5)The Department of Drug Discovery, The Moffitt Cancer Center and Research 
Institute, Tampa, Florida.
(6)The Department of Neurooncology, The Moffitt Cancer Center and Research 
Institute, Tampa, Florida.
(7)The Department of Malignant Hematology, The Moffitt Cancer Center and 
Research Institute, Tampa, Florida.
(8)The Department of Cutaneous Oncology, The Moffitt Cancer Center and Research 
Institute, Tampa, Florida.
(9)Department of Cancer Biology and Genetics, Ohio State University, Columbus, 
Ohio.
(10)The Department of Tumor Biology, The Moffitt Cancer Center and Research 
Institute, Tampa, Florida. keiran.smalley@moffitt.org.

Immunotherapy (IT) and targeted therapy (TT) are both effective against 
melanoma, but their combination is frequently toxic. Here, we investigated 
whether the sequence of IT (anti-PD-1)→ TT (ceritinib-trametinib or 
dabrafenib-trametinib) was associated with improved antitumor responses in mouse 
models of BRAF- and NRAS-mutant melanoma. Mice with NRAS-mutant (SW1) or 
BRAF-mutant (SM1) mouse melanomas were treated with either IT, TT, or the 
sequence of IT→TT. Tumor volumes were measured, and samples from the NRAS-mutant 
melanomas were collected for immune-cell analysis, single-cell RNA sequencing 
(scRNA-seq), and reverse phase protein analysis (RPPA). scRNA-seq demonstrated 
that the IT→TT sequence modulated the immune environment, leading to increased 
infiltration of T cells, monocytes, dendritic cells and natural killer cells, 
and decreased numbers of tumor-associated macrophages, myeloid-derived 
suppressor cells, and regulatory T cells. Durable responses to the IT→TT 
sequence were dependent on T-cell activity, with depletion of CD8+, but not 
CD4+, T cells abrogating the therapeutic response. An analysis of 
transcriptional heterogeneity in the melanoma compartment showed the sequence of 
IT→TT enriched for a population of melanoma cells with increased expression of 
MHC class I and melanoma antigens. RPPA analysis demonstrated that the sustained 
immune response induced by IT→TT suppressed tumor-intrinsic signaling pathways 
required for therapeutic escape. These studies establish that upfront IT 
improves the responses to TT in BRAF- and NRAS-mutant melanoma models.

©2021 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-20-0905
PMCID: PMC8102376
PMID: 33653716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: ZE is a consultant for 
Array, Novartis, Regeneron, Genentech, SunPharma and receives research funding 
Novartis. PF serves as advisor for Bayer, BTG, Inovio, Novocure, AbbVie, 
Boehringer-Ingelheim, Ziopharm, Tocagen. MAD serves as a PI of research grants 
to MDACC from GlaskoSmithKline, Roche-Genentech, Bristol Myers Squibb, Merck, 
Astrazeneca, Sanofi-Aventis, Oncothyreon, Myriad; Consultant for Novartis, 
Array, GlaxoSmithKline, Roche-Genentech, Bristol Myers Squibb, Sanofi-Aventis, 
Vaccinex, and Syndax. MAD has research grants from GlaskoSmithKline, 
Roche-Genentech, Bristol Myers Squibb, Merck, Astrazeneca, Sanofi-Aventis, 
Oncothyreon, Myriad and is a consultant for Novartis, Array, GlaxoSmithKline, 
Roche-Genentech, Bristol Myers Squibb, Sanofi-Aventis, Vaccinex, and Syndax). 
All other authors declare no conflict of interest.