1. J Clin Med. 2021 Feb 26;10(5):921. doi: 10.3390/jcm10050921.

Diagnosis and Risk Prediction of Dilated Cardiomyopathy in the Era of Big Data 
and Genomics.

Sammani A(1), Baas AF(2), Asselbergs FW(1)(3)(4), Te Riele ASJM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Division Heart & Lungs, University Medical Center 
Utrecht, Utrecht University, 3582 CX Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Genetics, Division Laboratories, Pharmacy and Biomedical 
Genetics, University Medical Centre Utrecht, University of Utrecht, 3582 CX 
Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(3)Institute of Cardiovascular Science, Faculty of Population Health Sciences, 
University College London, London WC1E 6BT, UK.
(4)Health Data Research UK and Institute of Health Informatics, University 
College London, London WC1E 6BT, UK.

Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is a leading cause of heart failure and 
life-threatening ventricular arrhythmias (LTVA). Work-up and risk stratification 
of DCM is clinically challenging, as there is great heterogeneity in phenotype 
and genotype. Throughout the last decade, improved genetic testing of patients 
has identified genotype-phenotype associations and enhanced evaluation of 
at-risk relatives leading to better patient prognosis. The field is now ripe to 
explore opportunities to improve personalised risk assessments. Multivariable 
risk models presented as "risk calculators" can incorporate a multitude of 
clinical variables and predict outcome (such as heart failure hospitalisations 
or LTVA). In addition, genetic risk scores derived from genome/exome-wide 
association studies can estimate an individual's lifetime genetic risk of 
developing DCM. The use of clinically granular investigations, such as late 
gadolinium enhancement on cardiac magnetic resonance imaging, is warranted in 
order to increase predictive performance. To this end, constructing big data 
infrastructures improves accessibility of data by using electronic health 
records, existing research databases, and disease registries. By applying 
methods such as machine and deep learning, we can model complex interactions, 
identify new phenotype clusters, and perform prognostic modelling. This review 
aims to provide an overview of the evolution of DCM definitions as well as its 
clinical work-up and considerations in the era of genomics. In addition, we 
present exciting examples in the field of big data infrastructures, personalised 
prognostic assessment, and artificial intelligence.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm10050921
PMCID: PMC7956169
PMID: 33652931

Conflict of interest statement: Authors declare no conflicts of interest