1. Epilepsia Open. 2021 Feb 2;6(1):102-111. doi: 10.1002/epi4.12450. eCollection 
2021 Mar.

Clinical and genomic analysis of a large Chinese family with familial cortical 
myoclonic tremor with epilepsy and SAMD12 intronic repeat expansion.

Zhou Y(1), Sood R(2), Wang Q(3)(4), Carrington B(2), Park M(5), Young AC(5), 
Birnbaum D(6), Liu Z(7), Ashizawa T(8), Mullikin JC(5), Koubeissi MZ(9), Liu 
P(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, MedStar St Mary's Hospital/Georgetown University 
Hospital, MedStar Medical Group, Leonardtown, MD, USA.
(2)Translational and Functional Genomics Branch, National Human Genome Research 
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(3)Epilepsy Center, Department of Neurology, Beijing Tiantan Hospital, Capital 
Medical University, Beijing, China.
(4)China National Clinical Research Center for Neurological Diseases, Beijing, 
China.
(5)NIH Intramural Sequencing Center, National Human Genome Research Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD, USA.
(6)Department of Neurology, Einstein Medical Center, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(7)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Children's Hospital of Illinois, University 
of Illinois College of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA.
(8)Houston Methodist Neurological Institute and Research Institute, Houston, TX, 
USA.
(9)Epilepsy Center, Department of Neurology, George Washington University, 
Washington, DC, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Our goal was to perform detailed clinical and genomic analysis of a 
large multigenerational Chinese family with 21 individuals showing symptoms of 
Familial Cortical Myoclonic Tremor with Epilepsy (FCMTE) that we have followed 
for over 20 years.
METHODS: Patients were subjected to clinical evaluation, routine EEG, and 
structural magnetic resonance imaging. Whole exome sequencing, repeat-primed 
PCR, long-range PCR, and PacBio sequencing were performed to characterize the 
disease-causing mutation in this family.
RESULTS: All evaluated patients manifested adult-onset seizures and presented 
with progressive myoclonic postural tremors starting after the third or fourth 
decade of life. Seizures typically diminished markedly in frequency with 
implementation of antiseizure medications but did not completely cease. The 
electroencephalogram of affected individuals showed generalized or multifocal 
spikes and slow wave complexes. An expansion of TTTTA motifs with addition of 
TTTCA motifs in intron 4 of SAMD12 was identified to segregate with the disease 
phenotype in this family. Furthermore, we found that the mutant allele is 
unstable and can undergo both contraction and expansion by changes in the number 
of repeat motifs each time it is passed to the next generation. The size of 
mutant allele varied from 5 to 5.5 kb with 549-603 copies of TTTTA and 287-343 
copies of TTTCA repeat motifs in this family.
SIGNIFICANCE: Our study provides a detailed description of clinical progression 
of FCMTE symptoms and its management with antiseizure medications. Our method of 
repeat analysis by PacBio sequencing of long-range PCR products does not require 
high-quality DNA and hence can be easily applied to other families to elucidate 
any correlation between the repeat size and phenotypic variables, such as, age 
of onset, and severity of symptoms.

© 2021 The Authors. Epilepsia Open published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf 
of International League Against Epilepsy.

DOI: 10.1002/epi4.12450
PMCID: PMC7918340
PMID: 33681653 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None of the authors have any conflicts of 
interest to disclose. We confirm that we have read the Journal's position on 
issues involved in ethical publication and affirm that this report is consistent 
with those guidelines.