1. PLoS One. 2021 Mar 8;16(3):e0247620. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0247620. 
eCollection 2021.

Epidemiological and clinical burden of EGFR Exon 20 insertion in advanced 
non-small cell lung cancer: A systematic literature review.

Burnett H(1), Emich H(2), Carroll C(3), Stapleton N(2), Mahadevia P(4), Li T(4).

Author information:
(1)Evidera, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(2)Evidera, London, United Kingdom.
(3)The University of Sheffield, Sheffield, United Kingdom.
(4)Janssen Global Services, Raritan, NJ, United States of America.

OBJECTIVES: The burden of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) exon 20 
insertion mutation (Exon 20ins) in non-small cell lung cancer is not well 
understood. A systematic review was conducted to identify evidence on mutation 
frequency, prognostic impact, clinical, patient-reported, and economic outcomes 
associated with Exon 20ins.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Searches were conducted in Embase and Medline and 
supplemented with recent conference proceedings. Included studies were not 
limited by intervention, geography, or publication year.
RESULTS: Seventy-eight unique studies were included; 53 reporting mutation 
frequency, 13 prognostic impact, 36 clinical outcomes, and one humanistic 
burden. No economic burden data were identified. The frequency of Exon 20ins 
mutation ranged from 0.1% to 4% of all NSCLC cases and 1% to 12% of all EGFR 
mutations. Data on the prognostic impact of Exon 20ins were heterogeneous but 
highlighted poorer outcomes in patients with Exon 20ins mutation compared with 
patients with other EGFR mutations and EGFR wildtype across a wide range of 
therapies and treatment lines. Comparative evidence on the clinical efficacy and 
safety of currently available therapies were limited, as were sample sizes of 
studies reporting on real-world effectiveness. Nine single-arm trials and 27 
observational studies reported clinical outcomes for patients with Exon 20ins. 
Trends towards better survival and response were observed for chemotherapy 
compared with TKIs as first-line treatments. For subsequent treatment lines, 
novel targeted therapies provided encouraging preliminary responses while 
results for chemotherapy were less favorable. Limited safety data were reported. 
One conference abstract described the symptom burden for Exon 20ins patients 
with fatigue and pain being most common.
CONCLUSION: Findings of the systematic review show a high unmet need for safe 
and efficacious treatments for patients with Exon 20ins as well and need for 
further evidence generation to better understand the patient-level and economic 
impact for these patients.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0247620
PMCID: PMC7939356
PMID: 33684140 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have read the journal’s policy and 
have the following competing interests: HB, HE, and NS are paid employees of 
Evidera, a consultancy which provides consulting and other research services to 
pharmaceutical, medical device, and other organizations. In their salaried 
positions, they work with a variety of companies and are precluded from 
receiving payment or honoraria directly from these organizations for services 
rendered. Evidera received funding from Janssen for the involvement of their 
employees in this research. TL and PM are paid employees of Janssen. This does 
not alter our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials. 
There are no patents, products in development or marketed products associated 
with this research to declare. CC has no conflicts to disclose.