1. J Extracell Vesicles. 2020 Nov;10(1):e12023. doi: 10.1002/jev2.12023. Epub
2021  Jan 9.

An implanted device enables in vivo monitoring of extracellular vesicle-mediated 
spread of pro-inflammatory mast cell response in mice.

Vukman KV(1), Ferencz A(2), Fehér D(2), Juhos K(2), Lőrincz P(3), Visnovitz 
T(1), Koncz A(1), Pálóczi K(1), Seregélyes G(1), Försönits A(1), Khamari D(1), 
Galinsoga A(1), Drahos L(4), Buzás EI(1)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics Cell- and Immunobiology Semmelweis University Budapest 
Hungary.
(2)Department of Surgical Research and Techniques Semmelweis University Budapest 
Hungary.
(3)Department of Anatomy Cell and Developmental Biology Eötvös Loránd University 
Budapest Hungary.
(4)MS Proteomics Research Group Hungarian Academy of Sciences Institute of 
Organic Chemistry Budapest Hungary.
(5)MTA-SE Immune-Proteogenomics Extracellular Vesicle Research Group Budapest 
Hungary.
(6)HCEMM-SE Extracellular Vesicle Research Group Budapest Hungary.

Mast cells have been shown to release extracellular vesicles (EVs) in vitro. 
However, EV-mediated mast cell communication in vivo remains unexplored. Primary 
mast cells from GFP-transgenic and wild type mice, were grown in the presence or 
absence of lipopolysaccharide (LPS), and the secreted EVs were separated from 
the conditioned media. Mast cell-derived EVs were next cultured with LPS-naïve 
mast cells, and the induction of TNF-α expression was monitored. In addition, 
primary mast cells were seeded in diffusion chambers that were implanted into 
the peritoneal cavities of mice. Diffusion chambers enabled the release of GFP+ 
mast cell-derived EVs in vivo into the peritoneal cavity. Peritoneal lavage 
cells were assessed for the uptake of GFP+ EVs and for TNF-α production. In 
vitro, LPS-stimulated mast cell-derived EVs were efficiently taken up by 
non-stimulated mast cells, and induced TNF-α expression in a TLR4, JNK and P38 
MAPK dependent manner. In vivo, using implanted diffusion chambers, we confirmed 
the release and transmission of mast cell-derived EVs to other mast cells with 
subsequent induction of TNF-α expression. These data show an EV-mediated 
spreading of pro-inflammatory response between mast cells, and provide the first 
in vivo evidence for the biological role of mast cell-derived EVs.

© 2020 The Authors. Journal of Extracellular Vesicles published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC on behalf of International Society for Extracellular Vesicles.

DOI: 10.1002/jev2.12023
PMCID: PMC7890545
PMID: 33708356 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors do not have financial interest to 
declare.