1. Sci Rep. 2021 Mar 11;11(1):5729. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-85100-0.

Pseudomonas aeruginosa PA80 is a cystic fibrosis isolate deficient in RhlRI 
quorum sensing.

Ahmed SAKS(#)(1), Rudden M(#)(2), Elias SM(1), Smyth TJ(3), Marchant R(4), Banat 
IM(4), Dooley JSG(5).

Author information:
(1)School of Environment and Life Sciences, Independent University, Bangladesh 
(IUB), Dhaka, Bangladesh.
(2)Department of Biology, University of York, Wentworth, York, YO10 5DD, UK.
(3)School of Science, Institute of Technology Sligo, Sligo, Ireland.
(4)School of Biomedical Sciences, Ulster University, Coleraine, UK.
(5)School of Biomedical Sciences, Ulster University, Coleraine, UK. 
jsg.dooley@ulster.ac.uk.
(#)Contributed equally

Pseudomonas aeruginosa uses quorum sensing (QS) to modulate the expression of 
several virulence factors that enable it to establish severe infections. The QS 
system in P. aeruginosa is complex, intricate and is dominated by two main 
N-acyl-homoserine lactone circuits, LasRI and RhlRI. These two QS systems work 
in a hierarchical fashion with LasRI at the top, directly regulating RhlRI. 
Together these QS circuits regulate several virulence associated genes, 
metabolites, and enzymes in P. aeruginosa. Paradoxically, LasR mutants are 
frequently isolated from chronic P. aeruginosa infections, typically among 
cystic fibrosis (CF) patients. This suggests P. aeruginosa can undergo 
significant evolutionary pathoadaptation to persist in long term chronic 
infections. In contrast, mutations in the RhlRI system are less common. Here, we 
have isolated a clinical strain of P. aeruginosa from a CF patient that has 
deleted the transcriptional regulator RhlR entirely. Whole genome sequencing 
shows the rhlR locus is deleted in PA80 alongside a few non-synonymous mutations 
in virulence factors including protease lasA and rhamnolipid rhlA, rhlB, rhlC. 
Importantly we did not observe any mutations in the LasRI QS system. PA80 does 
not appear to have an accumulation of mutations typically associated with 
several hallmark pathoadaptive genes (i.e., mexT, mucA, algR, rpoN, exsS, ampR). 
Whole genome comparisons show that P. aeruginosa strain PA80 is closely related 
to the hypervirulent Liverpool epidemic strain (LES) LESB58. PA80 also contains 
several genomic islands (GI's) encoding virulence and/or resistance determinants 
homologous to LESB58. To further understand the effect of these mutations in 
PA80 QS regulatory and virulence associated genes, we compared transcriptional 
expression of genes and phenotypic effects with isogenic mutants in the genetic 
reference strain PAO1. In PAO1, we show that deletion of rhlR has a much more 
significant impact on the expression of a wide range of virulence associated 
factors rather than deletion of lasR. In PA80, no QS regulatory genes were 
expressed, which we attribute to the inactivation of the RhlRI QS system by 
deletion of rhlR and mutation of rhlI. This study demonstrates that inactivation 
of the LasRI system does not impact RhlRI regulated virulence factors. PA80 has 
bypassed the common pathoadaptive mutations observed in LasR by targeting the 
RhlRI system. This suggests that RhlRI is a significant target for the long-term 
persistence of P. aeruginosa in chronic CF patients. This raises important 
questions in targeting QS systems for therapeutic interventions.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-85100-0
PMCID: PMC7970962
PMID: 33707533 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.