1. Hepatology. 2021 Sep;74(3):1148-1163. doi: 10.1002/hep.31802. Epub 2021 Jun
11.

Pathogenesis, MicroRNA-122 Gene-Regulation, and Protective Immune Responses 
After Acute Equine Hepacivirus Infection.

Tomlinson JE(1), Wolfisberg R(2), Fahnøe U(2), Patel RS(3), Trivedi S(4), Kumar 
A(4), Sharma H(4), Nielsen L(2), McDonough SP(5), Bukh J(2), Tennant BC(6), 
Kapoor A(4), Rosenberg BR(3), Rice CM(7), Divers TJ(6), Van de Walle GR(#)(1), 
Scheel TKH(#)(2)(7).

Author information:
(1)Baker Institute for Animal Health, Cornell University College of Veterinary 
Medicine, Ithaca, NY.
(2)Copenhagen Hepatitis C Program (CO-HEP), Department of Infectious Diseases, 
Hvidovre Hospital and Department of Immunology and Microbiology, University of 
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, NY.
(4)Center for Vaccines and Immunity, Research Institute at Nationwide Children's 
Hospital, Columbus, OH.
(5)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Cornell University College of Veterinary 
Medicine, Ithaca, NY.
(6)Department of Clinical Sciences, Cornell University College of Veterinary 
Medicine, Ithaca, NY.
(7)Laboratory of Virology and Infectious Disease, The Rockefeller University, 
New York, NY.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Equine hepacivirus (EqHV) is phylogenetically the closest 
relative of HCV and shares genome organization, hepatotropism, transient or 
persistent infection outcome, and the ability to cause hepatitis. Thus, EqHV 
studies are important to understand equine liver disease and further as an 
outbred surrogate animal model for HCV pathogenesis and protective immune 
responses. Here, we aimed to characterize the course of EqHV infection and 
associated protective immune responses.
APPROACH AND RESULTS: Seven horses were experimentally inoculated with EqHV, 
monitored for 6 months, and rechallenged with the same and, subsequently, a 
heterologous EqHV. Clearance was the primary outcome (6 of 7) and was associated 
with subclinical hepatitis characterized by lymphocytic infiltrate and 
individual hepatocyte necrosis. Seroconversion was delayed and antibody titers 
waned slowly. Clearance of primary infection conferred nonsterilizing immunity, 
resulting in shortened duration of viremia after rechallenge. Peripheral blood 
mononuclear cell responses in horses were minimal, although EqHV-specific T 
cells were identified. Additionally, an interferon-stimulated gene signature was 
detected in the liver during EqHV infection, similar to acute HCV in humans. 
EqHV, as HCV, is stimulated by direct binding of the liver-specific microRNA 
(miR), miR-122. Interestingly, we found that EqHV infection sequesters enough 
miR-122 to functionally affect gene regulation in the liver. This RNA-based 
mechanism thus could have consequences for pathology.
CONCLUSIONS: EqHV infection in horses typically has an acute resolving course, 
and the protective immune response lasts for at least a year and broadly 
attenuates subsequent infections. This could have important implications to 
achieve the primary goal of an HCV vaccine; to prevent chronicity while 
accepting acute resolving infection after virus exposure.

© 2021 The Authors. Hepatology published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of 
American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.31802
PMCID: PMC8435542
PMID: 33713356 [Indexed for MEDLINE]