1. Alzheimers Dement (Amst). 2021 Mar 4;13(1):e12162. doi: 10.1002/dad2.12162. 
eCollection 2021.

Abnormal retinal capillary blood flow in autosomal dominant Alzheimer's disease.

Singer MB(1), Ringman JM(2), Chu Z(3), Zhou X(3), Jiang X(1), Shahidzadeh A(1), 
Wang RK(3)(4), Kashani AH(1)(2)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology USC Roski Eye Institute Keck School of Medicine 
of the University of Southern California Los Angeles California USA.
(2)Department of Neurology Keck School of Medicine of the University of Southern 
California Los Angeles California USA.
(3)Department of Bioengineering University of Washington Seattle Washington USA.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology University of Washington Seattle Washington USA.
(5)USC Ginsburg Institute for Biomedical Therapeutics Keck School of Medicine of 
the University of Southern California Los Angeles California USA.
(6)Department of Biomedical Engineering University of Southern California Los 
Angeles California USA.

INTRODUCTION: This study characterizes retinal capillary blood flow in subjects 
with autosomal dominant Alzheimer's disease (ADAD)-causing mutations.
METHODS: Carriers of PSEN1 or APP mutations were prospectively recruited and 
split into early-stage (ES) and late-stage (LS) groups. Controls were normal 
subjects and non-carriers from the at-risk group. Capillary blood flow was 
quantified using an optical coherence tomography angiography-based measure of 
erythrocyte flux through capillary segments. Statistical analyses were adjusted 
for correlation between two eyes of the same subject.
RESULTS: ES carriers had significantly greater capillary blood flow than 
controls and LS carriers. ES and LS carriers had significantly greater capillary 
blood flow heterogeneity than controls. There was no difference between 
capillary blood flow of LS carriers and controls.
DISCUSSION: ES ADAD carriers demonstrate increased retinal capillary blood flow 
and flow heterogeneity compared to controls. These findings support the 
hypothesis that increased perfusion is a pathophysiologic feature of 
presymptomatic stages of ADAD.

© 2021 The Authors. Alzheimer's & Dementia: Diagnosis, Assessment & Disease 
Monitoring published by Wiley Periodicals, LLC on behalf of Alzheimer's 
Association.

DOI: 10.1002/dad2.12162
PMCID: PMC7931411
PMID: 33728371

Conflict of interest statement: John M. Ringman is a DMC member of Renew Group 
Private Limited and a consultant for InnoSense. Carl Zeiss Meditec has provided 
grant funding, equipment, and financial support to Amir H Kashani. Ruikang K. 
Wang holds patents with Carl Zeiss Meditec and Kowa Inc and is a consultant for 
Carl Zeiss Meditec and Insight Phototonic Solutions.