1. Front Immunol. 2021 Mar 15;12:635166. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.635166. 
eCollection 2021.

Novel Human Tenascin-C Function-Blocking Camel Single Domain Nanobodies.

Dhaouadi S(1), Ben Abderrazek R(1), Loustau T(2), Abou-Faycal C(2), Ksouri A(1), 
Erne W(2), Murdamoothoo D(2), Mörgelin M(3), Kungl A(4)(5), Jung A(6), 
Ledrappier S(6), Benlasfar Z(1), Bichet S(7), Chiquet-Ehrismann R(7), Hendaoui 
I(7), Orend G(2), Bouhaouala-Zahar B(1)(8).

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire des Venins et Biomolécules Thérapeutiques, Institut Pasteur de 
Tunis, Université Tunis El Manar, Tunis, Tunisia.
(2)Université Strasbourg, INSERM U1109 - The Tumor Microenvironment group, 
Hôpital Civil, Institut d'Hématologie et d'Immunologie, Fédération de Médecine 
Translationnelle de Strasbourg (FMTS), Strasbourg, France.
(3)Colzyx AB, Lund, Sweden.
(4)Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Karl Franzens University Graz, Graz, 
Austria.
(5)Antagonis Biotherapeutics GmbH, Graz, Austria.
(6)Tumor Bank Centre Paul Strauss, Strasbourg, France.
(7)Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Basel, Switzerland.
(8)Faculté de Médecine de Tunis, Université Tunis el Manar, Tunis, Tunisia.

The extracellular matrix (ECM) molecule Tenascin-C (TNC) is well-known to 
promote tumor progression by multiple mechanisms. However, reliable TNC 
detection in tissues of tumor banks remains limited. Therefore, we generated 
dromedary single-domain nanobodies Nb3 and Nb4 highly specific for human TNC 
(hTNC) and characterized the interaction with TNC by several approaches 
including ELISA, western blot, isothermal fluorescence titration and negative 
electron microscopic imaging. Our results revealed binding of both nanobodies to 
distinct sequences within fibronectin type III repeats of hTNC. By 
immunofluroescence and immunohistochemical imaging we observed that both 
nanobodies detected TNC expression in PFA and paraffin embedded human tissue 
from ulcerative colitis, solid tumors and liver metastasis. As TNC impairs cell 
adhesion to fibronectin we determined whether the nanobodies abolished this TNC 
function. Indeed, Nb3 and Nb4 restored adhesion of tumor and mesangial cells on 
a fibronectin/TNC substratum. We recently showed that TNC orchestrates the 
immune-suppressive tumor microenvironment involving chemoretention, causing 
tethering of CD11c+ myeloid/dendritic cells in the stroma. Here, we document 
that immobilization of DC2.4 dendritic cells by a CCL21 adsorbed TNC substratum 
was blocked by both nanobodies. Altogether, our novel TNC specific nanobodies 
could offer valuable tools for detection of TNC in the clinical practice and may 
be useful to inhibit the immune-suppressive and other functions of TNC in cancer 
and other diseases.

Copyright © 2021 Dhaouadi, Ben Abderrazek, Loustau, Abou-Faycal, Ksouri, Erne, 
Murdamoothoo, Mörgelin, Kungl, Jung, Ledrappier, Benlasfar, Bichet, 
Chiquet-Ehrismann, Hendaoui, Orend and Bouhaouala-Zahar.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.635166
PMCID: PMC8006918
PMID: 33790905 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: MM was employed by Colzyx AB. The remaining 
authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial 
or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of 
interest.