1. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2021 Mar 16;8:649813. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2021.649813. 
eCollection 2021.

Alcohol Binge Drinking Selectively Stimulates Protein S-Glutathionylation in 
Aorta and Liver of ApoE (-/-) Mice.

Seidel K(1), Wan X(1), Zhang M(1), Zhou Y(1), Zang M(2)(3), Han J(1).

Author information:
(1)Vascular Biology Section, Evans Department of Medicine, Whitaker 
Cardiovascular Institute, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, 
United States.
(2)Department of Molecular Medicine, Barshop Institute for Longevity and Aging 
Studies, Center for Healthy Aging, University of Texas Health Science Center, 
San Antonio, TX, United States.
(3)Geriatric Research, Education and Clinical Center, South Texas Veterans 
Health Care System, San Antonio, TX, United States.

Background: Binge drinking has become the most common and deadly pattern of 
excessive alcohol use in the United States, especially among younger adults. It 
is closely related to the increased risk of cardiovascular disease. Oxidative 
stress as a result of ethanol metabolism is the primary pathogenic factor for 
alcohol-induced end organ injury, but the role of protein S-glutathionylation-a 
reversible oxidative modification of protein cysteine thiol groups that mediates 
cellular actions by oxidants-in binge drinking-associated cardiovascular disease 
has not been explored. The present study defines the effect of alcohol binge 
drinking on the formation of protein S-glutathionylation in a mouse model of 
atherosclerosis. Methods and Results: To mimic the weekend binge drinking 
pattern in humans, ApoE deficient (ApoE -/-) mice on the Lieber-DeCarli liquid 
diet received ethanol or isocaloric maltose (as a control) gavages (5 g/kg/day, 
2 consecutive days/week) for 6 weeks. The primary alcohol-targeted organs 
(liver, brain), and cardiovascular system (heart, aorta, lung) of these two 
groups of the mice were determined by measuring the protein S-glutathionylation 
levels and its regulatory enzymes including [Glutaredoxin1(Grx1), glutathione 
reductase (GR), glutathione-S-transferase Pi (GST-π)], as well as by assessing 
aortic endothelial function and liver lipid levels. Our results showed that 
binge drinking selectively stimulated protein S-glutathionylation in aorta, 
liver, and brain, which coincided with altered glutathionylation regulatory 
enzyme expression that is downregulated Grx1 and upregulated GST-π in aorta, 
massive upregulation of GST-π in liver, and no changes in Grx1 and GST-π in 
brain. Functionally, binge drinking induced aortic endothelial cell function, as 
reflected by increased aortic permeability and reduced flow-mediated 
vasodilation. Conclusions: This study is the first to provide in vivo evidence 
for differential effects of binge drinking on formation of protein 
S-glutathionylation and its enzymatic regulation system in major alcohol-target 
organs and cardiovascular system. The selective induction of protein 
S-glutathionylation in aorta and liver is associated with aortic endothelial 
dysfunction and fatty liver, which may be a potential redox mechanism for the 
increased risk of vascular disease in human binge-drinkers.

Copyright © 2021 Seidel, Wan, Zhang, Zhou, Zang and Han.

DOI: 10.3389/fcvm.2021.649813
PMCID: PMC8007763
PMID: 33796575

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.