1. Cells. 2021 Mar 23;10(3):714. doi: 10.3390/cells10030714.

HPV and Other Microbiota; Who's Good and Who's Bad: Effects of the Microbial 
Environment on the Development of Cervical Cancer-A Non-Systematic Review.

Läsche M(1), Urban H(1), Gallwas J(1), Gründker C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, University Medicine Göttingen, 
37075 Göttingen, Germany.

Cervical cancer is responsible for around 5% of all human cancers worldwide. It 
develops almost exclusively from an unsolved, persistent infection of the 
squamocolumnar transformation zone between the endo- and ecto-cervix with 
various high-risk (HR) human papillomaviruses (HPVs). The decisive turning point 
on the way to persistent HPV infection and malignant transformation is an immune 
system weakened by pathobionts and oxidative stress and an injury to the 
cervical mucosa, often caused by sexual activities. Through these injury and 
healing processes, HPV viruses, hijacking activated keratinocytes, move into the 
basal layers of the cervical epithelium and then continue their development 
towards the distal prickle cell layer (Stratum spinosum). The microbial 
microenvironment of the cervical tissue determines the tissue homeostasis and 
the integrity of the protective mucous layer through the maintenance of a 
healthy immune and metabolic signalling. Pathological microorganisms and the 
resulting dysbiosis disturb this signalling. Thus, pathological inflammatory 
reactions occur, which manifest the HPV infection. About 90% of all women 
contract an HPV infection in the course of their lives. In about 10% of cases, 
the virus persists and cervical intra-epithelial neoplasia (CIN) develops. 
Approximately 1% of women with a high-risk HPV infection incur a cervical 
carcinoma after 10 to 20 years. In this non-systematic review article, we 
summarise how the sexually and microbial mediated pathogenesis of the cervix 
proceeds through aberrant immune and metabolism signalling via CIN to cervical 
carcinoma. We show how both the virus and the cancer benefit from the same 
changes in the immune and metabolic environment.

DOI: 10.3390/cells10030714
PMCID: PMC8005086
PMID: 33807087 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.