1. Front Neurosci. 2021 Mar 17;15:650082. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2021.650082. 
eCollection 2021.

Robust Cortical Thickness Morphometry of Neonatal Brain and Systematic 
Evaluation Using Multi-Site MRI Datasets.

Liu M(1), Lepage C(2), Kim SY(1), Jeon S(2), Kim SH(3), Simon JP(1), Tanaka 
N(1), Yuan S(1), Islam T(1), Peng B(1), Arutyunyan K(1), Surento W(1), Kim J(1), 
Jahanshad N(1), Styner MA(3)(4), Toga AW(1), Barkovich AJ(5), Xu D(5), Evans 
AC(2), Kim H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, USC Stevens Neuroimaging and Informatics Institute, 
Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, 
United States.
(2)Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel 
Hill, NC, United States.
(4)Department of Computer Science, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 
Chapel Hill, NC, United States.
(5)Department of Radiology and Biomedical Imaging, University of California, San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States.

The human brain grows the most dramatically during the perinatal and early 
post-natal periods, during which pre-term birth or perinatal injury that may 
alter brain structure and lead to developmental anomalies. Thus, characterizing 
cortical thickness of developing brains remains an important goal. However, this 
task is often complicated by inaccurate cortical surface extraction due to 
small-size brains. Here, we propose a novel complex framework for the 
reconstruction of neonatal WM and pial surfaces, accounting for large partial 
volumes due to small-size brains. The proposed approach relies only on 
T1-weighted images unlike previous T2-weighted image-based approaches while only 
T1-weighted images are sometimes available under the different clinical/research 
setting. Deep neural networks are first introduced to the neonatal magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) pipeline to address the mis-segmentation of brain 
tissues. Furthermore, this pipeline enhances cortical boundary delineation using 
combined models of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)/GM boundary detection with edge 
gradient information and a new skeletonization of sulcal folding where no CSF 
voxels are seen due to the limited resolution. We also proposed a systematic 
evaluation using three independent datasets comprising 736 pre-term and 97 term 
neonates. Qualitative assessment for reconstructed cortical surfaces shows that 
86.9% are rated as accurate across the three site datasets. In addition, our 
landmark-based evaluation shows that the mean displacement of the cortical 
surfaces from the true boundaries was less than a voxel size (0.532 ± 0.035 mm). 
Evaluating the proposed pipeline (namely NEOCIVET 2.0) shows the robustness and 
reproducibility across different sites and different age-groups. The mean 
cortical thickness measured positively correlated with post-menstrual age (PMA) 
at scan (p < 0.0001); Cingulate cortical areas grew the most rapidly whereas the 
inferior temporal cortex grew the least rapidly. The range of the cortical 
thickness measured was biologically congruent (1.3 mm at 28 weeks of PMA to 1.8 
mm at term equivalent). Cortical thickness measured on T1 MRI using NEOCIVET 2.0 
was compared with that on T2 using the established dHCP pipeline. It was 
difficult to conclude that either T1 or T2 imaging is more ideal to construct 
cortical surfaces. NEOCIVET 2.0 has been open to the public through CBRAIN 
(https://mcin-cnim.ca/technology/cbrain/), a web-based platform for processing 
brain imaging data.

Copyright © 2021 Liu, Lepage, Kim, Jeon, Kim, Simon, Tanaka, Yuan, Islam, Peng, 
Arutyunyan, Surento, Kim, Jahanshad, Styner, Toga, Barkovich, Xu, Evans and Kim.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2021.650082
PMCID: PMC8010150
PMID: 33815050

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.