1. Front Genet. 2021 Mar 18;12:638708. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2021.638708.
eCollection  2021.

Effects of Simulated Microgravity on the Proteome and Secretome of the 
Polyextremotolerant Black Fungus Knufia chersonesos.

Tesei D(1)(2), Chiang AJ(3), Kalkum M(3), Stajich JE(4), Mohan GBM(5), 
Sterflinger K(6), Venkateswaran K(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, University of Natural Resources and Life 
Sciences, Vienna, Austria.
(2)Biotechnology and Planetary Protection Group, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, 
California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, United States.
(3)Department of Molecular Imaging and Therapy, Beckman Research Institute of 
City of Hope, Duarte, CA, United States.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Plant Pathology, Institute of Integrative 
Genome Biology, University of California, Riverside, Riverside, CA, United 
States.
(5)Department of Biotechnology, Centre for Research and Infectious Diseases, 
SASTRA Deemed University, Thanjavur, India.
(6)Institute for Natural Sciences and Technology in the Arts, Academy of Fine 
Arts Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

Black fungi are a group of melanotic microfungi characterized by remarkable 
polyextremotolerance. Due to a broad ecological plasticity and adaptations at 
the cellular level, it is predicted that they may survive in a variety of 
extreme environments, including harsh niches on Earth and Mars, and in outer 
space. However, the molecular mechanisms aiding survival, especially in space, 
are yet to be fully elucidated. Based on these premises, the rock-inhabiting 
black fungus Knufia chersonesos (Wt) and its non-melanized mutant (Mut) were 
exposed to simulated microgravity-one of the prevalent features characterizing 
space conditions-by growing the cultures in high-aspect-ratio vessels (HARVs). 
Qualitative and quantitative proteomic analyses were performed on the mycelia 
and supernatant of culture medium (secretome) to assess alterations in cell 
physiology in response to low-shear simulated microgravity (LSSMG) and to 
ultimately evaluate the role of cell-wall melanization in stress survival. 
Differential expression was observed for proteins involved in carbohydrate and 
lipid metabolic processes, transport, and ribosome biogenesis and translation 
via ribosomal translational machinery. However, no evidence of significant 
activation of stress components or starvation response was detected, except for 
the scytalone dehydratase, enzyme involved in the synthesis of 
dihydroxynaphthalene (DNH) melanin, which was found to be upregulated in the 
secretome of the wild type and downregulated in the mutant. Differences in 
protein modulation were observed between K. chersonesos Wt and Mut, with several 
proteins being downregulated under LSSMG in the Mut when compared to the Wt. 
Lastly, no major morphological alterations were observed following exposure to 
LSSMG. Similarly, the strains' survivability was not negatively affected. This 
study is the first to characterize the response to simulated microgravity in 
black fungi, which might have implications on future astrobiological missions.

Copyright © 2021 Tesei, Chiang, Kalkum, Stajich, Mohan, Sterflinger and 
Venkateswaran.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2021.638708
PMCID: PMC8012687
PMID: 33815472

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.