1. Mol Biol Rep. 2021 Apr;48(4):3617-3628. doi: 10.1007/s11033-021-06286-0. Epub 
2021 Apr 6.

New diagnostic molecular markers and biomarkers in odontogenic tumors.

Farshbaf A(1)(2), Zare R(3), Mohajertehran F(1)(2)(3), Mohtasham N(4).

Author information:
(1)Dental Research Center, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, 
Iran.
(2)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Pathology, School of Dentistry, Mashhad 
University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran.
(3)Oral and Maxillofacial Diseases Research Center, Mashhad University of 
Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran.
(4)Oral and Maxillofacial Diseases Research Center, Mashhad University of 
Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran. mohtashamn@mums.ac.ir.

Odontogenic tumors comprised of complex heterogeneous lesions that diverse from 
harmatomas to malignant tumors with different behavior and histology. The 
etiology of odontogenic tumors is not exactly determined and pathologists deal 
with challenges in diagnosis of odontogenic tumors because they are rare and 
obtained experiences are difficult to evaluate. In this study, we describe 
immunohistochemical and molecular markers in diagnosis of odontogenic tumors 
besides advanced diagnostic technique. Immunohistochemical features of 
odontogenic tumors beside the clinical features and radiological finding can 
help us to determine the correct diagnosis. Although these markers are neither 
specific nor sensitive enough, but analysis of gene expression provides 
definitive confirmation of diagnosis. In addition, "-omics" technology detected 
specific molecular alternation associated with etiology such as genomics, 
epigenomics, transcriptomics, proteomics and metabolomics. The post 
transcriptional events such as DNA methylation and chromatin remodeling by 
histone modification affect the changes in epigenome. Furthermore, non-coding 
RNAs like micro-RNAs, long noncoding RNA (lncRNA) and small non-coding RNA 
(snoRNA) play regulatory role and impact odontogenesis. Molecular marker propose 
their potential role in etiopathogenesis of odontogenic tumors and suitable 
candidate in diagnostic, prognostic and therapeutic approaches in addition to 
patient management. For future evaluations, organoid represents in vitro tumor 
model-study for tumor behavior, metastasis and invasion, drug screening, 
immunotherapy, clinical trial, hallmarks association with prognosis and 
evolution of personalized anti-cancer therapy. Moreover, organoid biobank help 
us to check genetic profile. We think more investigation and studies are needed 
to gain these knowledges that can shift therapeutic approaches to target 
therapy.

DOI: 10.1007/s11033-021-06286-0
PMCID: PMC8021934
PMID: 33822294 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflicts 
of interest.