1. Front Immunol. 2021 Mar 22;12:647873. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.647873. 
eCollection 2021.

A Systems Biology Approach Identifies B Cell Maturation Antigen (BCMA) as a 
Biomarker Reflecting Oral Vaccine Induced IgA Antibody Responses in Humans.

Mottram L(1), Lundgren A(1), Svennerholm AM(1), Leach S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Gothenburg University Vaccine Research Institute (GUVAX), Department of 
Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of Biomedicine, Sahlgrenska Academy, 
University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(2)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, 
Gothenburg, Sweden.

Vaccines against enteric diseases could improve global health. Despite this, 
only a few oral vaccines are currently available for human use. One way to 
facilitate such vaccine development could be to identify a practical and 
relatively low cost biomarker assay to assess oral vaccine induced primary and 
memory IgA immune responses in humans. Such an IgA biomarker assay could 
complement antigen-specific immune response measurements, enabling more oral 
vaccine candidates to be tested, whilst also reducing the work and costs 
associated with early oral vaccine development. With this in mind, we take a 
holistic systems biology approach to compare the transcriptional signatures of 
peripheral blood mononuclear cells isolated from volunteers, who following two 
oral priming doses with the oral cholera vaccine Dukoral®, had either strong or 
no vaccine specific IgA responses. Using this bioinformatical method, we 
identify TNFRSF17, a gene encoding the B cell maturation antigen (BCMA), as a 
candidate biomarker of oral vaccine induced IgA immune responses. We then assess 
the ability of BCMA to reflect oral vaccine induced primary and memory IgA 
responses using an ELISA BCMA assay on a larger number of samples collected in 
clinical trials with Dukoral® and the oral enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli 
vaccine candidate ETVAX. We find significant correlations between levels of BCMA 
and vaccine antigen-specific IgA in antibodies in lymphocyte secretion (ALS) 
specimens, as well as with proportions of circulating plasmablasts detected by 
flow cytometry. Importantly, our results suggest that levels of BCMA detected 
early after primary mucosal vaccination may be a biomarker for induction of 
long-lived vaccine specific memory B cell responses, which are otherwise 
difficult to measure in clinical vaccine trials. In addition, we find that 
ALS-BCMA responses in individuals vaccinated with ETVAX plus the adjuvant double 
mutant heat-labile toxin (dmLT) are significantly higher than in subjects given 
ETVAX only. We therefore propose that as ALS-BCMA responses may reflect the 
total vaccine induced IgA responses to oral vaccination, this BCMA ELISA assay 
could also be used to estimate the total adjuvant effect on vaccine 
induced-antibody responses, independently of antigen specificity, further 
supporting the usefulness of the assay.

Copyright © 2021 Mottram, Lundgren, Svennerholm and Leach.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.647873
PMCID: PMC8019727
PMID: 33828557 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.