1. Curr Med Mycol. 2020 Sep;6(3):73-78. doi: 10.18502/cmm.6.3.4500.

Generalized exfoliative skin rash as an early predictor of supratherapeutic 
voriconazole trough levels in a leukemic child: A case report.

Amanati A(1), Badiee P(1), Lotfi M(2), Monabati A(3), Faghihi MA(4)(5), Yavarian 
M(5)(6), Hatami Mazinani N(7).

Author information:
(1)Professor Alborzi Clinical Microbiology Research Center, Shiraz University of 
Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.
(2)Medical Imaging Research Center, Department of Radiology, Shiraz University 
of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.
(3)Department of Hematopathology, Molecular Pathology and Cytogenetics, Shiraz 
University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.
(4)Center for Therapeutic Innovation, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral 
Sciences, University of Miami, Miami, USA.
(5)Persian Bayan Gene Research and Training Center, Shiraz, Iran.
(6)Hematology Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, 
Iran.
(7)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, School of Pharmacy, Shiraz University of 
Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Skin rashes, mostly seen in children and adolescents, 
are considered among the most common side effects of azole antifungals. Although 
therapeutic concentrations of voriconazole (VCZ) have been documented for 
infected skin, there is no evidence specifying whether specific dermatologic 
side effects could predict high VCZ serum concentration, especially in high-risk 
leukemic children.
CASE REPORT: Herein, we report a unique skin side effect of VCZ in a 5-year-old 
boy with T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) referred to Amir Medical 
Oncology Center in Shiraz, Iran. The patient experienced erythroderma and 
macular rashes shortly after VCZ consumption, leading to generalized exfoliative 
skin rashes. Concurrent to these skin manifestations, VCZ serum concentration 
reached the supratherapeutic levels despite the recommended VCZ doses. As a 
result, VCZ was withheld, and the patient was treated with caspofungin. The 
lesions were resolved gradually within 2 weeks, and the patient successfully 
completed his treatment course with caspofungin.
CONCLUSION: The unique case presented in this study emphasizes the need for a 
high index of suspicion for VCZ toxicity in any patient with atypical 
dermatologic manifestations, especially generalized exfoliative skin rashes. 
Based on this report, VCZ supratherapeutic concentration could be predicted 
early in the course of treatment. Additional therapeutic dose monitoring should 
be considered to establish a confirmatory diagnosis. It is required to further 
investigate the toxic effect of high VCZ concentration on the skin epithelium.

Copyright: © 2020, Published by Mazandaran University of Medical Sciences on 
behalf of Iranian Society of Medical Mycology and Invasive Fungi Research 
Center.

DOI: 10.18502/cmm.6.3.4500
PMCID: PMC8018824
PMID: 33834148