1. Nutr J. 2021 Apr 10;20(1):35. doi: 10.1186/s12937-021-00694-5.

Effects of supplementation with main coffee components including caffeine and/or 
chlorogenic acid on hepatic, metabolic, and inflammatory indices in patients 
with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease and type 2 diabetes: a randomized, 
double-blind, placebo-controlled, clinical trial.

Mansour A(1), Mohajeri-Tehrani MR(2), Samadi M(3), Qorbani M(4)(5), Merat S(6), 
Adibi H(7), Poustchi H(6), Hekmatdoost A(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Nutrition & Dietetics, Faculty of Nutrition Sciences 
and Food Technology, National Nutrition and Food Technology Research Institute, 
Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Endocrinology and Metabolism Research Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism 
Clinical Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, 
Iran.
(3)Radiology Department, Shariati Hospital, Tehran University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Non-communicable Diseases Research Center, Alborz University of Medical 
Sciences, Karaj, Iran.
(5)Chronic Diseases Research Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism Population 
Sciences Institute, Endocrinology and Metabolism Research Institute, Tehran 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(6)Liver and Pancreatobiliary Diseases Research Center, Digestive Diseases 
Research Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(7)Diabetes Research Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism Clinical Sciences 
Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(8)Department of Clinical Nutrition & Dietetics, Faculty of Nutrition Sciences 
and Food Technology, National Nutrition and Food Technology Research Institute, 
Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. 
a_hekmat2000@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is much more frequent and 
more severe, including cirrhosis, hepatocellular carcinoma in patients with type 
2 diabetes. Coffee is a complex beverage with hundreds of compounds whereas 
caffeine and chlorogenic acid are the most abundant bioactive compounds. The 
published epidemiological data demonstrating beneficial associations between all 
categories of coffee exposure and ranges of liver outcomes are rapidly growing; 
however, the main contributors and cause-effect relationships have not yet been 
elucidated. To address existing knowledge gaps, we sought to determine the 
efficacy and safety of 6 months chlorogenic acid and/or caffeine supplementation 
in patients with type 2 diabetes affected by NAFLD.
METHODS: This trial was carried out at two Diabetes Centers to assess the 
effects of supplementation with daily doses of 200 mg chlorogenic acid, 200 mg 
caffeine, 200 mg chlorogenic acid plus 200 mg caffeine or placebo (starch) in 
patients with type 2 diabetes and NAFLD. The primary endpoint was reduction of 
hepatic fat and stiffness measured by FibroScan, and changes in serum hepatic 
enzymes and cytokeratin - 18 (CK-18) levels. Secondary endpoints were 
improvements in metabolic (including fasting glucose, homeostasis model 
assessment-estimated insulin resistance (HOMA-IR), hemoglobin A1c (HBA1C), 
C-peptide, insulin and lipid profiles) and inflammatory (including nuclear 
factor k-B (NF-KB), tumor necrosis factor (TNF-α), high sensitive- C reactive 
protein(hs-CRP)) parameters from baseline to the end of treatment.
RESULTS: Neither chlorogenic acid nor caffeine was superior to placebo in 
attenuation of the hepatic fat and stiffness and other hepatic outcomes in 
patients with diabetes and NAFLD. Except for the lower level of total 
cholesterol in caffeine group (p = 0.04), and higher level of insulin in 
chlorogenic acid plus caffeine group (p = 0.01) compared with placebo, there 
were no significant differences among the treatment groups.
CONCLUSION: These findings do not recommend caffeine and/or chlorogenic acid to 
treat NAFLD in type 2 diabetes patients.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: IRCT201707024010N21 . Registered 14 September 2017.

DOI: 10.1186/s12937-021-00694-5
PMCID: PMC8037901
PMID: 33838673 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None of the authors have any conflicts of 
interest or financial ties to disclose.