1. Front Plant Sci. 2021 Mar 24;12:658456. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2021.658456. 
eCollection 2021.

Final Selection of Quality Protein Popcorn Hybrids.

Parsons L(1)(2), Ren Y(1)(2), Yobi A(3), Angelovici R(3), Rodriguez O(4), 
Holding DR(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Agronomy and Horticulture, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, 
Lincoln, NE, United States.
(2)Center for Plant Science Innovation - Beadle Center for Biotechnology, 
University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE, United States.
(3)Division of Biological Sciences and Interdisciplinary Plant Group, University 
of Missouri, Columbia, MO, United States.
(4)ConAgra Brands, Springfield, IN, United States.

Quality Protein Popcorn (QPP) BC2F5 inbred lines were produced through an 
interpopulation breeding system between Quality Protein Maize dent (QPM) and 
elite popcorn germplasm. In 2019, five QPP F1 hybrids were selected for further 
evaluation due to superior agronomics, endosperm protein quality, and popping 
quality traits. Though these BC2F5 QPP hybrids were phenotypically similar to 
their popcorn parents, the QPP cultivars conveyed slightly inferior popping 
characteristics when compared to the original popcorn germplasm. The objective 
of this study was twofold. First, BC2F5 inbred lines were crossed to their 
popcorn parents and BC3F4 inbred lines were produced for hybridization to test 
the agronomic, protein, and popping trait effects from an additional QPP by 
popcorn backcross. Second, BC2- and BC3-hybrids were simultaneously evaluated 
alongside ConAgra Brands® elite cultivars and ranked for potential 
commercialization in the spring of 2020. These 10 QPP hybrids were grown 
alongside five ConAgra Brands® elite popcorn cultivars in three locations and 
agronomic, protein quality, and popping quality traits were evaluated. 
Significant improvements in popcorn quality traits were observed in the QPP BC3 
cultivars compared to their BC2 counterparts, and yield averages were 
significantly lower in BC3-derived QPP hybrids compared to the BC2 population. 
Protein quality traits were not significantly different between QPP backcrossing 
populations and significantly superior to ConAgra elite popcorn varieties. 
Utilizing a previously published ranking system, six QPP hybrids, three from the 
BC2F5 population and three from the BC3F4 population, were evaluated as 
candidates for final selection. The successful evaluation and ranking system 
methodology employed is transferable to other hybrid production and testing 
programs. Incorporating this analysis with concurrent sensory studies, two QPP 
hybrids were chosen as premier cultivars for potential commercialization.

Copyright © 2021 Parsons, Ren, Yobi, Angelovici, Rodriguez and Holding.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2021.658456
PMCID: PMC8025670
PMID: 33841483

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that this study received 
funding from ConAgra Brands®. Moreover, OR was employed by the company ConAgra 
Brands®. The funder was not involved in the study design, collection, analysis, 
interpretation of data, the writing of this article, or the decision to submit 
it for publication. The remaining authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.