1. Neural Plast. 2021 Mar 29;2021:8834645. doi: 10.1155/2021/8834645. eCollection
 2021.

Molecular Factors Mediating Neural Cell Plasticity Changes in Dementia Brain 
Diseases.

Kozubski W(1), Ong K(2), Waleszczyk W(3), Zabel M(4), Dorszewska J(5).

Author information:
(1)Chair and Department of Neurology, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, 
Poland.
(2)General Medicine Department, Armadale Health Service, Mount Nasura, 
Australia.
(3)Laboratory of Visual Neurobiology, Department of Neurophysiology, Nencki 
Institute of Experimental Biology, PAS, Warsaw, Poland.
(4)College of Medicine, California Northstate University, CA, USA.
(5)Laboratory of Neurobiology, Department of Neurology, Poznan University of 
Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland.

Neural plasticity-the ability to alter a neuronal response to environmental 
stimuli-is an important factor in learning and memory. Short-term synaptic 
plasticity and long-term synaptic plasticity, including long-term potentiation 
and long-term depression, are the most-characterized models of learning and 
memory at the molecular and cellular level. These processes are often disrupted 
by neurodegeneration-induced dementias. Alzheimer's disease (AD) accounts for 
50% of cases of dementia. Vascular dementia (VaD), Parkinson's disease dementia 
(PDD), dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), and frontotemporal dementia (FTD) 
constitute much of the remaining cases. While vascular lesions are the principal 
cause of VaD, neurodegenerative processes have been established as etiological 
agents of many dementia diseases. Chief among such processes is the deposition 
of pathological protein aggregates in vivo including β-amyloid deposition in AD, 
the formation of neurofibrillary tangles in AD and FTD, and the accumulation of 
Lewy bodies composed of α-synuclein aggregates in DLB and PDD. The main symptoms 
of dementia are cognitive decline and memory and learning impairment. 
Nonetheless, accurate diagnoses of neurodegenerative diseases can be difficult 
due to overlapping clinical symptoms and the diverse locations of cortical 
lesions. Still, new neuroimaging and molecular biomarkers have improved 
clinicians' diagnostic capabilities in the context of dementia and may lead to 
the development of more effective treatments. Both genetic and environmental 
factors may lead to the aggregation of pathological proteins and altered levels 
of cytokines, such that can trigger the formation of proinflammatory 
immunological phenotypes. This cascade of pathological changes provides fertile 
ground for the development of neural plasticity disorders and dementias. 
Available pharmacotherapy and disease-modifying therapies currently in clinical 
trials may modulate synaptic plasticity to mitigate the effects 
neuropathological changes have on cognitive function, memory, and learning. In 
this article, we review the neural plasticity changes seen in common 
neurodegenerative diseases from pathophysiological and clinical points of view 
and highlight potential molecular targets of disease-modifying therapies.

Copyright © 2021 Wojciech Kozubski et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/8834645
PMCID: PMC8021472
PMID: 33854544 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.