1. Neoplasia. 2021 May;23(5):473-487. doi: 10.1016/j.neo.2021.03.008. Epub 2021
Apr  18.

SalvGlandDx - a comprehensive salivary gland neoplasm specific next generation 
sequencing panel to facilitate diagnosis and identify therapeutic targets.

Freiberger SN(1), Brada M(1), Fritz C(1), Höller S(1), Vogetseder A(2), Horcic 
M(3), Bihl M(4), Michal M(5), Lanzer M(6), Wartenberg M(7), Borner U(8), Bode 
PK(1), Broglie MA(9), Rordorf T(10), Morand GB(11), Rupp NJ(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Pathology, University Hospital Zurich, 
Zurich, Switzerland; University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Pathology, Cantonal Hospital of Lucerne, Lucerne, Switzerland.
(3)Institute for Histological and Cytological Diagnostics AG, Aarau, 
Switzerland.
(4)Department of Pathology and Medical Genetics, University Hospital Basel, 
Basel, Switzerland.
(5)Sikl's Department of Pathology, Medical Faculty in Pilsen, Charles University 
in Prague, Pilsen, Czech Republic; Bioptical Laboratory, Pilsen, Czech Republic.
(6)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, University Hospital Zurich, 
Zurich, Switzerland; University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(7)Institute of Pathology, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(8)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Inselspital, Bern 
University Hospital and University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(9)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University Hospital 
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland; University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(10)Department of Medical Oncology, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, 
Switzerland; University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(11)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University 
Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland; Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck 
Surgery, Sir Mortimer B. Davis- Jewish General Hospital, McGill University, 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada; University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(12)Department of Pathology and Molecular Pathology, University Hospital Zurich, 
Zurich, Switzerland; University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. Electronic 
address: niels.rupp@usz.ch.

Diagnosis of salivary gland neoplasms is often challenging due to their high 
morphological diversity and overlaps. Several recurrent molecular alterations 
have been described recently, which can serve as powerful diagnostic tools and 
potential therapeutic targets (e.g. NTRK or RET fusions). However, current 
sequential molecular testing can be expensive and time consuming. In order to 
facilitate the diagnosis of salivary gland neoplasms, we designed an all-in-one 
RNA-based next generation sequencing panel suitable for the detection of 
mutations, fusions and gene expression levels (including NR4A3) of 27 genes 
involved in salivary gland neoplasms. Here we present the validation of the 
"SalvGlandDx" panel on FFPE histological specimen including fine needle 
aspiration (FNA) cell block material, against the standard methods currently 
used at our institution. In a second part we describe selected unique cases in 
which the SalvGlandDx panel allowed proper diagnosis and new insights into 
special molecular characteristics of selected salivary gland tumors. We 
characterize a unique salivary gland adenocarcinoma harboring a ZCCHC7-NTRK2 
fusion, a highly uncommon spindle cell and pseudoangiomatoid adenoid-cystic 
carcinoma with MYBL1-NFIB fusion, and a purely oncocytic mucoepidermoid 
carcinoma, whereas diagnosis could be made by detection of a CRTC3-MAML2 
rearrangement on the cell block specimen of the FNA. Further, a rare case of a 
SS18-ZBTB7A rearranged low-grade adenocarcinoma previously described as 
potential spectrum of microsecretory adenocarcinoma, is reported. In addition, 
features of six cases within the spectrum of polymorphous adenocarcinoma / 
cribriform adenocarcinoma of salivary gland including PRKD1 p.E710D mutations 
and novel fusions involving PRKAR2A-PRKD1, SNX9-PRKD1 and ATL2-PRKD3, are 
described.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neo.2021.03.008
PMCID: PMC8081865
PMID: 33878706 [Indexed for MEDLINE]