1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2021 Dec;148(6):1559-1574.e13. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaci.2021.04.006. Epub 2021 Apr 17.

Mechanistic understanding of the combined immunodeficiency in complete human 
CARD11 deficiency.

Lu HY(1), Sharma M(1), Sharma AA(2), Lacson A(3), Szpurko A(4), Luider J(5), 
Dharmani-Khan P(5), Shameli A(5), Bell PA(6), Guilcher GMT(4), Lewis VA(4), 
Vasquez MR(7), Desai S(7), McGonigle L(8), Murguia-Favela L(9), Wright NAM(9), 
Sergi C(3), Wine E(10), Overall CM(6), Suresh S(7), Turvey SE(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, British Columbia Children's Hospital, The 
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada; 
Experimental Medicine Program, Faculty of Medicine, The University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(2)Department of Pathology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio; 
Department of Pathology, Emory University, Atlanta, Ga.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Alberta, 
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(4)Section of Oncology/Bone Marrow Therapy, Departments of Oncology and 
Pediatrics, Alberta Children's Hospital, University of Calgary, Calgary, 
Alberta, Canada.
(5)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Calgary, 
Alberta Precision Laboratories, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(6)Centre for Blood Research, The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, 
British Columbia, Canada; Department of Oral Biological and Medical Sciences, 
Faculty of Dentistry, The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British 
Columbia, Canada.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Immunology, Hematology, Oncology and 
Palliative Care (iHOPE), University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Division of General and Community Pediatrics, 
University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(9)Section of Pediatric Hematology-Immunology, Department of Pediatrics, Alberta 
Children's Hospital, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(10)Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Department of 
Pediatrics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(11)Department of Pediatrics, British Columbia Children's Hospital, The 
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada; 
Experimental Medicine Program, Faculty of Medicine, The University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. Electronic address: 
sturvey@cw.bc.ca.

BACKGROUND: Germline pathogenic variants impairing the caspase recruitment 
domain family member 11 (CARD11)-B cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia/lymphoma 10 
(BCL10)-MALT1 paracaspase (MALT1) (CBM) complex are associated with diverse 
human diseases including combined immunodeficiency (CID), atopy, and 
lymphoproliferation. However, the impact of CARD11 deficiency on human B-cell 
development, signaling, and function is incompletely understood.
OBJECTIVES: This study sought to determine the cellular, immunological, and 
biochemical basis of disease for 2 unrelated patients who presented with 
profound CID associated with viral and fungal respiratory infections, 
interstitial lung disease, and severe colitis.
METHODS: Patients underwent next-generation sequencing, immunophenotyping by 
flow cytometry, signaling assays by immunoblot, and transcriptome profiling by 
RNA-sequencing.
RESULTS: Both patients carried identical novel pathogenic biallelic 
loss-of-function variants in CARD11 (c.2509C>T; p.Arg837∗) leading to 
undetectable protein expression. This variant prevented CBM complex formation, 
severely impairing the activation of nuclear factor-κB, c-Jun N-terminal kinase, 
and MALT1 paracaspase activity in B and T cells. This functional defect resulted 
in a developmental block in B cells at the naive and type 1 transitional B-cell 
stage and impaired circulating T follicular helper cell (cTFH) development, 
which was associated with impaired antibody responses and absent germinal center 
structures on lymph node histology. Transcriptomics indicated that 
CARD11-dependent signaling is essential for immune signaling pathways involved 
in the development of these cells. Both patients underwent hematopoietic stem 
cell transplantations, which led to functional normalization.
CONCLUSIONS: Complete human CARD11 deficiency causes profound CID by impairing 
naive/type 1 B-cell and cTFH cell development and abolishing activation of MALT1 
paracaspase, NF-κB, and JNK activity. Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation 
functionally restores impaired signaling pathways.

Copyright © 2021 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2021.04.006
PMID: 33872653 [Indexed for MEDLINE]