1. Mol Metab. 2021 Aug;50:101238. doi: 10.1016/j.molmet.2021.101238. Epub 2021
Apr  20.

Metabolic-associated fatty liver disease and lipoprotein metabolism.

Heeren J(1), Scheja L(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Cell Biology, University Medical 
Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. Electronic address: heeren@uke.de.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Cell Biology, University Medical 
Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. Electronic address: l.scheja@uke.de.

BACKGROUND: Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, or as recently proposed 
'metabolic-associated fatty liver disease' (MAFLD), is characterized by 
pathological accumulation of triglycerides and other lipids in hepatocytes. This 
common disease can progress from simple steatosis to steatohepatitis, and 
eventually end-stage liver diseases. MAFLD is closely related to disturbances in 
systemic energy metabolism, including insulin resistance and atherogenic 
dyslipidemia.
SCOPE OF REVIEW: The liver is the central organ in lipid metabolism by secreting 
very low density lipoproteins (VLDL) and, on the other hand, by internalizing 
fatty acids and lipoproteins. This review article discusses recent research 
addressing hepatic lipid synthesis, VLDL production, and lipoprotein 
internalization as well as the lipid exchange between adipose tissue and the 
liver in the context of MAFLD.
MAJOR CONCLUSIONS: Liver steatosis in MAFLD is triggered by excessive hepatic 
triglyceride synthesis utilizing fatty acids derived from white adipose tissue 
(WAT), de novo lipogenesis (DNL) and endocytosed remnants of triglyceride-rich 
lipoproteins. In consequence of high hepatic lipid content, VLDL secretion is 
enhanced, which is the primary cause of complex dyslipidemia typical for 
subjects with MAFLD. Interventions reducing VLDL secretory capacity attenuate 
dyslipidemia while they exacerbate MAFLD, indicating that the balance of lipid 
storage versus secretion in hepatocytes is a critical parameter determining 
disease outcome. Proof of concept studies have shown that promoting lipid 
storage and energy combustion in adipose tissues reduces hepatic lipid load and 
thus ameliorates MAFLD. Moreover, hepatocellular triglyceride synthesis from DNL 
and WAT-derived fatty acids can be targeted to treat MAFLD. However, more 
research is needed to understand how individual transporters, enzymes, and their 
isoforms affect steatosis and dyslipidemia in vivo, and whether these two 
aspects of MAFLD can be selectively treated. Processing of cholesterol-enriched 
lipoproteins appears less important for steatosis. It may, however, modulate 
inflammation and consequently MAFLD progression.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier GmbH.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molmet.2021.101238
PMCID: PMC8324684
PMID: 33892169 [Indexed for MEDLINE]