1. PLoS One. 2021 Apr 23;16(4):e0250075. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0250075. 
eCollection 2021.

Gut microbiota of endangered crested ibis: Establishment, diversity, and 
association with reproductive output.

Ran J(1), Wan QH(1), Fang SG(1).

Author information:
(1)MOE Key Laboratory of Biosystems Homeostasis & Protection, State Conservation 
Centre for Gene Resources of Endangered Wildlife, College of Life Sciences, 
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, P. R. China.

Gut microbiota is known to influence the host's health; an imbalance of the gut 
microbial community leads to various intestinal and non-intestinal diseases. 
Research on gut microbes of endangered birds is vital for their conservation. 
However, a thorough understanding of the gut microbiome composition present in 
crested ibises at different ages and its correlation with crested ibis 
reproductive capacity has remained elusive. Here, we used 16S rRNA gene 
sequencing to explore the fecal microbial structure of nestlings and adult 
birds, and the difference in gut microbiota between healthy and sterile crested 
ibises. We observed that (1) bacterial microbiota, alpha and beta diversity of 
one-day-old nestlings significantly distinguished from other nestlings; 
abundance of Proteobacteria decreased, while that of Fusobacteria increased with 
an increase in the age of the nestlings; (2) there was no significant difference 
in community composition among adult crested ibises aged one, two, three, and 
five years; (3) the abundance of Proteobacteria and alpha diversity indices were 
higher in sterile crested ibises than in healthy crested ibises; thus, 
Proteobacteria can act as a diagnostic biomarker of reproductive dysfunction in 
crested ibises. This study significantly contributes to the field of ecology and 
conservation, as it provides a platform for assessing the reproductive capacity 
of endangered crested ibises, based on the gut microbiota composition. Further 
studies may unravel additional factors influencing crested ibises' reproductive 
health, which will further help the management and control of the crested ibis 
population.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0250075
PMCID: PMC8064547
PMID: 33891612 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.