1. Prostate Int. 2021 Mar;9(1):25-30. doi: 10.1016/j.prnil.2020.06.003. Epub 2020
 Jul 30.

Prostate cancer trajectory-map: clinical decision support system for prognosis 
management of radical prostatectomy.

Park J(1)(2), Rho MJ(2), Moon HW(3), Park YH(3), Kim CS(4), Jeon SS(5), Kang 
M(5), Lee JY(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedicine & Health Sciences, College of Medicine, The 
Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Catholic Cancer Research Institute, College of Medicine, The Catholic 
University of Korea, Seoul, Korea.
(3)Department of Urology, Seoul St. Mary's Hospital, College of Medicine, The 
Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea.
(4)Department of Urology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of 
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(5)Department of Urology, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School 
of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

PURPOSE: Prostate cancer has a low mortality rate and requires persistent 
treatment; however, treatment decisions are challenging. Because prostate cancer 
is complex, the outcomes warrant thorough follow-up evaluation for appropriate 
treatment. Electronic health records (EHRs) do not present intuitive 
information. This study aimed to develop a Clinical Decision Support System 
(CDSS) for prognosis management of radical prostatectomy.
METHODS: We used data from 5,199 prostate cancer patients from three hospitals' 
EHRs in South Korea, comprising laboratory results, surgery, medication, and 
radiation therapy. We used open source R for data preprocessing and development 
of web-based visualization system. We also used R for automatic calculation 
functionalities of two factors to visualize the data, e.g., Prostate-Specific 
Antigen Doubling Time (PSADT), and four Biochemical Recurrence (BCR) 
definitions: American Society of Therapeutic Radiology and Oncology (ASTRO), 
Phoenix, consecutive PSA > 0.2 ng/mL, and PSA > 0.2 ng/mL.
RESULTS: We developed the Prostate Cancer Trajectory Map (PCT-Map) as a CDSS for 
intuitive visualization of serial data of PSA, testosterone, surgery, 
medication, radiation therapy, BCR, and PSADT.
CONCLUSIONS: The PCT-Map comprises functionalities for BCR and PSADT and 
calculates and visualizes the newly added patient data automatically in a 
PCT-Map data format, thus optimizing the visualization of patient data and 
allowing clinicians to promptly access patient data to decide the appropriate 
treatment.

© 2020 Asian Pacific Prostate Society. Published services by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.prnil.2020.06.003
PMCID: PMC8053691
PMID: 33912511

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.