1. BMC Infect Dis. 2021 Apr 29;21(1):394. doi: 10.1186/s12879-021-06069-9.

Five-year microevolution of a multidrug-resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
strain within a patient with inadequate compliance to treatment.

Fernandez Do Porto DA(#)(1)(2), Monteserin J(#)(3)(4), Campos J(3), Sosa EJ(5), 
Matteo M(6), Serral F(1), Yokobori N(3)(4), Benevento AF(5), Poklepovich T(3), 
Pardo A(1)(5), Wainmayer I(3), Simboli N(3), Castello F(1), Paul R(3), Martí 
M(2)(5), López B(3), Turjanski A(7)(8), Ritacco V(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Cálculo, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, Universidad 
de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(2)Departamento de Química Biológica, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, 
Universidad de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(3)Instituto Nacional de Enfermedades Infecciosas-ANLIS Carlos Malbrán, Buenos 
Aires, Argentina.
(4)Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), Buenos 
Aires, Argentina.
(5)Instituto de Química Biológica de la Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y 
Naturales, IQUIBICEN, CONICET, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(6)Instituto de Tisioneumonología Raúl F. Vaccarezza, Hospital de Infecciosas 
Dr. F. J. Muñiz, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(7)Departamento de Química Biológica, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, 
Universidad de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina. aturjans@gmail.com.
(8)Instituto de Química Biológica de la Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y 
Naturales, IQUIBICEN, CONICET, Buenos Aires, Argentina. aturjans@gmail.com.
(9)Instituto Nacional de Enfermedades Infecciosas-ANLIS Carlos Malbrán, Buenos 
Aires, Argentina. vivianaritacco@gmail.com.
(10)Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), Buenos 
Aires, Argentina. vivianaritacco@gmail.com.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Whole-genome sequencing has shown that the Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis infection process can be more heterogeneous than previously 
thought. Compartmentalized infections, exogenous reinfections, and 
microevolution are manifestations of this clonal complexity. The analysis of the 
mechanisms causing the microevolution -the genetic variability of M. 
tuberculosis at short time scales- of a parental strain into clonal variants 
with a patient is a relevant issue that has not been yet completely addressed. 
To our knowledge, a whole genome sequence microevolution analysis in a single 
patient with inadequate adherence to treatment has not been previously reported.
CASE PRESENTATION: In this work, we applied whole genome sequencing analysis for 
a more in-depth analysis of the microevolution of a parental Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis strain into clonal variants within a patient with poor treatment 
compliance in Argentina. We analyzed the whole-genome sequence of 8 consecutive 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis isolates obtained from a patient within 57-months of 
intermittent therapy. Nineteen mutations (9 short-term, 10 fixed variants) 
emerged, most of them associated with drug resistance. The first isolate was 
already resistant to isoniazid, rifampicin, and streptomycin, thereafter the 
strain developed resistance to fluoroquinolones and pyrazinamide. Surprisingly, 
isolates remained susceptible to the pro-drug ethionamide after acquiring a 
frameshift mutation in ethA, a gene required for its activation. We also found a 
novel variant, (T-54G), in the 5' untranslated region of whiB7 (T-54G), a region 
allegedly related to kanamycin resistance. Notably, discrepancies between 
canonical and phage-based susceptibility testing to kanamycin were previously 
found for the isolate harboring this mutation. In our patient, microevolution 
was mainly driven by drug selective pressure. Rare short-term mutations fixed 
together with resistance-conferring mutations during therapy.
CONCLUSIONS: This report highlights the relevance of whole-genome sequencing 
analysis in the clinic for characterization of pre-XDR and MDR resistance 
profile, particularly in patients with incomplete and/or intermittent treatment.

DOI: 10.1186/s12879-021-06069-9
PMCID: PMC8082761
PMID: 33926375 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests