1. Mol Oncol. 2021 Sep;15(9):2401-2411. doi: 10.1002/1878-0261.12972. Epub 2021
Jun  22.

Monitoring levels of circulating cell-free DNA in patients with metastatic 
colorectal cancer as a potential biomarker of responses to regorafenib 
treatment.

Pastor B(1), André T(2)(3), Henriques J(4), Trouilloud I(2)(3), Tournigand 
C(3)(5), Jary M(3)(6)(7), Mazard T(1)(8), Louvet C(3)(9), Azan S(1), Bauer A(1), 
Roch B(1)(10), Sanchez C(1), Vernerey D(3)(4), Thierry AR(1)(8), Adenis A(1)(8).

Author information:
(1)Institut de Recherche en Cancérologie de Montpellier (IRCM), INSERM, 
Université de Montpellier, Montpellier Cancer Institute (ICM), France.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, Saint-Antoine University Hospital, Sorbonne 
University, Paris, France.
(3)Oncology Multidisciplinary Research Group (GERCOR), Paris, France.
(4)Methodology and Quality of Life Unit in Oncology, Besançon University 
Hospital, France.
(5)Medical Oncology Service, Henri Mondor Hospital, AP-HP, Université Paris Est 
Créteil Créteil, France.
(6)INSERM, Etablissement Français du Sang Bourgogne Franche-Comté, UMR1098, 
Interactions Hôte-Greffon-Tumeur/Ingénierie Cellulaire et Génique, Bourgogne 
Franche-Comté University, Besançon, France.
(7)Department of Medical Oncology, Besançon University Hospital, France.
(8)Department of Medical Oncology, Montpellier Cancer Institute (ICM), France.
(9)Department of Medical Oncology, Institut Monsouris, Paris, France.
(10)Department of Thoracic Oncology, Montpellier University Hospital, Université 
de Montpellier, France.

Circulating cell-free DNA (cfDNA) contains circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA), which 
can be obtained from serial liquid biopsies to enable tumor genome analysis 
throughout the course of treatment. We investigated cfDNA and mutant ctDNA as 
potential biomarkers to predict the best outcomes of regorafenib-treated 
metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC) patients. We analyzed longitudinally 
collected plasma cfDNA of 43 mCRC patients prospectively enrolled in the phase 
II TEXCAN trial by IntPlex qPCR. Qualitative (KRAS, NRAS, BRAFV600E mutations) 
and quantitative (total cfDNA concentration, mutant ctDNA concentration, mutant 
ctDNA fraction) parameters were correlated with overall survival (OS) and 
progression-free survival (PFS). When examined as classes or continuous 
variables, the concentrations of total cfDNA, mutant ctDNA, and, partly, mutant 
ctDNA fraction prior to regorafenib treatment correlated with OS. Patients with 
baseline cfDNA > 26 ng·mL-1 had shorter OS than those with cfDNA value below 
this threshold (4.0 vs 6.9 months; log-rank P = 0.0366). Patients with baseline 
mutant ctDNA > 2 ng·mL-1 had shorter OS than those with mutant ctDNA below this 
threshold (log-rank P = 0.0154). We show that pretreatment cfDNA and mutant 
ctDNA levels may identify mCRC patients that may benefit from regorafenib 
treatment.

© 2021 The Authors. Published by FEBS Press and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/1878-0261.12972
PMCID: PMC8410523
PMID: 33934494 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: TA has served in a consulting/advisory role 
and/or received honoraria from Amgen, Bristol‐Myers Squibb, Chugai, Clovis, 
Gritstone Oncology, Haliodx, MSD Oncology, Pierre Fabre, Roche/Ventana, Sanofi, 
Servier, and Tesaro/GSK, and has received travel, accommodation, and expenses 
from Roche/Genentech, MSD Oncology, and Bristol‐Myers Squibb. MJ has received 
travel, accommodation, and expenses from Roche/Genentech, and Pfizer. DV has 
reported a consulting role for GERCOR, HalioDX, Incyte, OSE Immunotherapeutics, 
Janssen‐Cilag, Pfizer, and CellProthera. CT has received travel expenses from 
Roche, Servier, Bayer, and BMS; has received research funding from Bayer; and 
has reported advisory board fees from Bayer, Roche, and Amgen. CL has reported a 
consulting/advisory role and receiving honoraria from MSD, Halozyme, Roche, 
Celgene, Amgen, and Servier, and has received travel accommodation from MSD and 
Roche. ART is a DiaDx stockholder. TM has disclosed research funding from Roche 
and Amgen; has received honoraria from Amgen, Sanofi, Bristol‐Myers Squibb, and 
Sandoz; has reported travel, accommodation, and expenses from Amgen and Merck. 
AA has reported a consulting/advisory role and/or receiving honoraria from 
Bristol‐Myers Squibb, MSD Oncology, and Servier; and has received research 
funding from Bayer Pharmaceuticals. All remaining authors have declared no 
conflicts of interest.