1. United European Gastroenterol J. 2021 Apr;9(3):307-331. doi:
10.1002/ueg2.12061.

United European Gastroenterology (UEG) and European Society for 
Neurogastroenterology and Motility (ESNM) consensus on functional dyspepsia.

Wauters L(1), Dickman R(2), Drug V(3), Mulak A(4), Serra J(5), Enck P(6), Tack 
J(1); ESNM FD Consensus Group; Accarino A(7), Barbara G(8), Bor S(9), Coffin 
B(10), Corsetti M(11), De Schepper H(12), Dumitrascu D(13), Farmer A(14), 
Gourcerol G(15), Hauser G(16), Hausken T(17), Karamanolis G(18), Keszthelyi 
D(19), Malagelada C(7), Milosavljevic T(20), Muris J(21), O'Morain C(22), 
Papathanasopoulos A(23), Pohl D(24), Rumyantseva D(25), Sarnelli G(26), Savarino 
E(27), Schol J(1), Sheptulin A(25), Smet A(28), Stengel A(29)(30)(31)(32), 
Storonova O(25), Storr M(30), Törnblom H(33), Vanuytsel T(1), Velosa M(34), 
Waluga M(35), Zarate N(36), Zerbib F(37).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Hospitals Leuven, 
Leuven, Belgium.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology, Rabin Medical Center, Beilinson Hospital, 
Petach Tikwa, Israel.
(3)University of Medicine and Pharmacy Gr T Popa Iasi and University Hospital St 
Spiridon, Iasi, Romania.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Wroclaw Medical University, 
Wroclaw, Poland.
(5)University Hospital Germans Trias I Pujol and Centro de Investigación 
Biomédica en Red de enfermedades Hepáticas y Digestivas (CIBERehd), Badalona, 
Spain.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine VI: Psychosomatic Medicine and Psychotherapy, 
University Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(7)CIBERehd and Departament de Medicina, Digestive System Research Unit, 
University Hospital Vall D'Hebron, Barcelona, Spain.
(8)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, University of Bologna, Bologna, 
Italy.
(9)Division of Gastroenterology, School of Medicine, Ege University, Izmir, 
Turkey.
(10)Université de Paris and AP-HP Hôpital Louis Mourier, Paris, France.
(11)NIHR Nottingham Biomedical Research Centre (BRC), Hospitals NHS Trust and 
the University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.
(12)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Hospital Antwerp, 
Antwerp, Belgium.
(13)2nd Department of Internal Medicine, Iuliu Hatieganu University of Medicine 
and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
(14)Wingate Institute of Neurogastroenterology, Barts and London School of 
Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, London, UK.
(15)Physiology Department, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France.
(16)Medical Faculty Rijeka, University of Rijeka and Clinical Hospital Centre 
Rijeka, Rijeka, Croatia.
(17)Department of Gastroenterology, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, 
Norway.
(18)Gastroentrology Unit, Aretaieio Hospital, National and Kapodistrian 
University of Athens, Athens, Greece.
(19)Division of Gastroenterology-Hepatology, Maastricht University Medical 
Center, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(20)Department of Gastroenterology, Euromedik Hospital Belgrade, Belgrade, 
Serbia.
(21)Department of General Practice, Caphri Institute, Maastricht University, 
Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(22)Department of Medicine, Trinity College Dublin and National Clinical Lead 
for Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Royal College Physicians Ireland, Dublin, 
Ireland.
(23)Private Practice, Ioannina, Greece.
(24)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Hospital Zurich, 
Zurich, Switzerland.
(25)I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University, Ministry of Health of 
the Russian Federation (Sechenov University), Moscow, Russia.
(26)Department of Clinical Medicine and Surgery, University of Naples Federico 
II, Naples, Italy.
(27)Gastroenterology Unit, Departmento of Surgery, Oncology and 
Gastroenterology, University of Padua, Padua, Italy.
(28)Laboratory of Experimental Medicine and Pediatrics and InflA-Med Centre of 
Excellence, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(29)Department of Psychosomatic Medicine and Psychotherapy, Internal Medicine 
VI, University Hospital Tübingen, and Charité Center for Internal Medicine and 
Dermatology, Tübingen, Germany.
(30)Department for Psychosomatic Medicine, Charité-Universitätsmedizin, Freie 
Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin and Berlin Institute of 
Health, Berlin, Germany.
(31)Center of Endoscopy, Starnberg, Germany.
(32)Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany.
(33)Department of Internal Medicine, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, 
Gothenburg, Sweden.
(34)Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel.
(35)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Medical University of 
Silesia, Katowice, Poland.
(36)Gastrointestinal Physiology Unit, University College London Hospital, 
London, UK.
(37)CHU de Bordeaux, Centre Medico-chirurgical Magellan, Hôpital Haut-Lévêque 
and Gastroenterology Department, Université de Bordeaux, INSERM CIC, Bordeaux, 
France.

BACKGROUND: Functional dyspepsia (FD) is one of the most common conditions in 
clinical practice. In spite of its prevalence, FD is associated with major 
uncertainties in terms of its definition, underlying pathophysiology, diagnosis, 
treatment, and prognosis.
METHODS: A Delphi consensus was initiated with 41 experts from 22 European 
countries who conducted a literature summary and voting process on 87 
statements. Quality of evidence was evaluated using the grading of 
recommendations, assessment, development, and evaluation (GRADE) criteria. 
Consensus (defined as >80% agreement) was reached for 36 statements.
RESULTS: The panel agreed with the definition in terms of its cardinal symptoms 
(early satiation, postprandial fullness, epigastric pain, and epigastric 
burning), its subdivision into epigastric pain syndrome and postprandial 
distress syndrome, and the presence of accessory symptoms (upper abdominal 
bloating, nausea, belching), and overlapping conditions. Also, well accepted are 
the female predominance of FD, its impact on quality of life and health costs, 
and acute gastrointestinal infections, and anxiety as risk factors. In terms of 
pathophysiological mechanisms, the consensus supports a role for impaired 
gastric accommodation, delayed gastric emptying, hypersensitivity to gastric 
distention, Helicobacter pylori infection, and altered central processing of 
signals from the gastroduodenal region. There is consensus that endoscopy is 
mandatory for establishing a firm diagnosis of FD, but that in primary care, 
patients without alarm symptoms or risk factors can be managed without 
endoscopy. There is consensus that H. pylori status should be determined in 
every patient with dyspeptic symptoms and H. pylori positive patients should 
receive eradication therapy. Also, proton pump inhibitor therapy is considered 
an effective therapy for FD, but no other treatment approach reached a 
consensus. The long-term prognosis and life expectancy are favorable.
CONCLUSIONS AND INFERENCES: A multinational group of European experts summarized 
the current state of consensus on the definition, diagnosis and management of 
FD.

© 2021 The Authors. United European Gastroenterology Journal published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC on behalf of United European Gastroenterology.

DOI: 10.1002/ueg2.12061
PMCID: PMC8259261
PMID: 33939891 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Drafted consensus questions, drafted literature 
review sections, set up the voting and summaries access, participated in voting, 
summarized voting outcomes, reviewed and corrected the manuscript: L. Wauters. 
Drafted consensus questions, drafted literature review sections, participated in 
voting, reviewed and corrected the manuscript: R. Dickman. Drafted consensus 
questions, drafted literature review sections, participated in voting, reviewed 
and corrected the manuscript: V. Drug. Drafted consensus questions, drafted 
literature review sections, participated in voting, reviewed and corrected the 
manuscript: A. Mulak. Drafted consensus questions, drafted literature review 
sections, participated in voting, reviewed and corrected the manuscript: J. 
Serra. Co‐initiated the process, obtained funding , drafted consensus questions, 
drafted literature review sections, participated in voting, reviewed and 
corrected manuscript content: P. Enck. Co‐initiated the process, drafted 
consensus questions, drafted literature review sections, wrote manuscript 
sections, participated in voting, wrote manuscript, reviewed and corrected 
content: J. Tack. Drafted consensus questions, wrote manuscript sections, 
participated in voting, reviewed and corrected content: All members of the ESNM 
FD consensus group (A. Accarino, G. Barbara, S. Bor, B. Coffin, M. Corsetti, H. 
De Schepper, D. Dumitrascu, A. Farmer, G. Gourcerol, G. Hauser, T. Hausken, G. 
Karamanolis, D. Kestzhelyi, C. Malagelada, T. Milosavljevic, J. Muris, C. 
O'Morain, A. Papathanasopoulos, D. Pohl, D. Rumyantseva, G. Sarnelli, E. 
Savarino, J. Schol, A. Sheptulin, A. Smet, A. Stengel, O. Storonova, M. Storr, 
H. Törnblom, T. Vanuytsel, M. Velosa, M. Waluga, N. Zarate, F. Zerbib).