1. Sci Rep. 2021 Apr 30;11(1):9402. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-88845-w.

Multitask fMRI and machine learning approach improve prediction of differential 
brain activity pattern in patients with insomnia disorder.

Lee MH(#)(1), Kim N(#)(2), Yoo J(3), Kim HK(3), Son YD(3), Kim YB(4), Oh SM(5), 
Kim S(6), Lee H(1), Jeon JE(1), Lee YJ(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Center for Sleep and Chronobiology, Seoul 
National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Biomedical Engineering Research Center, Gachon University, 
Inchon, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Gachon University, Inchon, Republic of 
Korea.
(4)Department of Neurosurgery, Gachon University Gil Hospital, Inchon, Republic 
of Korea.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, Dongguk University Hospital, Ilsan, Republic of 
Korea.
(6)Department of Neurology, Gangneung Asan Hospital, Gangneung, Republic of 
Korea.
(7)Department of Psychiatry and Center for Sleep and Chronobiology, Seoul 
National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea. 
ewpsyche@snu.ac.kr.
(#)Contributed equally

We investigated the differential spatial covariance pattern of blood oxygen 
level-dependent (BOLD) responses to single-task and multitask functional 
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) between patients with psychophysiological 
insomnia (PI) and healthy controls (HCs), and evaluated features generated by 
principal component analysis (PCA) for discrimination of PI from HC, compared to 
features generated from BOLD responses to single-task fMRI using machine 
learning methods. In 19 patients with PI and 21 HCs, the mean beta value for 
each region of interest (ROIbval) was calculated with three contrast images 
(i.e., sleep-related picture, sleep-related sound, and Stroop stimuli). We 
performed discrimination analysis and compared with features generated from BOLD 
responses to single-task fMRI. We applied support vector machine analysis with a 
least absolute shrinkage and selection operator to evaluate five performance 
metrics: accuracy, recall, precision, specificity, and F2. Principal component 
features showed the best classification performance in all aspects of metrics 
compared to BOLD response to single-task fMRI. Bilateral inferior frontal gyrus 
(orbital), right calcarine cortex, right lingual gyrus, left inferior occipital 
gyrus, and left inferior temporal gyrus were identified as the most salient 
areas by feature selection. Our approach showed better performance in 
discriminating patients with PI from HCs, compared to single-task fMRI.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-88845-w
PMCID: PMC8087661
PMID: 33931676 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.