1. Iran J Nurs Midwifery Res. 2021 Jan 18;26(1):25-33. doi: 
10.4103/ijnmr.IJNMR_5_19. eCollection 2021 Jan-Feb.

The Process of Managing the Children with Type 1 Diabetes in the Family: A 
Grounded Theory Study.

Sanjari M(1), Peyrovi H(2), Mehrdad N(3).

Author information:
(1)Diabetes Research Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism Clinical Sciences 
Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Critical Care Nursing, Nursing Care Research Center, School of 
Nursing and Midwifery, Iran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Endocrinology and Metabolism Research Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism 
Clinical Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, 
Iran.

BACKGROUND: Diabetes is a disease that affects all family members. Parents of 
children with type 1 diabetes are always concerned about all aspects of 
children's life. The aim of this study was to elucidate the process of managing 
children with diabetes in the family.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This is a qualitative grounded theory of a doctoral 
dissertation, which was done on 2016. The 18 participants were selected through 
purposive and theoretical sampling until data saturation. The main participants 
in this study included parents, siblings, and children with type 1 diabetes. The 
data was gathered by semi-structured interviews as well as field notes and 
memos. Data analysis was done concurrently with data collection in four levels, 
including data analysis for concept and contex, bringing the process into the 
analysis, and integration of categories according to Corbin and Struss (2008). 
Core category appeared at the end of integrated categories.
RESULTS: "The family with diabetes in the child's diabetes orbit" as a core 
category contains the process of managing children with diabetes within the 
family, which included three main subcategories, including "entering into the 
diabetes orbit", "movement into the diabetes orbit", and "living into the 
diabetes orbit".
CONCLUSIONS: The family through the concept of "The family with diabetes in the 
child's diabetes orbit "as a main concern of families with diabetes suffering 
diabetes attempt to select and practicing appropriate strategies and manage 
diabetes and children with diabetes.

Copyright: © 2021 Iranian Journal of Nursing and Midwifery Research.

DOI: 10.4103/ijnmr.IJNMR_5_19
PMCID: PMC8074732
PMID: 33954095

Conflict of interest statement: Nothing to declare.