1. Biophys Physicobiol. 2021 Feb 18;18:50-59. doi:
10.2142/biophysico.bppb-v18.006.  eCollection 2021.

Structure elements can be predicted using the contact volume among protein 
residues.

Takase Y(1), Yamazaki Y(1), Hayashi Y(1), Toma-Fukai S(1), Kamikubo H(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Materials Science, Graduate School of Science and Technology, 
Nara Institute of Science and Technology, Ikoma, Nara 630-0192, Japan.
(2)Institute of Materials Structure Science, High Energy Accelerator Research 
Organization (KEK), Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0801, Japan.

Previously, the structure elements of dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) were 
determined using comprehen-sive Ala-insertion mutation analysis, which is 
assumed to be a kind of protein "building blocks." It is hypo-thesized that our 
comprehension of the structure elements could lead to understanding how an amino 
acid sequence dictates its tertiary structure. However, the comprehensive 
Ala-insertion mutation analysis is a time- and cost-consuming process and only a 
set of the DHFR structure elements have been reported so far. Therefore, 
developing a computational method to predict structure elements is an urgent 
necessity. We focused on intramolecular residue-residue contacts to predict the 
structure elements. We introduced a simple and effective parameter: the 
overlapped contact volume (CV) among the residues and calculated the CV along 
the DHFR sequence using the crystal structure. Our results indicate that the CV 
profile can recapitulate its precipitate ratio profile, which was used to define 
the structure elements in the Ala-insertion mutation analysis. The CV profile 
allowed us to predict structure elements like the experimentally determined 
structure elements. The strong correlation between the CV and precipitate ratio 
profiles indicates the importance of the intramolecular residue-residue contact 
in maintaining the tertiary structure. Additionally, the CVs between the 
structure elements are considerably more than those between a structure element 
and a linker or two linkers, indicating that the structure elements play a 
funda-mental role in increasing the intramolecular adhesion. Thus, we propose 
that the structure elements can be considered a type of "building blocks" that 
maintain and dictate the tertiary structures of proteins.

2021 THE BIOPHYSICAL SOCIETY OF JAPAN.

DOI: 10.2142/biophysico.bppb-v18.006
PMCID: PMC8049775
PMID: 33954082