1. PLoS Pathog. 2021 May 6;17(5):e1009562. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1009562. 
eCollection 2021 May.

The methyltransferase domain of the Respiratory Syncytial Virus L protein 
catalyzes cap N7 and 2'-O-methylation.

Sutto-Ortiz P(1), Tcherniuk S(2), Ysebaert N(3), Abeywickrema P(3), Noël M(4), 
Decombe A(1), Debart F(4), Vasseur JJ(4), Canard B(1), Roymans D(3), Rigaux 
P(3), Eléouët JF(2), Decroly E(1).

Author information:
(1)Aix Marseille Université, CNRS, AFMB UMR 7257, Marseille, France.
(2)Unité de Virologie et Immunologie Moléculaires, INRAE, Université Paris 
Saclay, Jouy en Josas, France.
(3)Janssen Infectious Diseases and Vaccines, Beerse, Belgium.
(4)IBMM, Université de Montpellier, ENSCM, CNRS, UMR 5247, Montpellier, France.

Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is a negative sense single-stranded RNA virus 
and one of the main causes of severe lower respiratory tract infections in 
infants and young children. RSV RNA replication/transcription and capping are 
ensured by the viral Large (L) protein. The L protein contains a polymerase 
domain associated with a polyribonucleotidyl transferase domain in its 
N-terminus, and a methyltransferase (MTase) domain followed by the C-terminal 
domain (CTD) enriched in basic amino acids at its C-terminus. The MTase-CTD of 
Mononegavirales forms a clamp to accommodate RNA that is subsequently methylated 
on the cap structure and depending on the virus, on internal positions. These 
enzymatic activities are essential for efficient viral mRNA translation into 
proteins, and to prevent the recognition of uncapped viral RNA by innate 
immunity sensors. In this work, we demonstrated that the MTase-CTD of RSV, as 
well as the full-length L protein in complex with phosphoprotein (P), catalyzes 
the N7- and 2'-O-methylation of the cap structure of a short RNA sequence that 
corresponds to the 5' end of viral mRNA. Using different experimental systems, 
we showed that the RSV MTase-CTD methylates the cap structure with a preference 
for N7-methylation as first reaction. However, we did not observe 
cap-independent internal methylation, as recently evidenced for the Ebola virus 
MTase. We also found that at μM concentrations, sinefungin, a 
S-adenosylmethionine analogue, inhibits the MTase activity of the RSV L protein 
and of the MTase-CTD domain. Altogether, these results suggest that the RSV 
MTase domain specifically recognizes viral RNA decorated by a cap structure and 
catalyzes its methylation, which is required for translation and innate immune 
system subversion.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1009562
PMCID: PMC8130918
PMID: 33956914 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: I have read the journal’s policy and the authors 
of this manuscript have the following competing interests: P.R., N.Y., P.A, D.R 
are employees and possible shareholders of Janssen Pharmaceutical Companies of 
Johnson & Johnson.