1. Mol Vis. 2021 May 1;27:206-220. eCollection 2021.

Synaptic changes and the response of microglia in a light-induced photoreceptor 
degeneration model.

Xu S(1)(2)(3), Zhang P(1)(2)(3), Zhang M(1)(2)(3), Wang X(1)(2)(3), Li G(4), Xu 
G(1)(2)(3), Ni Y(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Eye & ENT Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, 
China.
(2)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Visual Impairment and Restoration, Fudan 
University, Shanghai, China.
(3)Key NHC Key Laboratory of Myopia (Fudan University); Laboratory of Myopia, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Shanghai, China.
(4)Research Center, Eye & ENT Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

PURPOSE: To explore synaptic changes and the response of microglia in a 
light-induced photoreceptor degeneration model.
METHODS: Sprague-Dawley rats were euthanized 1 h, 1 day, 3 days, 7 days, and 14 
days after being exposed to intense blue light for 24 h. Hematoxylin and eosin 
(H&E) and terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick-end labeling (TUNEL) 
staining were used to evaluate changes in the outer nuclear layer (ONL). 
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was applied to observe the 
ultrastructural changes in the synapses between the photoreceptors and 
second-order neurons. Western blotting was conducted to evaluate specific 
proteins, including postsynaptic density-95 (PSD-95), metabotropic glutamate 
receptor 6 (mGluR6), synapsin I, and synaptophysin. Immunofluorescence of CD11b 
and PKC-α or mGluR6 was used to explore the spatial relationships between 
microglial processes and synaptic elements. Immunoelectron microscopy of PSD-95 
was performed to further confirm its engulfment of synaptic materials.
RESULTS: H&E and TUNEL staining showed that the thickness of the ONL decreased 
markedly, and the number of apoptotic photoreceptors peaked at day 1. TEM 
revealed darkened photoreceptor terminals and that ribbons of them were floating 
in the cytoplasm, coinciding with the downregulation of PSD-95 and mGluR6. 
Downstream synaptic protein synapsin I and synaptophysin exhibited upregulation 
in the inner plexiform layer. Activated microglia migrated to the outer retina, 
and their processes were found in close proximity to synapses in the outer 
plexiform layer under light and electron microscopy levels. Double 
immunostaining of CD11b and mGluR6 showed colocalization. PSD-95-immunoreactive 
electron-dense materials were observed inside the microglia suggesting 
engulfment of synaptic components.
CONCLUSIONS: The study showed that there are early synaptic impairment and late 
compensatory changes in downstream synapses in this photic injury model. 
Activated microglia touched and directly engulfed synaptic materials. Microglia 
may play a role or a partial role in synaptic changes.

Copyright © 2021 Molecular Vision.

PMCID: PMC8100860
PMID: 33967574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]