1. JBMR Plus. 2021 Mar 22;5(5):e10470. doi: 10.1002/jbm4.10470. eCollection 2021 
May.

A Cross-Sectional Cohort Study of the Effects of FGF23 Deficiency and 
Hyperphosphatemia on Dental Structures in Hyperphosphatemic Familial Tumoral 
Calcinosis.

Lee AE(1), Chu EY(2), Gardner PJ(1), Duverger O(1), Saikali A(1), Wang SK(1), 
Gafni RI(1), Hartley IR(1)(3), Ten Hagen KG(1), Somerman MJ(2), Collins 
MT(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research, National Institutes 
of Health Bethesda MD USA.
(2)National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, 
National Institutes of Health Bethesda MD USA.
(3)Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development, National Institutes of Health Bethesda MD USA.

Hyperphosphatemic familial tumoral calcinosis (HFTC) is a rare autosomal 
recessive disorder caused by mutations in FGF23, GALNT3, KLOTHO, or FGF23 
autoantibodies. Prominent features include high blood phosphate and calcific 
masses, usually adjacent to large joints. Dental defects have been reported, but 
not systematically described. Seventeen patients with HFTC followed at the 
National Institutes of Health underwent detailed clinical, biochemical, 
molecular, and dental analyses. Studies of teeth included intraoral photos and 
radiographs, high-resolution μCT, histology, and scanning electron microscopy 
(SEM). A scoring system was developed to assess the severity of tooth phenotype. 
Pulp calcification was found in 13 of 14 evaluable patients. Short roots and 
midroot bulges with apical thinning were present in 12 of 13 patients. Premolars 
were most severely affected. μCT analyses of five HFTC teeth revealed that pulp 
density increased sevenfold, whereas the pulp volume decreased sevenfold in 
permanent HFTC teeth compared with age- and tooth-matched control teeth. 
Histology revealed loss of the polarized odontoblast cell layer and an 
obliterated pulp cavity that was filled with calcified material. The SEM showed 
altered pulp and cementum structures, without differences in enamel or dentin 
structures, when compared with control teeth. This study defines the spectrum 
and confirms the high penetrance of dental features in HFTC. The phenotypes 
appear to be independent of genetic/molecular etiology, suggesting 
hyperphosphatemia or FGF23 deficiency may be the pathomechanistic driver, with 
prominent effects on root and pulp structures, consistent with a role of 
phosphate and/or FGF23 in tooth development. Given the early appearance and high 
penetrance, cognizance of HFTC-related features may allow for earlier diagnosis 
and treatment. © 2021 The Authors. JBMR Plus published by Wiley Periodicals LLC. 
on behalf of American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

© 2021 The Authors. JBMR Plus published by Wiley Periodicals LLC. on behalf of 
American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

DOI: 10.1002/jbm4.10470
PMCID: PMC8101615
PMID: 33977199

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no potential conflicts of 
interest with respect to the authorship and/or publication of this article.