1. PLoS One. 2021 May 14;16(5):e0251459. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0251459. 
eCollection 2021.

Crystal and solution structures reveal oligomerization of individual capsid 
homology domains of Drosophila Arc.

Hallin EI(1), Markússon S(1), Böttger L(2), Torda AE(2), Bramham CR(1)(3), 
Kursula P(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(2)Centre for Bioinformatics (ZBH), University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany.
(3)KG Jebsen Centre for Neuropsychiatric Disorders, University of Bergen, 
Bergen, Norway.
(4)Faculty of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine & Biocenter Oulu, University 
of Oulu, Oulu, Finland.

Synaptic plasticity is vital for brain function and memory formation. One of the 
key proteins in long-term synaptic plasticity and memory is the 
activity-regulated cytoskeleton-associated protein (Arc). Mammalian Arc forms 
virus-like capsid structures in a process requiring the N-terminal domain and 
contains two C-terminal lobes that are structural homologues to retroviral 
capsids. Drosophila has two isoforms of Arc, dArc1 and dArc2, with low sequence 
similarity to mammalian Arc, but lacking a large N-terminal domain. Both dArc 
isoforms are related to the Ty3/gypsy retrotransposon capsid, consisting of N- 
and C-terminal lobes. Structures of dArc1, as well as capsids formed by both 
dArc isoforms, have been recently determined. We carried out structural 
characterization of the four individual dArc lobe domains. As opposed to the 
corresponding mammalian Arc lobe domains, which are monomeric, the dArc lobes 
were all oligomeric in solution, indicating a strong propensity for homophilic 
interactions. A truncated N-lobe from dArc2 formed a domain-swapped dimer in the 
crystal structure, resulting in a novel dimer interaction that could be relevant 
for capsid assembly or other dArc functions. This domain-swapped structure 
resembles the dimeric protein C of flavivirus capsids, as well as the structure 
of histones dimers, domain-swapped transcription factors, and 
membrane-interacting BAK domains. The strong oligomerization properties of the 
isolated dArc lobe domains explain the ability of dArc to form capsids in the 
absence of any large N-terminal domain, in contrast to the mammalian protein.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0251459
PMCID: PMC8121366
PMID: 33989344 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.