1. Pain Rep. 2021 Jan 21;6(1):e895. doi: 10.1097/PR9.0000000000000895.
eCollection  2021.

Research design considerations for chronic pain prevention clinical trials: 
IMMPACT recommendations.

Gewandter JS(1), Dworkin RH(1), Turk DC(2), Farrar JT(3), Fillingim RB(4), 
Gilron I(5), Markman JD(1), Oaklander AL(6), Polydefkis MJ(7), Raja SN(7), 
Robinson JP(2), Woolf CJ(6), Ziegler D(8), Ashburn MA(3), Burke LB(9), Cowan 
P(10), George SZ(4), Goli V(11), Graff OX(12), Iyengar S(13), Jay GW(14), Katz 
J(15), Kehlet H(16), Kitt RA(1), Kopecky EA(17), Malamut R(18), McDermott MP(1), 
Palmer P(19), Rappaport BA(20), Rauschkolb C(21), Steigerwald I(22), Tobias 
J(23), Walco GA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, USA.
(2)University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(3)University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(4)University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(5)Queen's University, Kingston, ON, Canada.
(6)Harvard University, Boston, MS, USA.
(7)Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(8)German Diabetes Center at Heinrich Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(9)Lora Group, LLC, Royal Oak, MD, USA.
(10)American Chronic Pain Association, Rocklin, CA, USA.
(11)Pfizer and Duke University, Raleigh-Duram, NC, USA.
(12)GlaxoSmithKline, London, United Kingdom.
(13)Eli Lilly, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(14)Virtuous Pharma, Inc, Raleigh-Durham, NC, USA.
(15)York University, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(16)Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University, Denmark.
(17)Endo Pharmaceuticals, Inc, Malvern, PA, USA.
(18)Teva Pharmaceuticals, North Wales, PA, USA.
(19)AcelRx, Redwood City, CA, USA.
(20)Arlington, VA, USA.
(21)Johnson and Johnson, Titusville, NJ, USA.
(22)Grünenthal GMbH, Aachen, Germany.
(23)Jazz Pharmaceuticals, Palo Alto, CA, USA.

Although certain risk factors can identify individuals who are most likely to 
develop chronic pain, few interventions to prevent chronic pain have been 
identified. To facilitate the identification of preventive interventions, an 
IMMPACT meeting was convened to discuss research design considerations for 
clinical trials investigating the prevention of chronic pain. We present general 
design considerations for prevention trials in populations that are at 
relatively high risk for developing chronic pain. Specific design considerations 
included subject identification, timing and duration of treatment, outcomes, 
timing of assessment, and adjusting for risk factors in the analyses. We provide 
a detailed examination of 4 models of chronic pain prevention (ie, chronic 
postsurgical pain, postherpetic neuralgia, chronic low back pain, and painful 
chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy). The issues discussed can, in many 
instances, be extrapolated to other chronic pain conditions. These examples were 
selected because they are representative models of primary and secondary 
prevention, reflect persistent pain resulting from multiple insults (ie, 
surgery, viral infection, injury, and toxic or noxious element exposure), and 
are chronically painful conditions that are treated with a range of 
interventions. Improvements in the design of chronic pain prevention trials 
could improve assay sensitivity and thus accelerate the identification of 
efficacious interventions. Such interventions would have the potential to reduce 
the prevalence of chronic pain in the population. Additionally, standardization 
of outcomes in prevention clinical trials will facilitate meta-analyses and 
systematic reviews and improve detection of preventive strategies emerging from 
clinical trials.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of the International Association for the Study of Pain.

DOI: 10.1097/PR9.0000000000000895
PMCID: PMC8108588
PMID: 33981929

Conflict of interest statement: The views expressed in this article are those of 
the authors, none of whom have financial conflicts of interest specifically 
related to the issues discussed in this article. At the time of the meeting on 
which this article is based, several authors were employed by pharmaceutical 
companies, and others had received consulting fees or honoraria from one or more 
pharmaceutical or device companies. Authors of this article who were not 
employed by industry or government at the time of the meeting received travel 
stipends, hotel accommodations, and meals during the meeting from the University 
of Rochester Office of Continuing Professional Education with funds from 
unrestricted grants to support the activities of the Initiative on Methods, 
Measurement, and Pain Assessment in Clinical Trials (IMMPACT) provided by 
multiple pharmaceutical companies. Preparation of background literature reviews 
and draft manuscripts was supported by the Analgesic, Anesthetic, and Addiction 
Clinical Trial Translations, Innovations, Opportunities, and Networks (ACTTION) 
public-private partnership with the US FDA, which has received research 
contracts, grants, or other revenue from the FDA, multiple pharmaceutical and 
device companies, and other sources. No official endorsement by the FDA, US 
Department of Veterans Affairs, US National Institutes of Health, or the 
pharmaceutical and device companies that have provided unrestricted grants to 
support the activities of IMMPACT and ACTTION should be inferred.Sponsorships or 
competing interests that may be relevant to content are disclosed at the end of 
this article.