1. PLoS One. 2021 May 14;16(5):e0251207. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0251207. 
eCollection 2021.

Structural features and phylogenetic implications of Cicadellidae subfamily and 
two new mitogenomes leafhoppers.

Chen X(1)(2), Yuan Z(1)(2), Li C(2), Dietrich CH(3), Song Y(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Karst Science, Guizhou Normal University/State Key Laboratory 
Cultivation Base for Guizhou Karst Mountain Ecology Environment of China, 
Guiyang, China.
(2)Guizhou Provincial Key Laboratory for Rare Animal and Economic Insect of the 
Mountainous Region, Guiyang University, Guiyang, China.
(3)Illinois Natural History Survey, Prairie Research Institute, University of 
Illinois, Illinois, Champaign, United States of America.

Complete mitochondrial genome sequences facilitate species identification and 
analyses of phylogenetic relationships. However, the available data are limited 
to the diverse and widespread insect family Cicadellidae. This study analyzes 
and summarizes the complete mitochondrial genome structure characteristics of 11 
leafhopper subfamilies and two newly sequenced Typhlocybinae species, 
Empoascanara wengangensis and E. gracilis. Moreover, using 13PCGs and rRNA data 
to analyze the nucleotide diversity, evolution rate, and the phylogenetic 
relationship between the subfamilies of 56 species, verifying the taxonomic 
status analysis of E. wengangensis and E. gracilis. The analysis results show 
that the genome structures of the subfamilies and the newly sequenced two 
species are very similar, and the size of the CR region is significantly related 
to the repeat unit. However, in the entire AT-skews and CG-skews, the AT-skews 
of other subfamilies are all positive, and CG-skews are negative, while 
Empoascini of Typhlocybinae and Ledrinae are the opposite. Furthermore, among 
13PCGs, the AT-skews of 13 species are all negative while CG-skews are positive, 
which from Empoascini in Typhlocybinae, Idiocerinae, Cicadellinae, Ledrinae, and 
Evacanthinae. Phylogenetic analysis shows that ML and PB analysis produce almost 
consistent topologies between different data sets and models, and some 
relationships are highly supported and remain unchanged. Mileewinae is a 
monophyletic group and is a sister group with Typhlocybinae, and the sister 
group of Evacanthinae is Ledrinae + Cicadellinae. Phylogenetic analysis grouped 
the two newly sequenced species with other species of Typhlocybinae, which was 
separated from other subfamilies, and all Erythroneurini insects gathered 
together. However, E. gracilis grouped into a single group, not grouped with 
species of the same genus (Empoascanara). This result does not match the 
traditional classification, and other nuclear genes or transcriptome genes may 
be needed to verify the result. Nucleotide diversity analysis shows that nad4 
and nad5 may be evaluated as potential DNA markers defining the Cicadellidae 
insect species.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0251207
PMCID: PMC8121325
PMID: 33989310 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.