1. Int J Nanomedicine. 2021 May 7;16:3161-3172. doi: 10.2147/IJN.S305361. 
eCollection 2021.

Small Extracellular Vesicles Derived from Adipose Tissue Prevent 
Bisphosphonate-Related Osteonecrosis of the Jaw by Promoting Angiogenesis.

Huang J(1)(2)(3)(4), Wang L(1)(2)(3), Tian W(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oral Disease, Engineering Research Center of Oral 
Translational Medicine, Ministry of Education, West China School of Stomatology, 
Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, People's Republic of China.
(2)National Engineering Laboratory for Oral Regenerative Medicine, Sichuan 
University, Chengdu, Sichuan, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, West China Hospital of 
Stomatology, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, People's Republic of China.
(4)West China Fourth Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, People's 
Republic of China.

PURPOSE: There is no definitive treatment for bisphosphonate-related 
osteonecrosis of the jaw (BRONJ). Small extracellular vesicles derived from 
adipose tissue (sEV-AT) have been proved efficient at promoting tissue 
regeneration. The aim of this study was to evaluate the effects of sEV-AT 
administration on BRONJ-like lesions in rats.
METHODS: Zoledronate (Zol) and dexamethasone (Dex) were subcutaneously 
administered to create a BRONJ rat model. Rats were randomly divided into three 
groups: 1) Control; 2) Zol+Dex; 3) sEV-AT. The maxillary left first molars were 
extracted two weeks after the first administration. In the sEV-AT group, sEV-AT 
were given intravenously every three days right after tooth extraction. We 
preformed occlusal view images, microcomputed tomography (µCT) and histological 
analysis to measure the regeneration of osseous and soft tissue in extraction 
sockets. Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) were isolated and 
cultured with endothelial cell medium (ECM). HUVECs were then divided into three 
groups: 1) Control: ECM; 2) Zol: ECM+Zol; 3) sEV-AT: ECM+Zol+sEV-AT. We 
evaluated the proliferation, tube formation and migration of HUVECs in each 
group.
RESULTS: Rats treated with Zol+Dex showed BRONJ-like lesions including open 
wounds, necrotic bones, empty osteocyte lacunae and reduced osteoclasts. sEV-AT 
administration reduced BRONJ-like lesions by promoting soft tissue healing. µCT 
results showed that bone volume in extraction sockets in the sEV-AT group was 
larger than the Zol+Dex group. Histological analysis showed less necrotic bones 
and empty osteocyte lacunae in the sEV-AT group compared to the Zol+Dex group. 
Histological analysis also showed more osteoclasts, collagen fibers and blood 
vessels in the sEV-AT group compared to the Zol+Dex group. Furthermore, sEV-AT 
enhanced the proliferation, migration and tube formation of HUVECs which were 
inhibited by Zol.
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate that sEV-AT prevent BRONJ in rats. 
Angiogenesis promotion contributes to the prevention of BRONJ.

© 2021 Huang et al.

DOI: 10.2147/IJN.S305361
PMCID: PMC8114828
PMID: 33994785 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.