1. Comput Struct Biotechnol J. 2021 Apr 16;19:2160-2169. doi: 
10.1016/j.csbj.2021.04.017. eCollection 2021.

Widespread distribution of hmf genes in Proteobacteria reveals key enzymes for 
5-hydroxymethylfurfural conversion.

Donoso RA(1)(2), González-Toro F(1), Pérez-Pantoja D(1).

Author information:
(1)Programa Institucional de Fomento a la Investigación, Desarrollo e Innovación 
(PIDi), Universidad Tecnológica Metropolitana, Santiago, Chile.
(2)Center of Applied Ecology and Sustainability (CAPES), Santiago, Chile.

Furans represent a class of promising chemicals, since they constitute valuable 
intermediates in conversion of biomass into sustainable products intended to 
replace petroleum-derivatives. Conversely, generation of furfural and 
5-hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF) as by-products in lignocellulosic hydrolysates is 
undesirable due its inhibitory effect over fermentative microorganisms. 
Therefore, the search for furans-metabolizing bacteria has gained increasing 
attention since they are valuable tools to solve these challenging issues. A few 
bacterial species have been described at genetic level, leading to a proposed 
HMF pathway encoded by a set of genes termed hmf/psf, although some enzymatic 
functions are still elusive. In this work we performed a genomic analysis of 
major subunits of furoyl-CoA dehydrogenase orthologues, revealing that the 
furoic acid catabolic route, key intermediate in HMF biodegradation, is 
widespread in proteobacterial species. Additionally, presence/absence profiles 
of hmf/psf genes in selected proteobacterial strains suggest parallel and/or 
complementary roles of enzymes with previously unclear function that could be 
key in HMF conversion. The furans utilization pattern of selected strains 
harboring different hmf/psf gene sets provided additional support for 
bioinformatic predictions of the relevance of some enzymes. On the other hand, 
at least three different types of transporter systems are clustered with hmf/psf 
genes, whose presence is mutually exclusive, suggesting a core and parallel role 
in furans transport in Proteobacteria. This study expands the number of bacteria 
that could be recruited in biotechnological processes for furans 
biodetoxification and predicts a core set of genes required to establish a 
functional HMF pathway in heterologous hosts for metabolic engineering 
endeavors.

© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.csbj.2021.04.017
PMCID: PMC8091172
PMID: 33995910

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.