1. J Virol. 2021 Jul 12;95(15):e0056321. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00563-21. Epub 2021 Jul
 12.

Cyclophilin A Inhibits Human Respiratory Syncytial Virus (RSV) Replication by 
Binding to RSV-N through Its PPIase Activity.

Liang W(1)(2)(3), Zhang Y(1)(2), Li M(1)(2), Al-Shaebi F(1)(2), Li J(1)(2)(3), 
Zhang J(1)(2), Wei L(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang, Hebei, 
China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Immune Mechanism and Intervention on Serious Disease in 
Hebei Province, Shijiazhuang, Hebei, China.
(3)Department of Pathogen Biology, Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang, 
Hebei, China.

Human respiratory syncytial virus (hRSV) is the most common pathogen which 
causes acute lower respiratory infection (ALRI) in infants. Recently, virus-host 
interaction has become a hot spot of virus-related research, and it needs to be 
further elaborated for RSV infection. In this study, we found that RSV infection 
significantly increased the expression of cyclophilin A (cypA) in clinical 
patients, mice, and epithelial cells. Therefore, we evaluated the function of 
cypA in RSV replication and demonstrated that virus proliferation was 
accelerated in cypA knockdown host cells but restrained in cypA-overexpressing 
host cells. Furthermore, we proved that cypA limited RSV replication depending 
on its PPIase activity. Moreover, we performed liquid chromatography-mass 
spectrometry, and the results showed that cypA could interact with several viral 
proteins, such as RSV-N, RSV-P, and RSV-M2-1. Finally, the interaction between 
cypA and RSV-N was certified by coimmunoprecipitation and immunofluorescence. 
Those results provided strong evidence that cypA may play an inhibitory role in 
RSV replication through interaction with RSV-N via its PPIase activity. 
IMPORTANCE RSV-N, packed in the viral genome to form the ribonucleoprotein (RNP) 
complex, which is recognized by the RSV RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) 
complex to initiate viral replication and transcription, plays an indispensable 
role in the viral biosynthesis process. cypA, binding to RSV-N, may impair this 
function by weakening the interaction between RSV-N and RSV-P, thus leading to 
decreased viral production. Our research provides novel insight into cypA 
antiviral function, including binding to viral capsid protein to inhibit viral 
replication, which may be helpful for new antiviral drug exploration.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00563-21
PMCID: PMC8274602
PMID: 34011546 [Indexed for MEDLINE]