1. J Adv Res. 2020 Dec 5;30:171-184. doi: 10.1016/j.jare.2020.12.001. eCollection
 2021 May.

Magnetic nanocatalysts as multifunctional platforms in cancer therapy through 
the synthesis of anticancer drugs and facilitated Fenton reaction.

Khan S(1), Sharifi M(2), Hasan A(3)(4), Attar F(5), Edis Z(6), Bai Q(7), 
Derakhshankhah H(8), Falahati M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cerebrovascular Diseases, The Second Affiliated Hospital of 
Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, PR China.
(2)Department of Nanotechnology, Faculty of Advanced Sciences and Technology, 
Tehran Medical Sciences, Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, College of Engineering, 
Qatar University, Doha 2713, Qatar.
(4)Biomedical Research Center, Qatar University, Doha 2713, Qatar.
(5)Department of Food Toxicology, Research Center of Food Technology and 
Agricultural Products, Standard Research Institute (SRI), Karaj, Iran.
(6)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy and Health 
Sciences, Ajman University, PO Box 346, Ajman, United Arab Emirates.
(7)Department of Anesthesiology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou 
University, Zhengzhou, PR China.
(8)Pharmaceutical Sciences Research Center, Kermanshah University of Medical 
Sciences, Kermanshah, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Heterocyclic compounds have always been used as a core portion in 
the development of anticancer drugs. However, there is a pressing need for 
developing inexpensive and simple alternatives to high-cost and complex chemical 
agents-based catalysts for large-scale production of heterocyclic compounds. 
Also, development of some smart platforms for cancer treatment based on 
nanoparticles (NPs) which facilitate Fenton reaction have been widely explored 
by different scientists. Magnetic NPs not only can serve as catalysts in the 
synthesis of heterocyclic compounds with potential anticancer properties, but 
also are widely used as smart agents in targeting cancer cells and inducing 
Fenton reactions.
AIM OF REVIEW: Therefore, in this review we aim to present an updated summary of 
the reports related to the main clinical or basic application and research 
progress of magnetic NPs in cancer as well as their application in the synthesis 
of heterocyclic compounds as potential anticancer drugs. Afterwards, specific 
tumor microenvironment (TME)-responsive magnetic nanocatalysts for cancer 
treatment through triggering Fenton-like reactions were surveyed. Finally, some 
ignored factors in the design of magnetic nanocatalysts- triggered Fenton-like 
reaction, challenges and future perspective of magnetic nanocatalysts-assisted 
synthesis of heterocyclic compounds and selective cancer therapy were 
discussed.Key Scientific Concepts of Review:This review may pave the way for 
well-organized translation of magnetic nanocatalysts in cancer therapy from the 
bench to the bedside.

© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of Cairo University.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jare.2020.12.001
PMCID: PMC8132204
PMID: 34026294 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have none to declare.