1. Elife. 2021 May 26;10:e61461. doi: 10.7554/eLife.61461.

Phenotypic plasticity underlies local invasion and distant metastasis in colon 
cancer.

Sacchetti A(#)(1), Teeuwssen M(#)(1), Verhagen M(#)(1), Joosten R(1), Xu T(1), 
Stabile R(1), van der Steen B(2), Watson MM(1), Gusinac A(1), Kim WK(3), Ubink 
I(4), Van de Werken HJ(5), Fumagalli A(6), Paauwe M(7), Van Rheenen J(8), Sansom 
OJ(7)(9), Kranenburg O(4), Fodde R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
(2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Erasmus University 
Medical Center, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
(3)Natural Product Research Center, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, 
Gangneung, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Surgical Oncology, Cancer Centre, University Medical Centre 
Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands.
(5)Cancer Computational Biology Center and Department of Urology; Erasmus 
University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
(6)Princess Máxima Center for Pediatric Oncology, Utrecht, Netherlands.
(7)Cancer Research UK Beatson Institute, Glasgow, United Kingdom.
(8)Department of Molecular Pathology, Oncode Institute, Netherlands Cancer 
Institute, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(9)Institute of Cancer Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom.
(#)Contributed equally

Phenotypic plasticity represents the most relevant hallmark of the carcinoma 
cell as it bestows it with the capacity of transiently altering its 
morphological and functional features while en route to the metastatic site. 
However, the study of phenotypic plasticity is hindered by the rarity of these 
events within primary lesions and by the lack of experimental models. Here, we 
identified a subpopulation of phenotypic plastic colon cancer cells: EpCAMlo 
cells are motile, invasive, chemo-resistant, and highly metastatic. EpCAMlo bulk 
and single-cell RNAseq analysis indicated (1) enhanced Wnt/β-catenin signaling, 
(2) a broad spectrum of degrees of epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) 
activation including hybrid E/M states (partial EMT) with highly plastic 
features, and (3) high correlation with the CMS4 subtype, accounting for colon 
cancer cases with poor prognosis and a pronounced stromal component. Of note, a 
signature of genes specifically expressed in EpCAMlo cancer cells is highly 
predictive of overall survival in tumors other than CMS4, thus highlighting the 
relevance of quasi-mesenchymal tumor cells across the spectrum of colon cancers. 
Enhanced Wnt and the downstream EMT activation represent key events in eliciting 
phenotypic plasticity along the invasive front of primary colon carcinomas. 
Distinct sets of epithelial and mesenchymal genes define transcriptional 
trajectories through which state transitions arise. pEMT cells, often earmarked 
by the extracellular matrix glycoprotein SPARC together with nuclear ZEB1 and 
β-catenin along the invasive front of primary colon carcinomas, are predicted to 
represent the origin of these (de)differentiation routes through biologically 
distinct cellular states and to underlie the phenotypic plasticity of colon 
cancer cells.

© 2021, Sacchetti et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.61461
PMCID: PMC8192123
PMID: 34036938 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: AS, MW The authors of this manuscript do not 
have any competing financial interests in relation to the work described. MT, OS 
No competing interests declared