1. J Hepatol. 2021 Jul;75 Suppl 1(Suppl 1):S49-S66. doi: 
10.1016/j.jhep.2021.01.002.

Pathophysiology of decompensated cirrhosis: Portal hypertension, circulatory 
dysfunction, inflammation, metabolism and mitochondrial dysfunction.

Engelmann C(1), Clària J(2), Szabo G(3), Bosch J(4), Bernardi M(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hepatology and Gastroenterology, Charité Universitätsmedizin 
Berlin, Berlin, Germany; Institute for Liver and Digestive Health, University 
College London, London, United Kingdom; Section Hepatology, Clinic for 
Gastroenterology and Rheumatology, University Hospital Leipzig, Leipzig, 
Germany; Berlin Institute of Health (BIH), Berlin, Germany. Electronic address: 
cornelius.engelmann@charite.de.
(2)European Foundation for the Study of Chronic Liver Failure (EF-Clif) and 
Grifols Chair, Barcelona, Spain; Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics Service, 
Hospital Clínic-IDIBAPS and CIBERehd, Spain; Department of Biomedical Sciences, 
University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, Beth Israel Deaconess 
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, USA.
(4)IDIBAPS and CIBERehd, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; Department 
for Biomedical Research (DBMR), Bern University, Bern, Switzerland.
(5)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences; Alma Mater Studiorum - 
University of Bologna; Italy.

Patients with acutely decompensated cirrhosis have a dismal prognosis and 
frequently progress to acute-on-chronic liver failure, which is characterised by 
hepatic and extrahepatic organ failure(s). The pathomechanisms involved in 
decompensation and disease progression are still not well understood, and as 
specific disease-modifying treatments do not exist, research to identify novel 
therapeutic targets is of the utmost importance. This review amalgamates the 
latest knowledge on disease mechanisms that lead to tissue injury and 
extrahepatic organ failure - such as systemic inflammation, mitochondrial 
dysfunction, oxidative stress and metabolic changes - and marries these with the 
classical paradigms of acute decompensation to form a single paradigm. With this 
detailed breakdown of pathomechanisms, we identify areas for future research. 
Novel disease-modifying strategies that break the vicious cycle are urgently 
required to improve patient outcomes.

Copyright © 2021 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhep.2021.01.002
PMCID: PMC9272511
PMID: 34039492 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest Cornelius Engelmann has 
on-going research collaboration with Merz Pharmaceutical and Novartis. He has 
received speaker fees from Novartis, Gilead and Merz Pharmaceuticals. Jaime 
Bosch received consultancy fees from Actelion, Ambys, BioVie, BLB, BMS, Brudy, 
Chiasma, Exalenz, Gilead, Lipocine, Surrozen, Zydus and speaker fees from Gore. 
Mauro Bernardi received consultancy fees from CSL Behring GmbH, Grifols SA, 
Martin Pharmaceuticals and speaker fees from CSL Behring GmbH, Grifols SA, 
Takeda, PPTA, Octapharma AG. All other authors declared no conflict of interest. 
Please refer to the accompanying ICMJE disclosure forms for further details.