1. BMJ Open. 2021 May 26;11(5):e046436. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2020-046436.

COVID-NURSE: evaluation of a fundamental nursing care protocol compared with 
care as usual on experience of care for noninvasively ventilated patients in 
hospital with the SARS-CoV-2 virus-protocol for a cluster randomised controlled 
trial.

Richards DA(1)(2), Sugg HV(3), Cockcroft E(3), Cooper J(4), Cruickshank S(5), 
Doris F(3), Hulme C(3), Logan P(6), Iles-Smith H(7), Melendez-Torres GJ(3), 
Rafferty AM(8), Reed N(3), Russell AM(9), Shepherd M(10), Singh SJ(11), Thompson 
Coon J(3), Tooze S(9), Wootton S(12), Abbott R(3), Bethel A(3), Creanor S(13), 
Quinn L(13), Tripp H(13), Warren FC(3), Whear R(3), Bollen J(13), Hunt HA(3), 
Kent M(3), Morgan L(9), Morley N(3), Romanczuk L(10).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Health Research, College of Medicine and Health, University of 
Exeter, Exeter, UK D.A.Richards@exeter.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Health and Caring Sciences, Western Norway University of 
Applied Sciences, Bergen, Norway.
(3)Institute for Health Research, College of Medicine and Health, University of 
Exeter, Exeter, UK.
(4)Nottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust, Nottingham, UK.
(5)Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(6)Community Health Sciences, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.
(7)University of Salford, Salford, UK.
(8)Florence Nightingale School of Nursing and Midwifery, King's College London, 
London, UK.
(9)Academy of Nursing, College of Medicine and Health, University of Exeter, 
Exeter, UK.
(10)NIHR Clinical Research Facility, University of Exeter, Exeter, UK.
(11)Cardiac/Pulmonary Rehabilitation, Leicester Royal Infirmary, Leicester, UK.
(12)Insitute of Human Nutrition, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK.
(13)Clinical Trials Unit, University of Exeter, Exeter, UK.

INTRODUCTION: Patient experience of nursing care is correlated with safety, 
clinical effectiveness, care quality, treatment outcomes and service use. 
Effective nursing care includes actions to develop nurse-patient relationships 
and deliver physical and psychosocial care to patients. The high risk of 
transmission of the SARS-CoV-2 virus compromises nursing care. No evidence-based 
nursing guidelines exist for patients infected with SARS-CoV-2, leading to 
potential variations in patient experience, outcomes, quality and costs. METHODS 
AND ANALYSIS: we aim to recruit 840 in-patient participants treated for 
infection with the SARS-CoV-2 virus from 14 UK hospitals, to a cluster 
randomised controlled trial, with embedded process and economic evaluations, of 
care as usual and a fundamental nursing care protocol addressing specific areas 
of physical, relational and psychosocial nursing care where potential variation 
may occur, compared with care as usual. Our coprimary outcomes are 
patient-reported experience (Quality from the Patients' Perspective; Relational 
Aspects of Care Questionnaire); secondary outcomes include care quality 
(pressure injuries, falls, medication errors); functional ability (Barthell 
Index); treatment outcomes (WHO Clinical Progression Scale); depression Patient 
Health Questionnaire-2 (PHQ-2), anxiety General Anxiety Disorder-2 (GAD-2), 
health utility (EQ5D) and nurse-reported outcomes (Measure of Moral Distress for 
Health Care Professionals). For our primary analysis, we will use a standard 
generalised linear mixed-effect model adjusting for ethnicity of the patient 
sample and research intensity at cluster level. We will also undertake a planned 
subgroup analysis to compare the impact of patient-level ethnicity on our 
primary and secondary outcomes and will undertake process and economic 
evaluations.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: Research governance and ethical approvals are from the 
UK National Health Service Health Research Authority Research Ethics Service. 
Dissemination will be open access through peer-reviewed scientific journals, 
study website, press and online media, including free online training materials 
on the Open University's FutureLearn web platform.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: ISRCTN13177364; Pre-results.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY. Published 
by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2020-046436
PMCID: PMC8159671
PMID: 34039574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.