1. Front Oncol. 2021 May 11;11:652283. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2021.652283. eCollection
 2021.

Positive Crosstalk Between Hedgehog and NF-κB Pathways Is Dependent on KRAS 
Mutation in Pancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinoma.

Wang Y(1), Wang D(2), Dai Y(3), Kong X(4), Zhu X(4), Fan Y(2), Wang Y(3), Wu 
H(4), Jin J(4), Yao W(5), Gao J(2), Wang K(4), Xu H(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, the Hospital of 92608 People's Liberation 
Army of China (PLA) Troops, Shanghai, China.
(2)Institute of Oncology, Second Affiliated Hospital, Xi'an Medical University, 
Xi'an, China.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology, Kunshan Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing 
University of Chinese Medicine, Suzhou, China.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology, Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical 
University, Shanghai, China.
(5)Bureau of headmaster, Xi'an Medical University, Xi'an, China.

It has been shown that aberrant activation of the Hedgehog (Hh) and nuclear 
factor-kappa B (NF-κB) signaling pathways plays an important role in the 
pancreatic carcinogenesis, and KRAS mutation is a hallmark of pancreatic ductal 
adenocarcinoma (PDAC). Until now, the role of KRAS mutation in the context of 
crosstalk between Hh and NF-κB signaling pathways in PDAC has not been 
investigated. This study was to determine whether the crosstalk between the Hh 
and NF-κB pathways is dependent on KRAS mutation in PDAC. The correlation 
between Gli1, Shh, NF-κB p65 expression and KRAS mutation in PDAC tissues was 
firstly examined by immunohistochemistry. Next, Western blotting, qPCR, and 
immunofluorescence were conducted to examine the biological effects of 
interleukin-1β (IL-1β) and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α) as NF-κB 
signaling agonists, Shh as an Hh ligand alone or in combination with KRAS small 
interfering RNA (si-KRAS) in KRAS-mutant PDAC cells (MT-KRAS; SW1990 and 
Panc-1), wild-type KRAS PDAC cells (WT-KRAS; BxPC-3) and mutant KRAS knock-in 
BxPC-3 cells in vitro as well as tumor growth in vivo. KRAS mutation-dependent 
crosstalk between Hh and NF-κB in PDAC cells was further assessed by Ras 
activity and luciferase reporter assays. The aberrant Hh and NF-κB pathway 
activation was found in PDAC tissues with KRAS mutation. The same findings were 
confirmed in MT-KRAS PDAC cells and MT-KRAS knock-in BxPC-3 cells, whereas this 
activation was not observed in WT-KRAS PDAC cells. However, the activation was 
significantly down-regulated by KRAS silencing in MT-KRAS PDAC cells. 
Furthermore, MT-KRAS cancer cell proliferation and survival in vitro and tumor 
growth after inoculation with MT-KRAS cells in vivo were promoted by NF-κB and 
Hh signaling activation. The pivotal factor for co-activation of NF-κB and Hh 
signaling is MT-KRAS protein upregulation, showing that positive crosstalk 
between Hh and NF-κB pathways is dependent upon KRAS mutation in PDAC.

Copyright © 2021 Wang, Wang, Dai, Kong, Zhu, Fan, Wang, Wu, Jin, Yao, Gao, Wang 
and Xu.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2021.652283
PMCID: PMC8144522
PMID: 34046348

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.