1. Immunohorizons. 2021 May 27;5(5):360-369. doi: 10.4049/immunohorizons.2100026.

Diverse Mucosal-Associated Invariant TCR Usage in HIV Infection.

Trivedi S(1), Afroz T(2), Bennett MS(2), Angell K(2), Barros F(2), Nell RA(2), 
Ying J(2), Spivak AM(2)(3), Leung DT(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Internal Medicine, University 
of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT; and Shubhanshi.Trivedi@hsc.utah.edu 
daniel.leung@utah.edu.
(2)Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Internal Medicine, University 
of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT; and.
(3)Division of Microbiology and Immunology, Department of Pathology, University 
of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT.

Mucosal-associated invariant T (MAIT) cells are innate-like T cells that 
specifically target bacterial metabolites but are also identified as innate-like 
sensors of viral infection. Individuals with chronic HIV-1 infection have lower 
numbers of circulating MAIT cells compared with healthy individuals, yet the 
features of the MAIT TCR repertoire are not well known. We isolated and 
stimulated human PBMCs from healthy non-HIV-infected donors (HD), HIV-infected 
progressors on antiretroviral therapy, and HIV-infected elite controllers (EC). 
We sorted MAIT cells using flow cytometry and used a high-throughput sequencing 
method with bar coding to link the expression of TCRα, TCRβ, and functional 
genes of interest at the single-cell level. We show differential patterns of 
MAIT TCR usage among the groups. We observed expansions of certain dominant MAIT 
clones in HIV-infected individuals upon Escherichia coli stimulation, which was 
not observed in clones of HD. We also found different patterns of CDR3 amino 
acid distributions among the three groups. Furthermore, we found blunted 
expression of phenotypic genes in HIV individuals; most notably, HD mounted a 
robust IFNG response to stimulation, whereas both HIV-infected progressors and 
EC did not. In conclusion, our study describes the diverse MAIT TCR repertoire 
of persons with chronic HIV-1 infection and suggest that MAIT clones of 
HIV-infected persons may be primed for expansion more than that of noninfected 
persons. Further studies are needed to examine the functional significance of 
unique MAIT cell TCR usage in EC.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.4049/immunohorizons.2100026
PMCID: PMC10563122
PMID: 34045357 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DISCLOSURES The authors have no financial 
conflicts of interest.