1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2021 May 13;9:663535. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2021.663535. 
eCollection 2021.

Neuroimmune Pathophysiology in Asthma.

Pavón-Romero GF(1), Serrano-Pérez NH(1), García-Sánchez L(1), Ramírez-Jiménez 
F(1), Terán LM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunogenetics and Allergy, Instituto Nacional Enfermedades 
Respiratorias Ismael Cosío Villegas, Mexico City, Mexico.

Asthma is a chronic inflammation of lower airway disease, characterized by 
bronchial hyperresponsiveness. Type I hypersensitivity underlies all atopic 
diseases including allergic asthma. However, the role of neurotransmitters (NT) 
and neuropeptides (NP) in this disease has been less explored in comparison with 
inflammatory mechanisms. Indeed, the airway epithelium contains pulmonary 
neuroendocrine cells filled with neurotransmitters (serotonin and GABA) and 
neuropeptides (substance P[SP], neurokinin A [NKA], vasoactive intestinal 
peptide [VIP], Calcitonin-gene related peptide [CGRP], and orphanins-[N/OFQ]), 
which are released after allergen exposure. Likewise, the autonomic airway 
fibers produce acetylcholine (ACh) and the neuropeptide Y(NPY). These NT/NP 
differ in their effects; SP, NKA, and serotonin exert pro-inflammatory effects, 
whereas VIP, N/OFQ, and GABA show anti-inflammatory activity. However, CGPR and 
ACh have dual effects. For example, the ACh-M3 axis induces goblet cell 
metaplasia, extracellular matrix deposition, and bronchoconstriction; the 
CGRP-RAMP1 axis enhances Th2 and Th9 responses; and the SP-NK1R axis promotes 
the synthesis of chemokines in eosinophils, mast cells, and neutrophils. In 
contrast, the ACh-α7nAChR axis in ILC2 diminishes the synthesis of TNF-α, IL-1, 
and IL-6, attenuating lung inflammation whereas, VIP-VPAC1, N/OFQ-NOP axes cause 
bronchodilation and anti-inflammatory effects. Some NT/NP as 5-HT and NKA could 
be used as biomarkers to monitor asthma patients. In fact, the asthma treatment 
based on inhaled corticosteroids and anticholinergics blocks M3 and TRPV1 
receptors. Moreover, the administration of experimental agents such as NK1R/NK2R 
antagonists and exogenous VIP decrease inflammatory mediators, suggesting that 
regulating the effects of NT/NP represents a potential novel approach for the 
treatment of asthma.

Copyright © 2021 Pavón-Romero, Serrano-Pérez, García-Sánchez, Ramírez-Jiménez 
and Terán.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2021.663535
PMCID: PMC8155297
PMID: 34055794

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.