1. Cancers (Basel). 2021 May 14;13(10):2366. doi: 10.3390/cancers13102366.

Sequence Neighborhoods Enable Reliable Prediction of Pathogenic Mutations in 
Cancer Genomes.

Banerjee S(1)(2)(3), Raman K(1)(2)(3), Ravindran B(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Robert Bosch Centre for Data Science and Artificial Intelligence (RBCDSAI), 
Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Madras, Chennai 600 036, India.
(2)Initiative for Biological Systems Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology 
(IIT) Madras, Chennai 600 036, India.
(3)Department of Biotechnology, Bhupat and Jyoti Mehta School of Biosciences, 
Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Madras, Chennai 600 036, India.
(4)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of 
Technology (IIT) Madras, Chennai 600 036, India.

Identifying cancer-causing mutations from sequenced cancer genomes hold much 
promise for targeted therapy and precision medicine. "Driver" mutations are 
primarily responsible for cancer progression, while "passengers" are 
functionally neutral. Although several computational approaches have been 
developed for distinguishing between driver and passenger mutations, very few 
have concentrated on using the raw nucleotide sequences surrounding a particular 
mutation as potential features for building predictive models. Using 
experimentally validated cancer mutation data in this study, we explored various 
string-based feature representation techniques to incorporate information on the 
neighborhood bases immediately 5' and 3' from each mutated position. Density 
estimation methods showed significant distributional differences between the 
neighborhood bases surrounding driver and passenger mutations. Binary 
classification models derived using repeated cross-validation experiments 
provided comparable performances across all window sizes. Integrating sequence 
features derived from raw nucleotide sequences with other genomic, structural, 
and evolutionary features resulted in the development of a pan-cancer mutation 
effect prediction tool, NBDriver, which was highly efficient in identifying 
pathogenic variants from five independent validation datasets. An ensemble 
predictor obtained by combining the predictions from NBDriver with three other 
commonly used driver prediction tools (FATHMM (cancer), CONDEL, and 
MutationTaster) significantly outperformed existing pan-cancer models in 
prioritizing a literature-curated list of driver and passenger mutations. Using 
the list of true positive mutation predictions derived from NBDriver, we 
identified a list of 138 known driver genes with functional evidence from 
various sources. Overall, our study underscores the efficacy of using raw 
nucleotide sequences as features to distinguish between driver and passenger 
mutations from sequenced cancer genomes.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers13102366
PMCID: PMC8156421
PMID: 34068918

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.