1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 May 10;22(9):5042. doi: 10.3390/ijms22095042.

Recent Advances in the Use of Molecular Analyses to Inform the Diagnosis and 
Prognosis of Patients with Polycythaemia Vera.

Stuckey R(1), Gómez-Casares MT(1).

Author information:
(1)Hematology Department, Hospital Universitario de Gran Canaria Dr. Negrín, 
35019 Las Palmas, Spain.

Genetic studies in the past decade have improved our understanding of the 
molecular basis of the BCR-ABL1-negative myeloproliferative neoplasm (MPN) 
polycythaemia vera (PV). Such breakthroughs include the discovery of the 
JAK2V617F driver mutation in approximately 95% of patients with PV, as well as 
some very rare cases of familial hereditary MPN caused by inherited germline 
mutations. Patients with PV often progress to fibrosis or acute myeloid 
leukaemia, both associated with very poor clinical outcome. Moreover, thrombosis 
and major bleeding are the principal causes of morbidity and mortality. As a 
result of increasingly available and economical next-generation sequencing 
technologies, mutational studies have revealed the prognostic relevance of a few 
somatic mutations in terms of thrombotic risk and risk of transformation, 
helping to improve the risk stratification of patients with PV. Finally, 
knowledge of the molecular basis of PV has helped identify targets for directed 
therapy. The constitutive activation of the tyrosine kinase JAK2 is targeted by 
ruxolitinib, a JAK1/JAK2 tyrosine kinase inhibitor for PV patients who are 
resistant or intolerant to cytoreductive treatment with hydroxyurea. Other 
molecular mechanisms have also been revealed, and numerous agents are in various 
stages of development. Here, we will provide an update of the recent published 
literature on how molecular testing can improve the diagnosis and prognosis of 
patients with PV and present recent advances that may have prognostic value in 
the near future.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms22095042
PMCID: PMC8126083
PMID: 34068690 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: M.T.G.-C. is the principal investigator of 
numerous clinical trials for patients with MPN, and has received honoraria 
and/or funding assistance from BMS, Novartis, Janssen and Incyte; however, no 
commercial partners were involved in the preparation or publication of this 
manuscript. R.S. has no conflict of interest to declare.