1. ACS Appl Nano Mater. 2021 May 28;4(5):4576-4583. doi: 10.1021/acsanm.1c00176. 
Epub 2021 Mar 29.

Sensing Enzyme Activation Heat Capacity at the Single-Molecule Level Using 
Gold-Nanorod-Based Optical Whispering Gallery Modes.

Subramanian S(1), Jones HBL(2), Frustaci S(1), Winter S(2), van der Kamp MW(3), 
Arcus VL(4), Pudney CR(2), Vollmer F(1).

Author information:
(1)Living Systems Institute, Department of Physics & Astronomy, University of 
Exeter, Exeter EX4 4QD, U.K.
(2)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, Centre for Biosensors, Bioelectronics 
and Biodevices, University of Bath, Bath BA2 7AY, U.K.
(3)School of Biochemistry, University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 1TD, U.K.
(4)Te Aka Ma̅tuatua - School of Science, University of Waikato, Hamilton 3240, 
New Zealand.

Here, we report a label-free gold nanoparticle-based single-molecule optical 
platform to study the immobilization, activity, and thermodynamics of single 
enzymes. The sensor uses plasmonic gold nanoparticles coupled to optical 
whispering gallery modes (WGMs) to probe enzyme conformational dynamics during 
turnover at a microsecond time resolution. Using a glucosidase enzyme as the 
model system, we explore the temperature dependence of the enzyme turnover at 
the single-molecule (SM) level. A recent physical model for understanding enzyme 
temperature dependencies (macromolecular rate theory; MMRT) has emerged as a 
powerful tool to study the relationship between enzyme turnover and 
thermodynamics. Using WGMs, SM enzyme measurements enable us to accurately track 
turnover as a function of conformational changes and therefore to quantitatively 
probe the key feature of the MMRT model, the activation heat capacity, at the 
ultimate level of SM. Our data shows that WGMs are extraordinarily sensitive to 
protein conformational change and can discern both multiple steps with turnover 
as well as microscopic conformational substates within those steps. The 
temperature dependence studies show that the MMRT model can be applied to a 
range of steps within turnover at the SM scale that is associated with 
conformational change. Our study validates the notion that MMRT captures 
differences in dynamics between states. The WGM sensors provide a platform for 
the quantitative analysis of SM activation heat capacity, applying MMRT to the 
label-free sensing of microsecond substates of active enzymes.

© 2021 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society.

DOI: 10.1021/acsanm.1c00176
PMCID: PMC8165693
PMID: 34085031

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.