1. Cureus. 2021 May 2;13(5):e14805. doi: 10.7759/cureus.14805.

Forty Years Since the Epidemic: Modern Paradigms in HIV Diagnosis and Treatment.

Patel K(1), Zhang A(1), Zhang MH(2), Bunachita S(3), Baccouche BM(4), Hundal 
H(5), Lavado LK(6), Agarwal A(7), Malik P(8)(9), Patel UK(10).

Author information:
(1)Medicine, Cooper Medical School of Rowan University, Camden, USA.
(2)Psychological & Brain Sciences and Biology, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, USA.
(3)Molecular and Cellular Biology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, USA.
(4)School of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, USA.
(5)Max Bell School of Public Policy, McGill University, Montreal, CAN.
(6)Nursing, Rutgers School of Nursing, Newark, USA.
(7)Biology, Yale University, New Haven, USA.
(8)Public Health, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, USA.
(9)Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, USA.
(10)Public Health and Neurology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, USA.

Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is a viral infection that, when transmitted 
through the exchange of certain bodily fluids, destroys various immune cells and 
contributes to an overall weakened immune system. If left untreated, HIV 
progresses to acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) - a chronic, 
life-threatening condition that puts patients at risk for opportunistic 
infections. Since the emergence of HIV nearly a century ago, the world has seen 
tremendous advances in elucidating its pathology and progression. These advances 
have been accompanied by an increased understanding of how subsequent effects 
and symptoms manifest in afflicted individuals. These discoveries, coupled with 
the ever-improving technologies and methodologies used for detection and 
treatment, provide the scientific and medical community with a solid grasp of 
HIV. Despite this significant headway, there is still much progress to be made; 
medical advances have allowed people with HIV to manage their disease and live a 
longer, healthier life, but a definite cure is yet to be found. Thus, the 
following literature review serves as both an extensive compendium of our 
current understanding of HIV - its pathology, testing/detection, repercussions, 
and treatment - and an acknowledgement of the areas that still require further 
research.

Copyright © 2021, Patel et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.14805
PMCID: PMC8172004
PMID: 34094761

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.