1. J Mater Sci Mater Med. 2021 Jun 12;32(6):67. doi: 10.1007/s10856-021-06536-4.

Microfibrillated cellulose films containing chitosan and tannic acid for wound 
healing applications.

Aliabadi M(1), Chee BS(2), Matos M(3), Cortese YJ(2), Nugent MJD(2), de Lima 
TAM(2), Magalhães WLE(4), de Lima GG(5)(6), Firouzabadi MD(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paper sciences and engineering, Gorgan University of 
Agricultural Sciences and Natural Resources, Gorgan, Iran.
(2)Materials Research Institute, Athlone Institute of Technology, Athlone, 
Ireland.
(3)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Engenharia e Ciência dos Materiais - PIPE, 
Universidade Federal do Paraná, Curitiba, Paraná, Brazil.
(4)Embrapa Florestas, Colombo, Brazil.
(5)Materials Research Institute, Athlone Institute of Technology, Athlone, 
Ireland. ggoetten@research.ait.ie.
(6)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Engenharia e Ciência dos Materiais - PIPE, 
Universidade Federal do Paraná, Curitiba, Paraná, Brazil. 
ggoetten@research.ait.ie.
(7)Department of Paper sciences and engineering, Gorgan University of 
Agricultural Sciences and Natural Resources, Gorgan, Iran. m_r_dehghani@mail.ru.

The effectiveness of tannic acid as antimicrobial and wound healing for burns 
have been shown for a century; however, uncontrolled target dosage may result in 
undesirable side-effects. Remarkably, tannic acid polyphenols compounds 
crosslinked with polymeric materials produce a strong composite containing the 
beneficial properties of this tannin. However, investigation of the crosslink 
structure and its antibacterial and regenerative properties are still unknown 
when using nanocellulose by mechanical defibrillation; additionally, due to the 
potential crosslink structure with chitosan, its structure can be complex. 
Therefore, this work uses bleach kraft nanocellulose in order to investigate the 
effect on the physical and regenerative properties when incorporated with 
chitosan and tannic acid. This film results in increased rigidity with a 
lamellar structure when incorporated with tannic acid due to its strong hydrogen 
bonding. The release of tannic acid varied depending on the structure it was 
synthesised with, whereas with chitosan it presented good release model compared 
to pure cellulose. In addition, exhibiting similar thermal stability as pure 
cellulose films with antibacterial properties tested against S. aureus and E. 
coli with good metabolic cellular viability while also inhibiting NF-κB 
activity, a characteristic of tannic acid.

DOI: 10.1007/s10856-021-06536-4
PMCID: PMC8197706
PMID: 34117926 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.