1. Front Neurosci. 2021 May 25;15:662064. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2021.662064. 
eCollection 2021.

CAR T Cell-Based Immunotherapy for the Treatment of Glioblastoma.

Maggs L(1), Cattaneo G(1), Dal AE(1), Moghaddam AS(1), Ferrone S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, United States.

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common and aggressive malignant 
primary brain tumor in adults. Current treatment options typically consist of 
surgery followed by chemotherapy or more frequently radiotherapy, however, 
median patient survival remains at just over 1 year. Therefore, the need for 
novel curative therapies for GBM is vital. Characterization of GBM cells has 
contributed to identify several molecules as targets for immunotherapy-based 
treatments such as EGFR/EGFRvIII, IL13Rα2, B7-H3, and CSPG4. Cytotoxic T 
lymphocytes collected from a patient can be genetically modified to express a 
chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) specific for an identified tumor antigen (TA). 
These CAR T cells can then be re-administered to the patient to identify and 
eliminate cancer cells. The impressive clinical responses to TA-specific CAR T 
cell-based therapies in patients with hematological malignancies have generated 
a lot of interest in the application of this strategy with solid tumors 
including GBM. Several clinical trials are evaluating TA-specific CAR T cells to 
treat GBM. Unfortunately, the efficacy of CAR T cells against solid tumors has 
been limited due to several factors. These include the immunosuppressive tumor 
microenvironment, inadequate trafficking and infiltration of CAR T cells and 
their lack of persistence and activity. In particular, GBM has specific 
limitations to overcome including acquired resistance to therapy, limited 
diffusion across the blood brain barrier and risks of central nervous system 
toxicity. Here we review current CAR T cell-based approaches for the treatment 
of GBM and summarize the mechanisms being explored in pre-clinical, as well as 
clinical studies to improve their anti-tumor activity.

Copyright © 2021 Maggs, Cattaneo, Dal, Moghaddam and Ferrone.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2021.662064
PMCID: PMC8185049
PMID: 34113233

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.