1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2021 Jun 14;15(6):e0009507. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pntd.0009507. eCollection 2021 Jun.

Whole-exome sequencing reveals insights into genetic susceptibility to 
Congenital Zika Syndrome.

Borda V(1), da Silva Francisco Junior R(1), Carvalho JB(1), Morais GL(1), Duque 
Rossi Á(2), Pezzuto P(2), Azevedo GS(3), Schamber-Reis BL(4), Portari EA(5), 
Melo A(3)(4), Moreira MEL(5), Guida LC(5), Cunha DP(5), Gomes L(5), Vasconcelos 
ZFM(5), Faucz FR(6), Tanuri A(2), Stratakis CA(6), Aguiar RS(7), Cardoso CC(2), 
Vasconcelos ATR(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratório de Bioinformática, Laboratório Nacional de Computação Científica 
LNCC/MCTIC Petrópolis, Brazil.
(2)Laboratório de Virologia Molecular, Instituto de Biologia, Universidade 
Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(3)Instituto de Pesquisa Professor Amorim Neto, Campina Grande Brazil.
(4)Faculdade de Ciências Médicas de Campina Grande, Núcleo de Genética Médica, 
Centro Universitário UniFacisa, Campina Grande, Brazil.
(5)Instituto Fernandes Figueira, Fiocruz, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(6)Section on Endocrinology and Genetics, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National 
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.
(7)Departamento de Genética, Ecologia e Evolução Instituto de Ciências 
Biológicas, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil.

Congenital Zika Syndrome (CZS) is a critical illness with a wide range of 
severity caused by Zika virus (ZIKV) infection during pregnancy. 
Life-threatening neurodevelopmental dysfunctions are among the most common 
phenotypes observed in affected newborns. Risk factors that contribute to 
susceptibility and response to ZIKV infection may be related to the virus 
itself, the environment, and maternal genetic background. Nevertheless, the 
newborn's genetic contribution to the critical illness is still not elucidated. 
Here, we aimed to identify possible genetic variants as well as relevant 
biological pathways that might be associated with CZS phenotypes. For this 
purpose, we performed a whole-exome sequencing in 40 children born to women with 
confirmed exposure to ZIKV during pregnancy. We investigated the occurrence of 
rare harmful single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) possibly associated with inborn 
errors in genes ontologically related to CZS phenotypes. Moreover, an exome-wide 
association analysis was also performed using a case-control design (29 CZS 
cases and 11 controls), for both common and rare variants. Five out of the 29 
CZS patients harbored known pathogenic variants likely to contribute to mild to 
severe manifestations observed. Approximately, 30% of affected individuals 
carried at least one pathogenic or likely pathogenic SNV in genes candidates to 
play a role in CZS. Our common variant association analysis detected a 
suggestive protective effect of the rs2076469 in DISP3 gene (p-value: 1.39 x 
10-5). The IL12RB2 gene (p-value: 2.18x10-11) also showed an unusual 
distribution of nonsynonymous rare SNVs in control samples. Finally, genes 
harboring harmful variants are involved in processes related to CZS phenotypes 
such as neurological development and immunity. Therefore, both rare and common 
variations may be likely to contribute as the underlying genetic cause of CZS 
susceptibility. The variations and pathways identified in this study may also 
have implications for the development of therapeutic strategies in the future.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0009507
PMCID: PMC8224898
PMID: 34125832 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.