1. J Physiol. 2021 Aug;599(15):3771-3797. doi: 10.1113/JP281362. Epub 2021 Jul 6.

Acute morphine blocks spinal respiratory motor plasticity via long-latency 
mechanisms that require toll-like receptor 4 signalling.

Tadjalli A(1)(2), Seven YB(1)(2), Sharma A(3), McCurdy CR(4), Bolser DC(1)(5), 
Levitt ES(1)(6), Mitchell GS(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Breathing Research and Therapeutics Center, University of Florida, 
Gainesville, FL, USA.
(2)Department of Physical Therapy, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutics, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(4)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, 
USA.
(5)Department of Physiological Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, 
USA.
(6)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, University of Florida, 
Gainesville, FL, USA.

Comment in
    J Physiol. 2021 Oct;599(19):4411-4412. doi: 10.1113/JP282068.

KEY POINTS: While respiratory complications following opioid use are mainly 
mediated via activation of mu opioid receptors, long-latency off-target 
signalling via innate immune toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) may impair other 
essential elements of breathing control such as respiratory motor plasticity. In 
adult rats, pre-treatment with a single dose of morphine blocked long-term 
facilitation (LTF) of phrenic motor output via a long-latency TLR4-dependent 
mechanism. In the phrenic motor nucleus, morphine triggered TLR4-dependent 
activation of microglial p38 MAPK - a key enzyme that orchestrates inflammatory 
signalling and is known to undermine phrenic LTF. Morphine-induced LTF loss may 
destabilize breathing, potentially contributing to respiratory side effects. 
Therefore, we suggest minimizing TLR-4 signalling may improve breathing 
stability during opioid therapy.
ABSTRACT: Opioid-induced respiratory dysfunction is a significant public health 
burden. While respiratory effects are mediated via mu opioid receptors, 
long-latency off-target opioid signalling through innate immune toll-like 
receptor 4 (TLR4) may modulate essential elements of breathing control, 
particularly respiratory motor plasticity. Plasticity in respiratory motor 
circuits contributes to the preservation of breathing in the face of 
destabilizing influences. For example, respiratory long-term facilitation (LTF), 
a well-studied model of respiratory motor plasticity triggered by acute 
intermittent hypoxia, promotes breathing stability by increasing respiratory 
motor drive to breathing muscles. Some forms of respiratory LTF are exquisitely 
sensitive to inflammation and are abolished by even a mild inflammation 
triggered by TLR4 activation (e.g. via systemic lipopolysaccharides). Since 
opioids induce inflammation and TLR4 activation, we hypothesized that opioids 
would abolish LTF through a TLR4-dependent mechanism. In adult Sprague Dawley 
rats, pre-treatment with a single systemic injection of the prototypical opioid 
agonist morphine blocks LTF expression several hours later in the phrenic motor 
system - the motor pool driving diaphragm muscle contractions. Morphine blocked 
phrenic LTF via TLR4-dependent mechanisms because pre-treatment with 
(+)-naloxone - the opioid inactive stereoisomer and novel small molecule TLR4 
inhibitor - prevented impairment of phrenic LTF in morphine-treated rats. 
Morphine triggered TLR4-dependent activation of microglial p38 MAPK within the 
phrenic motor system - a key enzyme that orchestrates inflammatory signalling 
and undermines phrenic LTF. Morphine-induced LTF loss may destabilize breathing, 
potentially contributing to respiratory side effects. We suggest minimizing 
TLR-4 signalling may improve breathing stability during opioid therapy by 
restoring endogenous mechanisms of plasticity within respiratory motor circuits.

© 2021 The Authors. The Journal of Physiology © 2021 The Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1113/JP281362
PMCID: PMC8437142
PMID: 34142718 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: We confirm that we do not 
have any financial or non-financial competing interests to disclose.