1. Front Oncol. 2021 Jun 1;11:654921. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2021.654921. eCollection 
2021.

The Use of Heptamethine Cyanine Dyes as Drug-Conjugate Systems in the Treatment 
of Primary and Metastatic Brain Tumors.

Cooper E(1)(2), Choi PJ(2), Denny WA(2), Jose J(2), Dragunow M(1)(3)(4), Park 
TI(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences, 
University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
(2)Auckland Cancer Society Research Centre, School of Medical Sciences, 
University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
(3)Neurosurgical Research Unit, The Centre for Brain Research, University of 
Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
(4)Hugh Green Biobank, The Centre for Brain Research, University of Auckland, 
Auckland, New Zealand.

Effective cancer therapeutics for brain tumors must be able to cross the 
blood-brain barrier (BBB) to reach the tumor in adequate quantities and overcome 
the resistance conferred by the local tumor microenvironment. Clinically 
approved chemotherapeutic agents have been investigated for brain neoplasms, but 
despite their effectiveness in peripheral cancers, failed to show therapeutic 
success in brain tumors. This is largely due to their poor bioavailability and 
specificity towards brain tumors. A targeted delivery system might improve the 
efficacy of the candidate compounds by increasing the retention time in the 
tumor tissue, and minimizing the numerous side effects associated with the 
non-specific distribution of the chemotherapy agent. Heptamethine cyanine dyes 
(HMCDs) are a class of near-infrared fluorescence (NIRF) compounds that have 
recently emerged as promising agents for drug delivery. Initially explored for 
their use in imaging and monitoring neoplasms, their tumor-targeting properties 
have recently been investigated for their use as drug carrier systems. This 
review will explore the recent developments in the tumour-targeting properties 
of a specific group of NIRF cyanine dyes and the preclinical evidence for their 
potential as drug-delivery systems in the treatment of primary and metastatic 
brain tumors.

Copyright © 2021 Cooper, Choi, Denny, Jose, Dragunow and Park.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2021.654921
PMCID: PMC8204086
PMID: 34141613

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.