1. Endocrinol Diabetes Metab Case Rep. 2021 Jun 1;2021:21-0031. doi: 
10.1530/EDM-21-0031. Online ahead of print.

Testosterone-induced increase in libido in a patient with a loss-of-function 
mutation in the AR gene.

Marino L(1), Messina A(1), S Acierno J(1), Phan-Hug F(1), J Niederländer N(1), 
Santoni F(1), La Rosa S(2), Pitteloud N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Service of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism, Faculty of 
Biology and Medicine, University of Lausanne, Lausanne University Hospital, 
Lausanne, Vaud, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire Vaudois, Lausanne, Vaud, Switzerland.

SUMMARY: Complete androgen-insensitivity syndrome (CAIS), a disorder of sex 
development (46,XY DSD), is caused primarily by mutations in the androgen 
receptor (AR). Gonadectomy is recommended due to the increased risk of 
gonadoblastoma, however, surgical intervention is often followed by loss of 
libido. We present a 26-year-old patient with CAIS who underwent gonadectomy 
followed by a significant decrease in libido, which was improved with 
testosterone treatment but not with estradiol. Genetic testing was performed and 
followed by molecular characterization. We found that this patient carried a 
previously unidentified start loss mutation in the androgen receptor. This 
variant resulted in an N-terminal truncated protein with an intact DNA binding 
domain and was confirmed to be loss-of-function in vitro. This unique CAIS case 
and detailed functional studies raise intriguing questions regarding the 
relative roles of testosterone and estrogen in libido, and in particular, the 
potential non-genomic actions of androgens.
LEARNING POINTS: N-terminal truncation of androgen receptor can cause 
androgen-insensitivity syndrome. Surgical removal of testosterone-producing 
gonads can result in loss of libido. Libido may be improved with testosterone 
treatment but not with estradiol in some forms of CAIS. A previously unreported 
AR mutation - p.Glu2_Met190del (c.2T>C) - is found in a CAIS patient and results 
in blunted AR transcriptional activity under testosterone treatment.

DOI: 10.1530/EDM-21-0031
PMCID: PMC8240814
PMID: 34152287