1. Theranostics. 2021 May 21;11(15):7144-7158. doi: 10.7150/thno.59152.
eCollection  2021.

Plasma-derived DNA containing-extracellular vesicles induce STING-mediated 
proinflammatory responses in dermatomyositis.

Li Y(1)(2), Bax C(1)(2), Patel J(1)(2), Vazquez T(1)(2), Ravishankar A(1)(2), 
Bashir MM(1)(2), Grinnell M(1)(2), Diaz D(1)(2), Werth VP(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Corporal Michael J. Crescenz Veterans Affairs Medical Center Philadelphia, 
PA.
(2)Department of Dermatology, School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA 19104.

Objectives: Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are lipid bilayer membrane vesicles 
that are present in various bodily fluids and have been implicated in autoimmune 
disease pathogenesis. Type I interferons (IFN), specifically IFN-β, are uniquely 
elevated in dermatomyositis (DM). The stimulator of interferon genes (STING) 
works as a critical nucleic acid sensor and adaptor in type I IFN signaling with 
possible implications in autoimmune diseases such as DM. In the current study, 
we investigated whether circulating EVs contribute to proinflammatory effects in 
DM, whether these proinflammatory responses are mediated by the STING signaling 
pathway, and if so, by what mechanism STING is activated. Methods: We collected 
and characterized EVs from plasma of healthy controls (HC) and DM patients; 
analyzed their abilities to trigger proinflammatory cytokines release by ELISA, 
and explored STING signaling pathway activation using immunoblot and 
immunofluorescent staining. STING signaling pathway inhibitors and RNAi were 
used to further investigate whether STING was involved in EVs-triggered 
proinflammatory response. DNase/lipid destabilizing agent was utilized to digest 
EVs and their captured DNA contents to evaluate how EVs triggered STING-mediated 
proinflammatory response in DM. Results: EVs isolated from DM plasma triggered 
proinflammatory cytokines including type I IFN release with STING signaling 
pathway activation. The activated STING pathway was preferentially mediated by 
dsDNA captured by EVs. Suppression of STING or its downstream signaling proteins 
attenuated the EVs-mediated proinflammatory response. Conclusions: 
Plasma-derived, DNA containing-EVs induced STING-mediated proinflammatory 
effects in DM. Targeting the STING pathway may be a potential therapeutic 
approach for DM.

© The author(s).

DOI: 10.7150/thno.59152
PMCID: PMC8210592
PMID: 34158841 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interest exists.