1. Front Oncol. 2021 Jun 7;11:648649. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2021.648649. eCollection 
2021.

WRN Germline Mutation Is the Likely Inherited Etiology of Various Cancer Types 
in One Iranian Family.

Norouzi M(1), Shafiei M(1), Abdollahi Z(2), Miar P(2), Galehdari H(1), Emami 
MH(3), Zeinalian M(2), Tabatabaiefar MA(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Sciences, Shahid Chamran University of 
Ahvaz, Ahvaz, Iran.
(2)Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology, School of Medicine, Isfahan 
University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan, Iran.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology, Poursina Hakim Digestive Disease Research 
Center, Isfahan University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan, Iran.
(4)Pediatric Inherited Diseases Research Center, Research Institute for 
Primordial Prevention of Noncommunicable Disease, Isfahan University of Medical 
Sciences, Isfahan, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Familial cancers comprise a considerable distribution of colorectal 
cancers (CRCs), of which only about 5% occurs through well-established 
hereditary syndromes. It has been demonstrated that deleterious variants at the 
newly identified cancer-predisposing genes could describe the etiology of 
undefined familial cancers.
METHODS: The present study aimed to identify the genetic etiology in a 
32-year-old man with early onset familial CRC employing several molecular 
diagnostic techniques. DNA was extracted from tumoral and normal 
formalin-fixed-paraffin-embedded (FFPE) blocks, and microsatellite instability 
(MSI) was evaluated. Immunohistochemistry staining of MMR proteins was performed 
on tumoral FFPE blocks. Next-generation sequencing (NGS), multiplex 
ligation-dependent amplification (MLPA) assay, and Sanger sequencing were 
applied on the genomic DNA extracted from peripheral blood. Data analysis was 
performed using bioinformatics tools. Genetic variants interpretation was based 
on ACMG.
RESULTS: MSI analysis indicated MSI-H phenotype, and IHC staining proved no 
expressions of MSH2 and MSH6 proteins. MLPA and NGS data showed no pathogenic 
variants in MMR genes. Further analysis of NGS data revealed a candidate WRN 
frameshift variant (p.R389Efs*3), which was validated with Sanger sequencing. 
The variant was interpreted as pathogenic since it met the criteria based on the 
ACMG guideline including very strong (PVS1), strong (PS3), and moderate (PM2).
CONCLUSION: WRN is a DNA helicase participating in DNA repair pathways to 
sustain genomic stability. WRN deficient function may contribute to CRC 
development that is valuable for further investigation as a candidate gene in 
hereditary cancer syndrome diagnosis.

Copyright © 2021 Norouzi, Shafiei, Abdollahi, Miar, Galehdari, Emami, Zeinalian 
and Tabatabaiefar.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2021.648649
PMCID: PMC8215443
PMID: 34164337

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.