1. Environ Health Perspect. 2021 Jun;129(6):67004. doi: 10.1289/EHP7813. Epub
2021  Jun 23.

Sources and Risk Factors for Nitrate and Microbial Contamination of Private 
Household Wells in the Fractured Dolomite Aquifer of Northeastern Wisconsin.

Borchardt MA(1), Stokdyk JP(2), Kieke BA Jr(3), Muldoon MA(4), Spencer SK(1), 
Firnstahl AD(2), Bonness DE(5), Hunt RJ(6), Burch TR(1).

Author information:
(1)Environmentally Integrated Dairy Management Research Unit, U.S. Dairy Forage 
Research Center, U.S. Department of Agriculture-Agricultural Research Service 
(USDA-ARS), Marshfield, Wisconsin, USA.
(2)Upper Midwest Water Science Center, U.S. Geological Survey, Marshfield, 
Wisconsin, USA.
(3)Center for Clinical Epidemiology and Population Health, Marshfield Clinic 
Research Institute, Marshfield, Wisconsin, USA.
(4)Wisconsin Geological and Natural History Survey, Madison, Wisconsin, USA.
(5)Kewaunee County Department of Land and Water Conservation, Luxemburg, 
Wisconsin, USA.
(6)Upper Midwest Water Science Center, U.S. Geological Survey, Middleton, 
Wisconsin, USA.

Comment in
    Environ Health Perspect. 2021 Nov;129(11):114001. doi: 10.1289/EHP10034.

BACKGROUND: Groundwater quality in the Silurian dolomite aquifer in northeastern 
Wisconsin, USA, has become contentious as dairy farms and exurban development 
expand.
OBJECTIVES: We investigated private household wells in the region, determining 
the extent, sources, and risk factors of nitrate and microbial contamination.
METHODS: Total coliforms, Escherichia coli, and nitrate were evaluated by 
synoptic sampling during groundwater recharge and no-recharge periods. 
Additional seasonal sampling measured genetic markers of human and bovine 
fecal-associated microbes and enteric zoonotic pathogens. We constructed 
multivariable regression models of detection probability (log-binomial) and 
concentration (gamma) for each contaminant to identify risk factors related to 
land use, precipitation, hydrogeology, and well construction.
RESULTS: Total coliforms and nitrate were strongly associated with 
depth-to-bedrock at well sites and nearby agricultural land use, but not septic 
systems. Both human wastewater and cattle manure contributed to well 
contamination. Rotavirus group A, Cryptosporidium, and Salmonella were the most 
frequently detected pathogens. Wells positive for human fecal markers were 
associated with depth-to-groundwater and number of septic system drainfield 
within 229 m. Manure-contaminated wells were associated with groundwater 
recharge and the area size of nearby agricultural land. Wells positive for any 
fecal-associated microbe, regardless of source, were associated with septic 
system density and manure storage proximity modified by bedrock depth. Well 
construction was generally not related to contamination, indicating land use, 
groundwater recharge, and bedrock depth were the most important risk factors.
DISCUSSION: These findings may inform policies to minimize contamination of the 
Silurian dolomite aquifer, a major water supply for the U.S. and Canadian Great 
Lakes region. https://doi.org/10.1289/EHP7813.

DOI: 10.1289/EHP7813
PMCID: PMC8221036
PMID: 34160249 [Indexed for MEDLINE]