1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2021 Jun 14;12:645279. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2021.645279. eCollection 2021.

Case Report: Severe Hypocalcemic Episodes Due to Autoimmune Enteropathy.

Halabi I(1)(2), Barohom MN(1)(2)(3), Peleg S(4), Trougouboff P(5), Elias-Assad 
G(1)(6), Agbaria R(7), Tenenbaum-Rakover Y(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Endocrine Institute, Ha'Emek Medical Center, Afula, Israel.
(2)Pediatric Health Center, Clalit Health Services, Naharia, Israel.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, Bar Ilan University, Safed, Israel.
(4)Pediatric Health Center, Clalit Health Services, Hadera, Israel.
(5)Tissue Diagnosis and Cancer Research Department, Ha'Emek Medical Center, 
Afula, Israel.
(6)The Ruth & Bruce Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion, Haifa, Israel.
(7)Pediatric Gastroenterology Unit, Ha'Emek Medical Center, Afula, Israel.

Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) is a 
rare monogenic disorder, associated with endocrine deficiencies and 
non-endocrine involvement. Gastrointestinal (GI) manifestations appear in 
approximately 25% of patients and are the presenting symptom in about 10% of 
them. Limited awareness among pediatricians of autoimmune enteropathy (AIE) 
caused by destruction of the gut endocrine cells in APECED patients delays 
diagnosis and appropriate therapy. We describe an 18-year-old female presenting 
at the age of 6.10 years with hypoparathyroidism, oral candidiasis and vitiligo. 
The clinical diagnosis of APECED was confirmed by sequencing the autoimmune 
regulator-encoding (AIRE) gene. Several characteristics of the 
disease-Hashimoto's thyroiditis, Addison's disease, diabetes mellitus type 1 and 
primary ovarian insufficiency-developed over the years. She had recurrent 
episodes of severe intractable hypocalcemia. Extensive GI investigations for 
possible malabsorption, including laboratory analyses, imaging and endoscopy 
with biopsies were unremarkable. Revision of the biopsies and chromogranin A 
(CgA) immunostaining demonstrated complete loss of enteroendocrine cells in the 
duodenum and small intestine, confirming the diagnosis of AIE. Management of 
hypocalcemia was challenging. Only intravenous calcitriol maintained calcium in 
the normal range. Between hypocalcemic episodes, the proband maintained normal 
calcium levels, suggesting a fluctuating disease course. Repeated intestinal 
biopsy revealed positive intestinal CgA immunostaining. The attribution of 
severe hypocalcemic episodes to AIE emphasizes the need for increased awareness 
of this unique presentation of APECED. The fluctuating disease course and 
repeated intestinal biopsy showing positive CgA immunostaining support a 
reversible effect of GI involvement. CgA immunostaining is indicated in patients 
with APECED for whom all other investigations have failed to reveal an 
explanation for the malabsorption.

Copyright © 2021 Halabi, Barohom, Peleg, Trougouboff, Elias-Assad, Agbaria and 
Tenenbaum-Rakover.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2021.645279
PMCID: PMC8237854
PMID: 34194389 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.