1. Biomolecules. 2021 Jun 15;11(6):889. doi: 10.3390/biom11060889.

Comprehensive Evaluation of PAXgene Fixation on Oral Cancer Tissues Using 
Routine Histology, Immunohistochemistry, and FTIR Microspectroscopy.

Lahiri P(1), Mukherjee S(1), Ghosh B(1), Das D(1), Lahiri B(2), Varshney SK(2), 
Pal M(3), Paul RR(4), Chatterjee J(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Medical Science and Technology, Indian Institute of Technology 
Kharagpur, Kharagpur 721302, India.
(2)Department of Electronics and Electrical Communication Engineering, Indian 
Institute of Technology Kharagpur, Kharagpur 721302, India.
(3)Guru Nanak Institute of Dental Sciences and Research (GNIDSR), Kolkata 
700114, India.
(4)Department of Oral & Dental Sciences, JIS University, Kolkata 700109, India.

The choice of tissue fixation is critical for preserving the morphology and 
biochemical information of tissues. Fragile oral tissues with lower tensile 
strength are challenging to process for histological applications as they are 
prone to processing damage, such as tissue tear, wrinkling, and tissue fall-off 
from slides. This leads to loss of morphological information and unnecessary 
delay in experimentation. In this study, we have characterized the new PAXgene 
tissue fixation system on oral buccal mucosal tissue of cancerous and normal 
pathology for routine histological and immunohistochemical applications. We 
aimed to minimize the processing damage of tissues and improve the quality of 
histological experiments. We also examined the preservation of biomolecules by 
PAXgene fixation using FTIR microspectroscopy. Our results demonstrate that the 
PAXgene-fixed tissues showed significantly less tissue fall-off from slides. 
Hematoxylin and Eosin staining showed comparable morphology between 
formalin-fixed and PAXgene-fixed tissues. Good quality and slightly superior 
immunostaining for cancer-associated proteins p53 and CK5/6 were observed in 
PAXgene-fixed tissues without antigen retrieval than formalin-fixed tissues. 
Further, FTIR measurements revealed superior preservation of glycogen, fatty 
acids, and amide III protein secondary structures in PAXgene-fixed tissues. 
Overall, we present the first comprehensive evaluation of the PAXgene tissue 
fixation system in oral tissues. This study concludes that the PAXgene tissue 
fixation system can be applied to oral tissues to perform diagnostic molecular 
pathology experiments without compromising the quality of the morphology or 
biochemistry of biomolecules.

DOI: 10.3390/biom11060889
PMCID: PMC8232633
PMID: 34203873 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.