1. J Clin Med. 2021 Jun 25;10(13):2803. doi: 10.3390/jcm10132803.

Molecular Subtypes and Precision Oncology in Intrahepatic Cholangiocarcinoma.

Czauderna C(1), Kirstein MM(1), Tews HC(1)(2), Vogel A(3), Marquardt JU(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine I, University Medical Center Schleswig-Holstein-Campus 
Lübeck, 23562 Lübeck, Germany.
(2)Departement of Internal Medicine I, University Hospital Regensburg, 93042 
Regensburg, Germany.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Endocrinology, Hannover 
Medical School, 30625 Hannover, Germany.

Cholangiocarcinomas (CCAs) are the second-most common primary liver cancers. 
CCAs represent a group of highly heterogeneous tumors classified based on 
anatomical localization into intra- (iCCA) and extrahepatic CCA (eCCA). In 
contrast to eCCA, the incidence of iCCA is increasing worldwide. Curative 
treatment strategies for all CCAs involve oncological resection followed by 
adjuvant chemotherapy in early stages, whereas chemotherapy is administered at 
advanced stages of disease. Due to late diagnosis, high recurrence rates, and 
limited treatment options, the prognosis of patients remains poor. Comprehensive 
molecular characterization has further revealed considerable heterogeneity and 
distinct prognostic and therapeutic traits for iCCA and eCCA, indicating that 
specific treatment modalities are required for different subclasses. Several 
druggable alterations and oncogenic drivers such as fibroblast growth factor 
receptor 2 gene fusions and hotspot mutations in isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 and 
2 mutations have been identified. Specific inhibitors have demonstrated striking 
antitumor activity in affected subgroups of patients in phase II and III 
clinical trials. Thus, improved understanding of the molecular complexity has 
paved the way for precision oncological approaches. Here, we outline current 
advances in targeted treatments and immunotherapeutic approaches. In addition, 
we delineate future perspectives for different molecular subclasses that will 
improve the clinical care of iCCA patients.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm10132803
PMCID: PMC8269161
PMID: 34202401

Conflict of interest statement: J.U.M. received honoraria from Roche, Bayer, 
Ipsen, Merz, AstraZeneca, Johnson & Johnson, MSD, Leap-Tx, and Eisai. A.V. 
received honoraria as a speaker, consultant, and advisor from Roche, Bayer, 
Sanofi, BMS, Lilly, Novartis, EISAI, AstraZeneca, Merck, Incyte, Ipsen, 
PierreFabre, MSD, and Janssen. C.C. reports receiving consulting fees from MSD 
and lecture fees from EISAI.