1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Jun 18;22(12):6574. doi: 10.3390/ijms22126574.

Heparan Sulfate Proteoglycans in Viral Infection and Treatment: A Special Focus 
on SARS-CoV-2.

De Pasquale V(1), Quiccione MS(2), Tafuri S(1), Avallone L(1), Pavone LM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Medicine and Animal Productions, University of 
Naples Federico II, 80137 Naples, Italy.
(2)Department of Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnology, Medical School, 
University of Naples Federico II, 80131 Naples, Italy.

Heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs) encompass a group of glycoproteins 
composed of unbranched negatively charged heparan sulfate (HS) chains covalently 
attached to a core protein. The complex HSPG biosynthetic machinery generates an 
extraordinary structural variety of HS chains that enable them to bind a 
plethora of ligands, including growth factors, morphogens, cytokines, 
chemokines, enzymes, matrix proteins, and bacterial and viral pathogens. These 
interactions translate into key regulatory activity of HSPGs on a wide range of 
cellular processes such as receptor activation and signaling, cytoskeleton 
assembly, extracellular matrix remodeling, endocytosis, cell-cell crosstalk, and 
others. Due to their ubiquitous expression within tissues and their large 
functional repertoire, HSPGs are involved in many physiopathological processes; 
thus, they have emerged as valuable targets for the therapy of many human 
diseases. Among their functions, HSPGs assist many viruses in invading host 
cells at various steps of their life cycle. Viruses utilize HSPGs for the 
attachment to the host cell, internalization, intracellular trafficking, egress, 
and spread. Recently, HSPG involvement in the pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2 
infection has been established. Here, we summarize the current knowledge on the 
molecular mechanisms underlying HSPG/SARS-CoV-2 interaction and downstream 
effects, and we provide an overview of the HSPG-based therapeutic strategies 
that could be used to combat such a fearsome virus.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms22126574
PMCID: PMC8235362
PMID: 34207476 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: L.M.P. has granted a patent for the use of HGF 
and its variants for the treatment of mucopolysaccharidoses. The authors declare 
no additional competing financial interest.