1. Viruses. 2021 Jun 8;13(6):1096. doi: 10.3390/v13061096.

Reovirus Low-Density Particles Package Cellular RNA.

Thoner TW Jr(1), Ye X(1), Karijolich J(1), Ogden KM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, Vanderbilt University 
Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 
37232, USA.

Packaging of segmented, double-stranded RNA viral genomes requires coordination 
of viral proteins and RNA segments. For mammalian orthoreovirus (reovirus), 
evidence suggests either all ten or zero viral RNA segments are simultaneously 
packaged in a highly coordinated process hypothesized to exclude host RNA. 
Accordingly, reovirus generates genome-containing virions and "genomeless" top 
component particles. Whether reovirus virions or top component particles package 
host RNA is unknown. To gain insight into reovirus packaging potential and 
mechanisms, we employed next-generation RNA-sequencing to define the RNA content 
of enriched reovirus particles. Reovirus virions exclusively packaged viral 
double-stranded RNA. In contrast, reovirus top component particles contained 
similar proportions but reduced amounts of viral double-stranded RNA and were 
selectively enriched for numerous host RNA species, especially short, 
non-polyadenylated transcripts. Host RNA selection was not dependent on RNA 
abundance in the cell, and specifically enriched host RNAs varied for two 
reovirus strains and were not selected solely by the viral RNA polymerase. 
Collectively, these findings indicate that genome packaging into reovirus 
virions is exquisitely selective, while incorporation of host RNAs into top 
component particles is differentially selective and may contribute to or result 
from inefficient viral RNA packaging.

DOI: 10.3390/v13061096
PMCID: PMC8228547
PMID: 34201386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to 
publish the results.