1. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2021 Aug;89:41-47. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2021.06.010. Epub 2021 Jun 19.

Preformed fibrils generated from mouse alpha-synuclein produce more inclusion 
pathology in rats than fibrils generated from rat alpha-synuclein.

Howe JW(1), Sortwell CE(2), Duffy MF(1), Kemp CJ(3), Russell CP(4), Kubik M(3), 
Patel P(4), Luk KC(5), El-Agnaf OMA(6), Patterson JR(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Translational Neuroscience, Michigan State University, Grand 
Rapids, MI, USA; Neuroscience Program, Michigan State University, East Lansing, 
MI, USA.
(2)Department of Translational Neuroscience, Michigan State University, Grand 
Rapids, MI, USA; Neuroscience Program, Michigan State University, East Lansing, 
MI, USA; Mercy Health Hauenstein Neuroscience Medical Center, Grand Rapids, MI, 
USA.
(3)Department of Translational Neuroscience, Michigan State University, Grand 
Rapids, MI, USA.
(4)Cell and Molecular Biology Department, Grand Valley State University, 
Allendale, MI, USA.
(5)Center for Neurodegenerative Disease Research, Department of Pathology and 
Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(6)Neurological Disorders Research Center, Qatar Biomedical Research Institute 
(QBRI), Hamad Bin Khalifa University (HBKU), Qatar Foundation, Doha, Qatar.
(7)Department of Translational Neuroscience, Michigan State University, Grand 
Rapids, MI, USA. Electronic address: Joseph.Patterson@hc.msu.edu.

BACKGROUND: Alpha-synuclein (α-syn) preformed fibril (PFF)-induced pathology can 
be used to study the features and progression of synucleinopathies, such as 
Parkinson's disease. Intrastriatal injection of mouse α-syn PFFs produce 
accumulation of α-syn pathology in both mice and rats. Previous studies in mice 
have revealed that greater sequence homology between the α-syn amino acid 
sequence used to produce PFFs with that of the endogenous host α-syn increases 
α-syn pathology in vivo.
NEW METHODS: Based on the prediction that greater sequence homology will result 
in more α-syn pathology, PFFs generated from recombinant rat α-syn (rPFFs) were 
used instead of PFFs produced from recombinant mouse α-syn (mPFFs), which are 
normally used in the model. Rats received unilateral intrastriatal injections of 
either rPFFs or mPFFs and accumulation of α-syn phosphorylated at serine 129 
(pSyn) was examined at 1-month post-surgery.
RESULTS: Rats injected with mPFFs exhibited abundant accumulation of α-syn 
inclusions in the substantia nigra and cortical regions, whereas in rats 
injected with rPFFs had significantly fewer SNpc neurons containing pSyn 
inclusions (≈60% fewer) and little, if any, pSyn inclusions were observed in the 
cortex.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that additional factors beyond the degree of 
sequence homology between host α-syn and injected recombinant α-syn impact 
efficiency of seeding and subsequent inclusion formation. More practically, 
these findings caution against the use of rPFFs in the rat preformed fibril 
model.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2021.06.010
PMCID: PMC8429263
PMID: 34218047 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST Authors have no conflicts 
of interest to disclose or competing interests with regards to data presented 
within this manuscript.