1. Pest Manag Sci. 2021 Nov;77(11):4993-5000. doi: 10.1002/ps.6541. Epub 2021 Jul
 12.

Differential expression of genes associated with non-target site resistance in 
Poa annua with target site resistance to acetolactate synthase inhibitors.

Laforest M(1), Soufiane B(1), Patterson EL(2), Vargas JJ(3), Boggess SL(4), 
Houston LC(4), Trigiano RN(4), Brosnan JT(3).

Author information:
(1)Saint-Jean-sur-Richelieu R&D Centre, Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, 
Saint-Jean-sur-Richelieu, QC, Canada.
(2)Department of Plant, Soil, & Microbial Sciences, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing, MI, USA.
(3)Department of Plant Sciences, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN, USA.
(4)Department of Entomology & Plant Pathology, University of Tennessee, 
Knoxville, TN, USA.

BACKGROUND: Poa annua is a pervasive grassy, self-pollinating, weed that has 
evolved resistance to 10 different herbicide modes-of-action, third most of all 
weed species. We investigated constitutive overexpression of genes associated 
with non-target site resistance (NTSR) in POAAN-R3 and the response of those 
genes when treated with trifloxysulfuron despite the biotype having a known 
target site mutation in acetolactate synthase (ALS).
RESULTS: Despite having an ALS target site mutation, POAAN-R3 still had a 
transcriptomic response to herbicide application that differed from a 
susceptible biotype. We observed differential expression of genes associated 
with transmembrane transport and oxidation-reduction activities, with 
differences being most pronounced prior to herbicide treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: In the P. annua biotype we studied with confirmed target site 
resistance to ALS inhibitors, we also observed constitutive expression of genes 
regulating transmembrane transport, as well as differential expression of genes 
associated with oxidative stress after treatment with trifloxysulfuron. This 
accumulation of mechanisms, in addition to the manifestation of target site 
resistance, could potentially increase the chance of survival when plants are 
challenged by different modes of action.

© 2021 The Authors. Pest Management Science published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 
on behalf of Society of Chemical Industry.

DOI: 10.1002/ps.6541
PMCID: PMC8518846
PMID: 34218510 [Indexed for MEDLINE]