1. Acta Biomed. 2021 Jul 1;92(3):e2021206. doi: 10.23750/abm.v92i3.10544.

Interleukin 9 serum level and single nucleotide polymorphism in patients with 
asthma.

Mahdaviani SA(1), Eskian M(2), Khorasanizadeh M(3), Bashardoost B(4), Tashayoie 
Nejad S(5), Jamaati HR(6), Rezaei A(7), Sadr M(8), Aryan Z(9), Rezaei N(10).

Author information:
(1)1- Pediatric Respiratory Diseases Research Center, National Research 
Institute of Tuberculosis and Lung Diseases (NRITLD), Shahid Beheshti University 
of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. mahdavini@yahoo.com.
(2)2- Research Center for Immunodeficiencies, Children's Medical Center, Tehran 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. meskian@bwh.harvard.edu.
(3)Research Center for Immunodeficiencies, Children's Medical Center, Tehran 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. mirhojjax@yahoo.com.
(4)1- Pediatric Respiratory Diseases Research Center, National Research 
Institute of Tuberculosis and Lung Diseases (NRITLD), Shahid Beheshti University 
of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. bashardoustb@yahoo.com.
(5)Pediatric Respiratory Diseases Research Center, National Research Institute 
of Tuberculosis and Lung Diseases (NRITLD), Shahid Beheshti University of 
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. sabere.t.nejad@gmail.com.
(6)Pediatric Respiratory Diseases Research Center, National Research Institute 
of Tuberculosis and Lung Diseases (NRITLD), Shahid Beheshti University of 
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. hamidjamaati@hotmail.com.
(7)Research Center for Immunodeficiencies, Children's Medical Center, Tehran 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. arezoorezai@gmail.com.
(8)Research Center for Immunodeficiencies, Children's Medical Center, Tehran 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. m.sadr62@gmail.com.
(9)Research Center for Immunodeficiencies, Children's Medical Center, Tehran 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. aryanzahra@yahoo.com.
(10)a:1:{s:5:"en_US";s:4:"TUMS";}. rezaei_nima@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: Asthma is a chronic inflammatory disease of airways which accounts 
for a huge economic, morbidity and mortality burden. There are different 
cytokines that contribute to asthma pathophysiology. Learning about these 
cytokines leads to attaining novel anti-inflammatory treatments for asthma 
control.
OBJECTIVES: The objective of this study is to investigate the association 
between interleukin-9 serum level and gene polymorphism with asthma 
susceptibility.
METHODS: This was a case-control study of 70 asthmatic patients and 77 healthy 
control adults aged 18-60. Asthma diagnosis and severity were based on physician 
diagnosis, pulmonary function test (PFT) and 2016 guild line of Global 
Initiative for Asthma (GINA). Interleukin 9(IL -9) serum level was measured 
using sandwich enzyme linked immunosorbent assay.  IL9 promoter single 
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) (rs2069882) was also assessed using Real-Time PCR 
System.
RESULTS: There was no significant association between IL-9 SNP polymorphism and 
asthma. IL-9 serum level was significantly associated with asthma susceptibility 
(p value= 0.016) and absolute eosinophil count (AEC) (P value=0.033) however its 
corelation with atopic asthma type, asthma sivierity and Immunoglubin E serum 
level were not statistically significant.
CONCLUSION: Although there was no association between IL-9 SNP and asthma, but 
IL-9 serum level was significantly correlated with asthma susceptibility and 
AEC.

DOI: 10.23750/abm.v92i3.10544
PMCID: PMC8343737
PMID: 34212923 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Each author declares that he or she has no 
commercial associations (e.g. consultancies, stock ownership, equity interest, 
patent/licensing arrangement etc.) that might pose a conflict of interest in 
connection with the submitted article.