1. J Inflamm Res. 2021 Jun 30;14:2883-2896. doi: 10.2147/JIR.S302117. eCollection
 2021.

Increased Sphingosine-1-Phosphate Serum Concentrations in Subjects with 
Periodontitis: A Matter of Inflammation.

Moritz E(#)(1)(2), Jedlitschky G(#)(1), Negnal J(1), Tzvetkov MV(1), Daum 
G(3)(4), Dörr M(2)(5), Felix SB(2)(5), Völzke H(2)(6), Nauck M(2)(7), Schwedhelm 
E(4)(8), Meisel P(9), Kocher T(9), Rauch BH(#)(1)(2)(10), Holtfreter B(#)(9).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pharmacology, Department of General Pharmacology, University 
Medicine Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany.
(2)German Center for Cardiovascular Research (DZHK), Partner Site Greifswald, 
Greifswald, Germany.
(3)Clinic and Polyclinic for Vascular Medicine, University Heart Center, 
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(4)German Center for Cardiovascular Research (DZHK), Partner Site 
Hamburg/Kiel/Lübeck, Hamburg, Germany.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine B, University Medicine Greifswald, 
Greifswald, Germany.
(6)Institute for Community Medicine, University Medicine Greifswald, Greifswald, 
Germany.
(7)Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, University Medicine 
Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany.
(8)Institute of Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology, University Medical Center 
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Humburg, Germany.
(9)Dental Clinics, Department of Periodontology, University Medicine Greifswald, 
Greifswald, Germany.
(10)Carl von Ossietzky Universität Oldenburg, Department of Human Medicine, 
Section of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Oldenburg, Germany.
(#)Contributed equally

PURPOSE: Periodontitis is an inflammatory disease of the oral cavity with an 
alarmingly high prevalence within the adult population. The signaling lipid 
sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) plays a crucial role in inflammatory and 
immunomodulatory responses. In addition to cardiovascular disease, sepsis and 
tumor entities, S1P has been recently identified as both mediator and biomarker 
in osteoporosis. We hypothesized that S1P may play a role in periodontitis as an 
inflammation-prone bone destructive disorder. The goal of our study was to 
evaluate associations between periodontitis and S1P serum concentrations in the 
Study of Health in Pomerania (SHIP)-Trend cohort. In addition, we investigated 
the expression of S1P metabolizing enzymes in inflamed gingival tissue.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We analyzed data from 3371 participants (51.6% women) of 
the SHIP-Trend cohort. Periodontal parameters and baseline characteristics were 
assessed. Serum S1P was measured by liquid chromatography tandem mass 
spectrometry. The expression of S1P metabolizing enzymes was determined by 
immunofluorescence staining of human gingival tissue.
RESULTS: S1P serum concentrations were significantly increased in subjects with 
both moderate and severe periodontitis, assessed as probing depth and clinical 
attachment loss. In contrast, no significant association of S1P was seen with 
caries variables (number and percentage of decayed or filled surfaces). S1P 
concentrations significantly increased with increasing high-sensitivity 
C-reactive protein (hs-CRP) levels. Interestingly, inflamed compared to normal 
human gingival tissue exhibited elevated expression levels of the S1P-generating 
enzyme sphingosine kinase 1 (SphK1).
CONCLUSION: We report an intriguingly significant association of various 
periodontal parameters with serum levels of the inflammatory lipid mediator S1P. 
Our data point towards a key role of S1P during periodontitis pathology. 
Modulation of local S1P levels or its signaling properties may represent a 
potential future therapeutic strategy to prevent or to retard periodontitis 
progression and possibly reduce periodontitis-related tooth loss.

© 2021 Moritz et al.

DOI: 10.2147/JIR.S302117
PMCID: PMC8256099
PMID: 34234513

Conflict of interest statement: Prof. Dr. Matthias Nauck reports grants from 
Federal Ministry of Education and Research Germany, the Ministry of Cultural 
Affairs, the Social Ministry of the Federal State of Mecklenburg-West Pomerania, 
during the conduct of the study; grants from Federal Ministry of Education and 
Research, Germany, European Union Interreg IVa, personal fees from German 
Medical Association, German Centre for Cardiovascular Research (GCCR), National 
Cohort, outside the submitted work. The authors report no other conflicts of 
interest in this work.