1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Jun 23;12:682605. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.682605. 
eCollection 2021.

Expanded Diversity and Phylogeny of mer Genes Broadens Mercury Resistance 
Paradigms and Reveals an Origin for MerA Among Thermophilic Archaea.

Christakis CA(1), Barkay T(2), Boyd ES(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Montana State University, Bozeman, 
MT, United States.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Rutgers, The State University of 
New Jersey, New Brunswick, NJ, United States.

Mercury (Hg) is a highly toxic element due to its high affinity for protein 
sulfhydryl groups, which upon binding, can destabilize protein structure and 
decrease enzyme activity. Prokaryotes have evolved enzymatic mechanisms to 
detoxify inorganic Hg and organic Hg (e.g., MeHg) through the activities of 
mercuric reductase (MerA) and organomercury lyase (MerB), respectively. Here, 
the taxonomic distribution and evolution of MerAB was examined in 84,032 
archaeal and bacterial genomes, metagenome assembled genomes, and single-cell 
genomes. Homologs of MerA and MerB were identified in 7.8 and 2.1% percent of 
genomes, respectively. MerA was identified in the genomes of 10 archaeal and 28 
bacterial phyla previously unknown to code for this functionality. Likewise, 
MerB was identified in 2 archaeal and 11 bacterial phyla previously unknown to 
encode this functionality. Surprisingly, homologs of MerB were identified in a 
number of genomes (∼50% of all MerB-encoding genomes) that did not encode MerA, 
suggesting alternative mechanisms to detoxify Hg(II) once it is generated in the 
cytoplasm. Phylogenetic reconstruction of MerA place its origin in thermophilic 
Thermoprotei (Crenarchaeota), consistent with high levels of Hg(II) in 
geothermal environments, the natural habitat of this archaeal class. MerB 
appears to have been recruited to the mer operon relatively recently and likely 
among a mesophilic ancestor of Euryarchaeota and Thaumarchaeota. This is 
consistent with the functional dependence of MerB on MerA and the widespread 
distribution of mesophilic microorganisms that methylate Hg(II) at lower 
temperature. Collectively, these results expand the taxonomic and ecological 
distribution of mer-encoded functionalities, and suggest that selection for 
Hg(II) and MeHg detoxification is dependent not only on the availability and 
type of mercury compounds in the environment but also the physiological 
potential of the microbes who inhabit these environments. The expanded diversity 
and environmental distribution of MerAB identify new targets to prioritize for 
future research.

Copyright © 2021 Christakis, Barkay and Boyd.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.682605
PMCID: PMC8261052
PMID: 34248899

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.