1. J Biol Chem. 2021 Aug;297(2):100948. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.100948. Epub 2021
 Jul 9.

Recognition of lipoproteins by scavenger receptor class A members.

Cheng C(1), Zheng E(2), Yu B(2), Zhang Z(2), Wang Y(2), Liu Y(3), He Y(4).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes, Shanghai Cancer 
Institute, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, 
Shanghai, China; Department of Biliary-Pancreatic Surgery, Renji Hospital, 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China; Shanghai 
Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Center for Excellence in Molecular 
Cell Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.
(2)Shanghai Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Center for Excellence in 
Molecular Cell Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China; University 
of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes, Shanghai Cancer 
Institute, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, 
Shanghai, China; Department of Biliary-Pancreatic Surgery, Renji Hospital, 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China; Shanghai Key 
Laboratory of Biliary Tract Disease, Shanghai, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes, Shanghai Cancer 
Institute, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, 
Shanghai, China; Department of Biliary-Pancreatic Surgery, Renji Hospital, 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China; Shanghai 
Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Center for Excellence in Molecular 
Cell Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China; University of 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China; Shanghai Key Laboratory of Biliary 
Tract Disease, Shanghai, China. Electronic address: he@sibcb.ac.cn.

Scavenger receptor class A (SR-A) proteins are type II transmembrane 
glycoproteins that form homotrimers on the cell surface. This family has five 
known members (SCARA1 to 5, or SR-A1 to A5) that recognize a variety of ligands 
and are involved in multiple biological pathways. Previous reports have shown 
that some SR-A family members can bind modified low-density lipoproteins (LDLs); 
however, the mechanisms of the interactions between the SR-A members and these 
lipoproteins are not fully understood. Here, we systematically characterize the 
recognition of SR-A receptors with lipoproteins and report that SCARA1 (SR-A1, 
CD204), MARCO (SCARA2), and SCARA5 recognize acetylated or oxidized LDL and 
very-low-density lipoprotein in a Ca2+-dependent manner through their C-terminal 
scavenger receptor cysteine-rich (SRCR) domains. These interactions occur 
specifically between the SRCR domains and the modified apolipoprotein B 
component of the lipoproteins, suggesting that they might share a similar 
mechanism for lipoprotein recognition. Meanwhile, SCARA4, a SR-A member with a 
carbohydrate recognition domain instead of the SRCR domain at the C terminus, 
shows low affinity for modified LDL and very-low-density lipoprotein but binds 
in a Ca2+-independent manner. SCARA3, which does not have a globular domain at 
the C terminus, was found to have no detectable binding with these lipoproteins. 
Taken together, these results provide mechanistic insights into the interactions 
between SR-A family members and lipoproteins that may help us understand the 
roles of SR-A receptors in lipid transport and related diseases such as 
atherosclerosis.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.100948
PMCID: PMC8353498
PMID: 34252459 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.