1. J Transl Med. 2021 Jul 12;19(1):302. doi: 10.1186/s12967-021-02980-6.

A paradigm shift in cell-free approach: the emerging role of MSCs-derived 
exosomes in regenerative medicine.

Moghadasi S(1), Elveny M(2), Rahman HS(3)(4), Suksatan W(5), Jalil AT(6), 
Abdelbasset WK(7)(8), Yumashev AV(9), Shariatzadeh S(10), Motavalli R(11), 
Behzad F(12), Marofi F(13), Hassanzadeh A(14), Pathak Y(15), Jarahian M(16).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Medicine, Shahid 
Sadoughi University of Medical Sciences, Yazd, Iran.
(2)DS & CI Research Group, Universitas Sumatera Utara, Medan, Indonesia.
(3)College of Medicine, University of Sulaimani, Sulaymaniyah, Iraq.
(4)Department of Medical Laboratory Sciences, Komar University of Science and 
Technology, Sulaymaniyah, Iraq.
(5)Faculty of Nursing, HRH Princess Chulabhorn College of Medical Science, 
Chulabhorn Royal Academy, Bangkok, 10210, Thailand.
(6)Faculty of Biology and Ecology, Yanka Kupala State University of Grodno, 
Grodno, Belarus.
(7)Department of Health and Rehabilitation Sciences, College of Applied Medical 
Sciences, Prince Sattam Bin Abdulaziz University, Al Kharj, Saudi Arabia.
(8)Department of Physical Therapy, Kasr Al-Aini Hospital, Cairo University, 
Giza, Egypt.
(9)Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University, Moscow, Russia.
(10)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Shahid Beheshti University 
of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(11)Stem Cell Research Center, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, 
Iran.
(12)Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, University of Tabriz, 
Tabriz, Iran.
(13)Department of Hematology, Faculty of Medicine, Tabriz University of Medical 
Sciences, Tabriz, Iran.
(14)Department of Applied Cell Sciences, School of Advanced Technologies in 
Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(15)Taneja College of Pharmacy, University of South Florida, Tampa Florida, USA.
(16)German Cancer Research Center, Toxicology and Chemotherapy Unit (G401), 
69120, Heidelberg, Germany. mostafajarahian@gmail.com.

Recently, mesenchymal stem/stromal cells (MSCs) due to their pro-angiogenic, 
anti-apoptotic, and immunoregulatory competencies along with fewer ethical 
issues are presented as a rational strategy for regenerative medicine. Current 
reports have signified that the pleiotropic effects of MSCs are not related to 
their differentiation potentials, but rather are exerted through the release of 
soluble paracrine molecules. Being nano-sized, non-toxic, biocompatible, barely 
immunogenic, and owning targeting capability and organotropism, exosomes are 
considered nanocarriers for their possible use in diagnosis and therapy. 
Exosomes convey functional molecules such as long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) and 
micro-RNAs (miRNAs), proteins (e.g., chemokine and cytokine), and lipids from 
MSCs to the target cells. They participate in intercellular interaction 
procedures and enable the repair of damaged or diseased tissues and organs. 
Findings have evidenced that exosomes alone are liable for the beneficial 
influences of MSCs in a myriad of experimental models, suggesting that MSC- 
exosomes can be utilized to establish a novel cell-free therapeutic strategy for 
the treatment of varied human disorders, encompassing myocardial infarction 
(MI), CNS-related disorders, musculoskeletal disorders (e.g. arthritis), kidney 
diseases, liver diseases, lung diseases, as well as cutaneous wounds. 
Importantly, compared with MSCs, MSC- exosomes serve more steady entities and 
reduced safety risks concerning the injection of live cells, such as 
microvasculature occlusion risk. In the current review, we will discuss the 
therapeutic potential of MSC- exosomes as an innovative approach in the context 
of regenerative medicine and highlight the recent knowledge on MSC- exosomes in 
translational medicine, focusing on in vivo researches.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12967-021-02980-6
PMCID: PMC8273572
PMID: 34253242 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: There is no conflict of interests.