1. Am J Case Rep. 2021 Jul 19;22:e933002. doi: 10.12659/AJCR.933002.

A Rare Cause of Chronic Liver Disease Diagnosed by Endoscopic Ultrasound-Guided 
Liver Biopsy.

Alajeel NA(1), Shehab M(1), Francis I(2), Alali A(3).

Author information:
(1)Haya Al-Habeeb Gastroenterology and Hepatology Center, Mubarak Al-Kabeer 
Hospital, Jabriya, Kuwait.
(2)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Kuwait University, Jabriya, 
Kuwait.
(3)Haya Al-Habeeb Gastroenterology and Hepatology Center, Mubarak Al-Kabeer 
Hospital, Jabriyah, Kuwait.

BACKGROUND Elevated liver enzymes is a common clinical problem with many 
possible etiologies, yet some are rare and can be missed. Patients with sickle 
cell disease (SCD) may be at risk of liver disease due to recurrent blood 
transfusion predisposing to viral hepatitis. Furthermore, recurrent transfusions 
can increase the risk of iron overload, which can create deposits in the liver, 
eventually resulting in chronic liver disease. Liver biopsy is an essential tool 
to establish a diagnosis of liver disease in many patients with unexplained 
elevation of liver enzymes. Recently, endosocpic ultrasound (EUS)-guided liver 
biopsy has been shown to be safe and effective in obtaining adequate liver 
tissue. However, the safety and efficacy has not been established in patients 
with SCD. CASE REPORT A 59-year-old man with SCD and beta-thalassemia minor was 
evaluated for persistently elevated liver enzymes (mainly cholestatic). He had a 
background history of treated hepatitis C virus infection. He had multiple blood 
transfusions in the past for sickle cell crisis. A diagnostic work-up revealed 
negative viral and autoimmiune serology and no evidence of biliary obstruction 
on abdominal imaging. The iron profile was elevated, consistent with iron 
overload. An EUS-guided liver biopsy confirmed a diagnosis hepatic hemosiderosis 
secondary to long-term blood transfusions. CONCLUSIONS This report emphasizes 
the importance of careful monitoring of iron levels in patients with 
hematological conditions requiring long-term blood transfusions. In addition, it 
highlights the emerging role of EUS-guided liver biopsy as a safe and accurate 
alternative to percutaneous liver biopsy.

DOI: 10.12659/AJCR.933002
PMCID: PMC8311384
PMID: 34276044 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: None declared Conflict of 
Interest None.