1. Int J Cancer. 2021 Nov 15;149(10):1817-1827. doi: 10.1002/ijc.33745. Epub 2021
 Aug 4.

Role of calcium in hormone-independent and -resistant breast cancer.

Cyrus K(1), Wang Q(2), Sharawi Z(3), Noguchi G(1), Kaushal M(1), Chang T(2), 
Rydzewski W(1), Yeguech W(1), Gibrel F(2), Psaltis JB(1), Haddad BR(1), Martin 
MB(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, Georgetown University, Washington, District of 
Columbia, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular & Cellular Biology, Georgetown 
University, Washington, District of Columbia, USA.
(3)Department of Genetics and Human Genetics, Howard University, Washington, 
District of Columbia, USA.

Approximately one-third of estrogen receptor (ER) positive breast tumors fail to 
respond to or become resistant to hormonal therapy. Although the mechanisms 
responsible for hormone resistance are not completely understood, resistance is 
associated with alterations in ERα; overexpression of proteins that interact 
with the receptor; and hormone-independent activation of the receptor by growth 
factor signal transduction pathways. Our previous studies show that in estrogen 
dependent breast cancer cells, activation of the epidermal growth factor 
signaling pathway increases intracellular calcium which binds to and activates 
ERα through sites in the ligand-binding domain of the receptor and that 
treatment with extracellular calcium increases the concentration of 
intracellular calcium which activates ERα and induces hormone-independent cell 
growth. The present study asked whether overexpression of calcium channels 
contributes to the hormone-independent and -resistant phenotype of breast cancer 
cells and whether clinically used calcium channel blockers reverse hormone 
independence and resistance. The results show that hormone-independent and 
-resistant cells overexpress calcium channels, have high concentrations of 
intracellular calcium, overexpress estrogen responsive genes and, as expected, 
grow in the absence of estradiol and that treatment with calcium channel 
blockers decreased the concentration of intracellular calcium, the expression of 
estrogen responsive genes and cell growth. More importantly, in 
hormone-resistant cells, treatment that combined a calcium channel blocker with 
an antiestrogen reversed resistance to the antiestrogen.

© 2021 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.33745
PMCID: PMC9682976
PMID: 34289100 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors do not report 
any conflicts of interest.