1. Int J Nanomedicine. 2021 Jul 15;16:4813-4830. doi: 10.2147/IJN.S302516. 
eCollection 2021.

Glycan Nanostructures of Human Coronaviruses.

Guo W(1), Lakshminarayanan H(2), Rodriguez-Palacios A(3)(4)(5)(6), Salata RA(7), 
Xu K(1), Draz MS(7).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, 
National Clinical Research Center for Infectious Diseases, Collaborative 
Innovation Center for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, The First 
Affiliated Hospital, College of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 
People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Pathology and Molecular Pathology, University of Zurich and 
University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(3)Division of Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases, Case Western Reserve 
University School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(4)Digestive Health Research Institute, Case Western Reserve University, 
Cleveland, OH, USA.
(5)Germ-Free and Gut Microbiome Core, Cleveland Digestive Diseases Research Core 
Center, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(6)University Hospitals Research and Education Institute, University Hospital 
Cleveland Medical Center, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(7)Department of Medicine, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, 
Cleveland, OH, USA.

Human coronaviruses present a substantial global disease burden, causing damage 
to populations' health, economy, and social well-being. Glycans are one of the 
main structural components of all microbes and organismic structures, including 
viruses-playing multiple essential roles in virus infection and immunity. 
Studying and understanding virus glycans at the nanoscale provide new insights 
into the diagnosis and treatment of viruses. Glycan nanostructures are 
considered potential targets for molecular diagnosis, antiviral therapeutics, 
and the development of vaccines. This review article describes glycan 
nanostructures (eg, glycoproteins and glycolipids) that exist in cells, 
subcellular structures, and microbes. We detail the structure, characterization, 
synthesis, and functions of virus glycans. Furthermore, we describe the glycan 
nanostructures of different human coronaviruses, such as human coronavirus 229E 
(HCoV-229E), human coronavirus OC43 (HCoV-OC43), severe acute respiratory 
syndrome-associated coronavirus (SARS-CoV), human coronavirus NL63 (HCoV-NL63), 
human coronavirus HKU1 (HCoV-HKU1), the Middle East respiratory 
syndrome-associated coronavirus (MERS-CoV), and how glycan nanotechnology can be 
useful to prevent and combat human coronaviruses infections, along with 
possibilities that are not yet explored.

© 2021 Guo et al.

DOI: 10.2147/IJN.S302516
PMCID: PMC8289332
PMID: 34290504 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest for 
this work.