1. J Alzheimers Dis. 2021;83(1):269-279. doi: 10.3233/JAD-210365.

Genetics Contributes to Concomitant Pathology and Clinical Presentation in 
Dementia with Lewy Bodies.

van der Lee SJ(1)(2), van Steenoven I(1)(3), van de Beek M(1), Tesi N(1)(2)(4), 
Jansen IE(1)(5), van Schoor NM(6), Reinders MJT(4), Huisman M(6)(7), Scheltens 
P(1), Teunissen CE(3), Holstege H(1)(2), van der Flier WM(1)(6), Lemstra AW(1).

Author information:
(1)Alzheimer Center Amsterdam, Department of Neurology, Amsterdam Neuroscience, 
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Section Genomics of Neurdegenerative Diseases and Aging, Department of Human 
Genetics Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands.
(3)Neurochemistry Laboratory, Department of Clinical Chemistry, Amsterdam 
Neuroscience, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(4)Pattern Recognition & Bioinformatics, Delft University of Technology, Delft, 
The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Complex Trait Genetics, Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive 
Research, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Vrije University, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Epidemiology and Data Science, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam Public Health Research Institute, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(7)Department of Sociology, VU University, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) is a complex, progressive 
neurodegenerative disease with considerable phenotypic, pathological, and 
genetic heterogeneity.
OBJECTIVE: We tested if genetic variants in part explain the heterogeneity in 
DLB.
METHODS: We tested the effects of variants previously associated with DLB (near 
APOE, GBA, and SNCA) and polygenic risk scores for Alzheimer's disease (AD-PRS) 
and Parkinson's disease (PD-PRS). We studied 190 probable DLB patients from the 
Alzheimer's dementia cohort and compared them to 2,552 control subjects. The 
p-tau/Aβ1-42 ratio in cerebrospinal fluid was used as in vivo proxy to separate 
DLB cases into DLB with concomitant AD pathology (DLB-AD) or DLB without AD 
(DLB-pure). We studied the clinical measures age, Mini-Mental State Examination 
(MMSE), and the presence of core symptoms at diagnosis and disease duration.
RESULTS: We found that all studied genetic factors significantly associated with 
DLB risk (all-DLB). Second, we stratified the DLB patients by the presence of 
concomitant AD pathology and found that APOE ɛ4 and the AD-PRS associated 
specifically with DLB-AD, but less with DLB-pure. In addition, the GBA p.E365K 
variant showed strong associated with DLB-pure and less with DLB-AD. Last, we 
studied the clinical measures and found that APOE ɛ4 associated with reduced 
MMSE, higher odds to have fluctuations and a shorter disease duration. In 
addition, the GBA p.E365K variant reduced the age at onset by 5.7 years, but the 
other variants and the PRS did not associate with clinical features.
CONCLUSION: These finding increase our understanding of the pathological and 
clinical heterogeneity in DLB.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-210365
PMCID: PMC8461715
PMID: 34308904 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors’ disclosures available online 
(https://www.j-alz.com/manuscript-disclosures/21-0365r1).