1. Clin Transl Med. 2021 Jul;11(7):e475. doi: 10.1002/ctm2.475.

Extracellular matrix and Hippo signaling as therapeutic targets of antifibrotic 
compounds for uterine fibroids.

Islam MS(1), Afrin S(1), Singh B(1), Jayes FL(2), Brennan JT(1), Borahay MA(1), 
Leppert PC(2), Segars JH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Division of Reproductive Sciences & 
Women's Health Research, Johns Hopkins Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Duke University, Durham, North 
Carolina, USA.

BACKGROUND: Uterine fibroids are highly prevalent, collagen-rich, mechanically 
stiff, fibrotic tumors for which new therapeutic options are needed. Increased 
extracellular matrix (ECM) stiffness activates mechanical signaling and 
Hippo/YAP promoting fibroid growth, but no prior studies have tested either as a 
therapeutic target. We tested the hypothesis that injection of a purified form 
of collagenase Clostridium histolyticum (CCH) that selectively digests type I 
and type III collagens would alter ECM stiffness, Hippo signaling, and 
selectively reduce fibroid cell growth. We also used two FDA-approved drugs, 
verteporfin and nintedanib, to elucidate the role of Hippo/YAP signaling in 
uterine fibroid and myometrial cells.
METHODS: The clinical trial was registered (NCT02889848). Stiffness of samples 
was measured by rheometry. Protein expression in surgical samples was analyzed 
via immunofluorescence. Protein and gene expression in uterine fibroid or 
myometrial cell lines were measured by real time PCR and western blot, and 
immunofluorescence.
RESULTS: Injection of CCH at high doses (0.1-0.2 mg/cm3 ) into fibroids resulted 
in a 46% reduction in stiffness in injected fibroids compared to controls after 
60 days. Levels of the cell proliferation marker proliferative cell nuclear 
antigen (PCNA) were decreased in fibroids 60 days after injection at high doses 
of CCH. Key Hippo signaling factors, specifically the transcriptionally inactive 
phosphorylated YAP (p-YAP), was increased at high CCH doses, supporting the role 
of YAP in fibroid growth. Furthermore, inhibition of YAP via verteporfin (YAP 
inhibitor) decreased cell proliferation, gene and protein expression of key 
factors promoting fibrosis and mechanotransduction in fibroid cells. 
Additionally, the anti-fibrotic drug, nintedanib, inhibited YAP and showed 
anti-fibrotic effects.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first report that in vivo injection of collagenase into 
uterine fibroids led to a reduction in Hippo/YAP signaling and crucial genes and 
pathways involved in fibroid growth. These results indicate that targeting ECM 
stiffness and Hippo signaling might be an effective strategy for uterine 
fibroids.

© 2021 The Authors. Clinical and Translational Medicine published by John Wiley 
& Sons Australia, Ltd on behalf of Shanghai Institute of Clinical 
Bioinformatics.

DOI: 10.1002/ctm2.475
PMCID: PMC8255059
PMID: 34323413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: James H. Segars is or was a PI on research 
sponsored by Bayer, Abbvie, Biospecifics, Allergan, Inc., and Myovant. James H. 
Segars serves on boards of the Society for Reproductive Investigation, and the 
American Gynecological and Obstetrical Society. Md Soriful Islam, Friederike L. 
Jayes, Bhuchitra Singh, Sadia Afrin, Joshua T. Brennan, and Phyllis C. Leppert 
have nothing to disclose. Mostafa A. Borahay serves as Advisory Board member for 
Myovant Sciences.