1. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2021;20:100128. doi: 10.1016/j.mcpro.2021.100128. Epub
2021  Jul 29.

A Toolbox for Efficient Proximity-Dependent Biotinylation in Zebrafish Embryos.

Rosenthal SM(1), Misra T(2), Abdouni H(3), Branon TC(4), Ting AY(5), Scott 
IC(6), Gingras AC(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada; Program in Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, The Hospital for Sick 
Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute at 
Mount Sinai Hospital, Sinai Health, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Program in Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, The Hospital for Sick 
Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute at Mount Sinai Hospital, Sinai Health, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Department of Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA; 
Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA; 
Department of Chemistry, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA; 
Department of Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, USA.
(5)Department of Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA; 
Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA; 
Department of Chemistry, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA; Chan 
Zuckerberg Biohub, San Francisco, California, USA.
(6)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada; Program in Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, The Hospital for Sick 
Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Electronic address: ian.scott@sickkids.ca.
(7)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada; Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute at Mount Sinai Hospital, Sinai 
Health, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Electronic address: gingras@lunenfeld.ca.

Understanding how proteins are organized in compartments is essential to 
elucidating their function. While proximity-dependent approaches such as BioID 
have enabled a massive increase in information about organelles, protein 
complexes, and other structures in cell culture, to date there have been only a 
few studies on living vertebrates. Here, we adapted proximity labeling for 
protein discovery in vivo in the vertebrate model organism, zebrafish. Using 
lamin A (LMNA) as bait and green fluorescent protein (GFP) as a negative 
control, we developed, optimized, and benchmarked in vivo TurboID and miniTurbo 
labeling in early zebrafish embryos. We developed both an mRNA injection 
protocol and a transgenic system in which transgene expression is controlled by 
a heat shock promoter. In both cases, biotin is provided directly in the egg 
water, and we demonstrate that 12 h of labeling are sufficient for biotinylation 
of prey proteins, which should permit time-resolved analysis of development. 
After statistical scoring, we found that the proximal partners of LMNA detected 
in each system were enriched for nuclear envelope and nuclear membrane proteins 
and included many orthologs of human proteins identified as proximity partners 
of lamin A in mammalian cell culture. The tools and protocols developed here 
will allow zebrafish researchers to complement genetic tools with powerful 
proteomics approaches.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mcpro.2021.100128
PMCID: PMC8383115
PMID: 34332124 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest The authors declare that 
they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that 
could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.