1. mBio. 2021 Aug 31;12(4):e0163621. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01636-21. Epub 2021 Aug 3.

Expression Patterns of Plasmodium falciparum Clonally Variant Genes at the Onset 
of a Blood Infection in Malaria-Naive Humans.

Pickford AK(1), Michel-Todó L(1), Dupuy F(2), Mayor A(1)(3)(4), Alonso PL(1)(3), 
Lavazec C(2), Cortés A(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)ISGlobal, Hospital Clínic-Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Catalonia, 
Spain.
(2)INSERM U1016, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) Unité Mixte 
de Recherche (UMR) 8104, Université de Paris, Institut Cochingrid.462098.1, 
Paris, France.
(3)Centro de Investigação em Saúde de Manhiça, Manhiça, Mozambique.
(4)Consorcio de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Epidemiología y Salud Pública 
(CIBERESP), Madrid, Spain.
(5)ICREA, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.

Clonally variant genes (CVGs) play fundamental roles in the adaptation of 
Plasmodium falciparum to fluctuating conditions of the human host. However, 
their expression patterns under the natural conditions of the blood circulation 
have been characterized in detail for only a few specific gene families. Here, 
we provide a detailed characterization of the complete P. falciparum 
transcriptome across the full intraerythrocytic development cycle (IDC) at the 
onset of a blood infection in malaria-naive human volunteers. We found that the 
vast majority of transcriptional differences between parasites obtained from the 
volunteers and the parental parasite line maintained in culture occurred in 
CVGs. In particular, we observed a major increase in the transcript levels of 
most genes of the pfmc-2tm and gbp families and of specific genes of other 
families, such as phist, hyp10, rif, or stevor, in addition to previously 
reported changes in var and clag3 gene expression. Increased transcript levels 
of individual pfmc-2tm, rif, and stevor genes involved activation in small 
subsets of parasites. Large transcriptional differences correlated with changes 
in the distribution of heterochromatin, confirming their epigenetic nature. 
Furthermore, the similar expression of several CVGs between parasites collected 
at different time points along the blood infection suggests that the epigenetic 
memory for multiple CVG families is lost during transmission stages, resulting 
in a reset of their transcriptional state. Finally, the CVG expression patterns 
observed in a volunteer likely infected by a single sporozoite suggest that new 
epigenetic patterns are established during liver stages. IMPORTANCE The ability 
of malaria parasites to adapt to changes in the human blood environment, where 
they produce long-term infection associated with clinical symptoms, is 
fundamental for their survival. CVGs, regulated at the epigenetic level, play a 
major role in this adaptive process, as changes in the expression of these genes 
result in alterations in the antigenic and functional properties of the 
parasites. However, how these genes are expressed under the natural conditions 
of the human circulation and how their expression is affected by passage through 
transmission stages are not well understood. Here, we provide a comprehensive 
characterization of the expression patterns of these genes at the onset of human 
blood infections, which reveals major differences with in vitro-cultured 
parasites. We also show that, during transmission stages, the previous 
expression patterns for many CVG families are lost, and new patterns are 
established.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01636-21
PMCID: PMC8406225
PMID: 34340541 [Indexed for MEDLINE]