1. Immun Inflamm Dis. 2021 Dec;9(4):1153-1159. doi: 10.1002/iid3.487. Epub 2021
Aug  3.

Vitamin D receptor gene polymorphisms in atopy.

Tamasauskiene L(1), Golubickaite I(2), Ugenskiene R(2), Sjakste N(3), Paramonova 
N(3), Wu LS(4), Wang LS(5)(6), Sitkauskiene B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology and Allergology, Lithuanian University of Health 
Sciences, Kaunas, Lithuania.
(2)Department of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Lithuanian University of 
Health Sciences, Kaunas, Lithuania.
(3)Laboratory of Genomics and Bioinformatics, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Latvia, Riga, Latvia.
(4)Graduate Institute of Biomedical Sciences, China Medical University, 
Taichung, Taiwan.
(5)Allergy and Clinical Immunology Research (ACIR) Center, College of Medicine, 
National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(6)Children's Hospital, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: The occurrence of allergic conditions, for example allergic asthma, 
rhinitis, and atopic dermatitis, is rising worldwide. These allergic conditions 
are associated with poor life quality. Vitamin D is proposed to be linked with 
increased risk and severe forms of allergic diseases.
AIMS: This review article aimed to evaluate the vitamin D level role and 
polymorphisms of vitamin D receptor gene (VDR) in atopy.
METHODS & MATERIALS: We analyzed publications that were focusing on levels of 
vitamin D and/or polymorphism analysis of vitamin D receptor gene in allergic 
asthma, rhinitis, and atopic dermatitis patients.
RESULTS: We noticed that levels of vitamin D are extensively studied in atopy by 
many research groups, however, polymorphisms of vitamin D receptor gene and 
their link with levels of vitamin D lack comprehensive data. There is evidence 
that vitamin D may be associated with anti-inflammatory effects in allergic 
diseases. Some of VDR polymorphisms also may play a role in pathogenesis of 
these diseases. However, the data from different studies are controversial.
DISCUSSION: The results of different studies are usually inconsistent, most 
probably due to populational bias or differences in methodology. Even though, 
more evidence shows a positive impact of vitamin D on the risk and outcomes of 
allergic diseases, especially atopic dermatitis, and asthma.
CONCLUSIONS: There is controversial data about the level of vitamin D and its 
role in atopy; however, more evidence shows a positive impact on the risk and 
outcomes of allergic diseases.

© 2021 The Authors. Immunity, Inflammation and Disease published by John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/iid3.487
PMCID: PMC8589349
PMID: 34343413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflict 
of interests.