1. Pharmaceuticals (Basel). 2021 Jul 15;14(7):674. doi: 10.3390/ph14070674.

Impact of Endocytosis Mechanisms for the Receptors Targeted by the Currently 
Approved Antibody-Drug Conjugates (ADCs)-A Necessity for Future ADC Research and 
Development.

Hammood M(1), Craig AW(2), Leyton JV(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Departément de Medécine Nucléaire et Radiobiologie, Faculté de Medécine et 
des Sciences de la Santé, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Sherbrooke (CHUS), 
Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC J1H 5N4, Canada.
(2)Department of Biomedical and Molecular Sciences, Queen's University, 
Kingston, ON K7L 3N6, Canada.
(3)Centre d'Imagerie Moleculaire, Centre de Recherche, CHUS, Sherbrooke, QC J1H 
5N4, Canada.

Biologically-based therapies increasingly rely on the endocytic cycle of 
internalization and exocytosis of target receptors for cancer therapies. 
However, receptor trafficking pathways (endosomal sorting (recycling, lysosome 
localization) and lateral membrane movement) are often dysfunctional in cancer. 
Antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) have revitalized the concept of targeted 
chemotherapy by coupling inhibitory antibodies to cytotoxic payloads. 
Significant advances in ADC technology and format, and target biology have 
hastened the FDA approval of nine ADCs (four since 2019). Although the links 
between aberrant endocytic machinery and cancer are emerging, the impact of 
dysregulated internalization processes of ADC targets and response rates or 
resistance have not been well studied. This is despite the reliance on ADC 
uptake and trafficking to lysosomes for linker cleavage and payload release. In 
this review, we describe what is known about all the target antigens for the 
currently approved ADCs. Specifically, internalization efficiency and relevant 
intracellular sorting activities are described for each receptor under normal 
processes, and when complexed to an ADC. In addition, we discuss aberrant 
endocytic processes that have been directly linked to preclinical ADC resistance 
mechanisms. The implications of endocytosis in regard to therapeutic 
effectiveness in the clinic are also described. Unexpectedly, information on 
endocytosis is scarce (absent for two receptors). Moreover, much of what is 
known about endocytosis is not in the context of receptor-ADC/antibody 
complexes. This review provides a deeper understanding of the pertinent 
principles of receptor endocytosis for the currently approved ADCs.

DOI: 10.3390/ph14070674
PMCID: PMC8308841
PMID: 34358100

Conflict of interest statement: J.V.L. owns shares and is Head of ADCs and 
nuclear-targeted strategies at Defense Therapeutic Inc. and is a consultant for 
Entrust Consult Partners Inc.