1. PLoS One. 2021 Aug 5;16(8):e0255850. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0255850. 
eCollection 2021.

Sympatric threatened Iberian leuciscids exhibit differences in Aeromonas 
diversity and skin lesions' prevalence.

Grilo ML(1)(2), Chambel L(3), Marques TA(4)(5), Sousa-Santos C(2), Robalo JI(2), 
Oliveira M(1).

Author information:
(1)CIISA-Centro de Investigação Interdisciplinar em Sanidade Animal, Faculdade 
de Medicina Veterinária, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal.
(2)MARE-Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre, ISPA-Instituto Universitário 
de Ciências Psicológicas, Sociais e da Vida, Lisbon, Portugal.
(3)BioISI-Biosystems and Integrative Sciences Institute, Faculdade de Ciências, 
Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal.
(4)Departamento de Biologia Animal, Centro de Estatística e Aplicações, 
Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal.
(5)Centre for Research into Ecological & Environmental Modelling, University of 
St Andrews, St Andrews, United Kingdom.

Assessments regarding health aspects of Iberian leuciscids are limited. There is 
currently an information gap regarding effects of infectious diseases on these 
populations and their role as a possible conservation threat. Moreover, 
differences in susceptibility to particular agents, such as Aeromonas spp., by 
different species/populations is not clear. To understand potential differences 
in Aeromonas diversity and load, as well as in the prevalence and proportion of 
skin lesions, in fishes exposed to similar environmental conditions, an 
observational study was implemented. Using a set of 12 individuals belonging to 
two sympatric Iberian leuciscid species (Squalius pyrenaicus and 
Iberochondrostoma lusitanicum), the skin lesion score in each individual was 
analyzed. Furthermore, a bacterial collection of Aeromonas spp. isolated from 
each individual was created and isolates' load was quantified by plate counting, 
identified at species level using a multiplex-PCR assay and virulence profiles 
established using classical phenotypic methods. The similarity relationships of 
the isolates were evaluated using a RAPD analysis. The skin lesion score was 
significantly higher in S. pyrenaicus, while the Aeromonas spp. load did not 
differ between species. When analyzing Aeromonas species diversity between 
fishes, different patterns were observed. A predominance of A. hydrophila was 
detected in S. pyrenaicus individuals, while I. lusitanicum individuals 
displayed a more diverse structure. Similarly, the virulence index of isolates 
from S. pyrenaicus was higher, mostly due to the isolated Aeromonas species. 
Genomic typing clustered the isolates mainly by fish species and skin lesion 
score. Specific Aeromonas clusters were associated with higher virulence 
indexes. Current results suggest potential differences in susceptibility to 
Aeromonas spp. at the fish species/individual level, and constitute important 
knowledge for proper wildlife management through the signalization of at-risk 
fish populations and hierarchization of conservation measures.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0255850
PMCID: PMC8341478
PMID: 34352027 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.