1. J Clin Med. 2021 Jul 23;10(15):3258. doi: 10.3390/jcm10153258.

Gastric Microenvironment-A Partnership between Innate Immunity and Gastric 
Microbiota Tricks Helicobacter pylori.

Mărginean CO(1), Meliț LE(1), Săsăran MO(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics I, George Emil Palade University of Medicine, 
Pharmacy, Science, and Technology of Târgu Mureș, Gheorghe Marinescu Street No. 
38, 540136 Târgu Mureș, Romania.
(2)Department of Pediatrics III, George Emil Palade University of Medicine, 
Pharmacy, Science, and Technology of Târgu Mureș, Gheorghe Marinescu Street No. 
38, 540136 Târgu Mureș, Romania.

Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) carcinogenicity depends on three major factors: 
bacterial virulence constituents, environmental factors and host's genetic 
susceptibility. The relationship between microenvironmental factors and H. 
pylori virulence factors are incontestable. H. pylori infection has a major 
impact on both gastric and colonic microbiota. The presence of non-H. pylori 
bacteria within the gastric ecosystem is particularly important since they might 
persistently act as an antigenic stimulus or establish a partnership with H. 
pylori in order to augment the subsequent inflammatory responses. The gastric 
ecosystem, i.e., microbiota composition in children with H. pylori infection is 
dominated by Streptoccocus, Neisseria, Rothia and Staphylococcus. The impairment 
of this ecosystem enhances growth and invasion of different pathogenic bacteria, 
further impairing the balance between the immune system and mucosal barrier. 
Moreover, altered microbiota due to H. pylori infection is involved in 
increasing the gastric T regulatory cells response in children. Since gastric 
homeostasis is defined by the partnership between commensal bacteria and host's 
immune system, this review is focused on how pathogen recognition through 
toll-like receptors (TLRs-an essential class of pathogen recognition 
receptors-PRRs) on the surface of macrophages and dendritic cells impact the 
immune response in the setting of H. pylori infection. Further studies are 
required for delineate precise role of bacterial community features and of 
immune system components.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm10153258
PMCID: PMC8347153
PMID: 34362042

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.