1. Skelet Muscle. 2021 Aug 13;11(1):20. doi: 10.1186/s13395-021-00275-4.

Investigating the correlation of muscle function tests and sarcomere 
organization in C. elegans.

Lesanpezeshki L(1), Qadota H(2), Darabad MN(1), Kashyap K(3), Lacerda CMR(1), 
Szewczyk NJ(4)(5), Benian GM(2), Vanapalli SA(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX, 
79409, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, 30322, USA.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX, 79409, 
USA.
(4)MRC/Arthritis Research UK Centre for Musculoskeletal Ageing Research, 
University of Nottingham, United Kingdom & National Institute for Health 
Research Nottingham Biomedical Research Centre, Derby, DE22 3DT, UK.
(5)Ohio Musculoskeletal and Neurological Institute (OMNI) and Department of 
Biomedical Sciences, Ohio University, Athens, OH, 45701, USA.
(6)Department of Chemical Engineering, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX, 
79409, USA. siva.vanapalli@ttu.edu.

BACKGROUND: Caenorhabditis elegans has been widely used as a model to study 
muscle structure and function. Its body wall muscle is functionally and 
structurally similar to vertebrate skeletal muscle with conserved molecular 
pathways contributing to sarcomere structure, and muscle function. However, a 
systematic investigation of the relationship between muscle force and sarcomere 
organization is lacking. Here, we investigate the contribution of various 
sarcomere proteins and membrane attachment components to muscle structure and 
function to introduce C. elegans as a model organism to study the genetic basis 
of muscle strength.
METHODS: We employ two recently developed assays that involve exertion of muscle 
forces to investigate the correlation of muscle function to sarcomere 
organization. We utilized a microfluidic pillar-based platform called NemaFlex 
that quantifies the maximum exertable force and a burrowing assay that 
challenges the animals to move in three dimensions under a chemical stimulus. We 
selected 20 mutants with known defects in various substructures of sarcomeres 
and compared the physiological function of muscle proteins required for force 
generation and transmission. We also characterized the degree of sarcomere 
disorganization using immunostaining approaches.
RESULTS: We find that mutants with genetic defects in thin filaments, thick 
filaments, and M-lines are generally weaker, and our assays are successful in 
detecting the functional changes in response to each sarcomere location tested. 
We find that the NemaFlex and burrowing assays are functionally distinct 
informing on different aspects of muscle physiology. Specifically, the burrowing 
assay has a larger bandwidth in phenotyping muscle mutants, because it could 
pick ten additional mutants impaired while exerting normal muscle force in 
NemaFlex. This enabled us to combine their readouts to develop an integrated 
muscle function score that was found to correlate with the score for muscle 
structure disorganization.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results highlight the suitability of NemaFlex and burrowing 
assays for evaluating muscle physiology of C. elegans. Using these approaches, 
we discuss the importance of the studied sarcomere proteins for muscle function 
and structure. The scoring methodology we have developed enhances the utility 
of  C. elegans as a genetic model to study muscle function.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13395-021-00275-4
PMCID: PMC8362255
PMID: 34389048 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: S. A. V. is the co-founder of NemaLife Inc. that 
commercializes C. elegans assays. The remaining authors declare that they have 
no competing interests.