1. Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Cell Res. 2021 Nov;1868(12):119118. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2021.119118. Epub 2021 Aug 12.

The anti-parallel dimer binding interface in STAT3 transcription factor is 
required for the inactivation of cytokine-mediated signal transduction.

Menon PR(1), Doudin A(1), Gregus A(1), Wirths O(2), Staab J(1), Meyer T(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychosomatic Medicine and Psychotherapy, University Medical 
Centre Göttingen, German Centre for Cardiovascular Research (DZHK), partner site 
Göttingen, Germany.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Medical Centre 
Göttingen, Germany.
(3)Department of Psychosomatic Medicine and Psychotherapy, University Medical 
Centre Göttingen, German Centre for Cardiovascular Research (DZHK), partner site 
Göttingen, Germany. Electronic address: thomas.meyer@med.uni-goettingen.de.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) gain-of-function 
mutations have been widely reported in patients with tumors and haematological 
malignancies. However, the molecular mechanisms of these pathogenic mutations 
remain largely uninvestigated. In this study, we have extensively characterized 
two STAT3 missense mutations, namely a valine-to-alanine exchange in the 
amino-terminal region (V77A) and a phenylalanine-to-alanine substitution (F174A) 
in the coiled-coil domain. The two mutants displayed elevated levels of tyrosine 
phosphorylation, premature nuclear accumulation, and differential 
transcriptional responses following stimulation of cells with interleukin-6 and 
interferon-ɣ. In line with their hyper-phosphorylated status, a greater fraction 
of V77A and F174A proteins was bound to DNA on high-affinity binding sites 
termed sis-inducible elements (SIE) as compared to the wild-type (WT) protein. 
Unexpectedly, these STAT3 variants displayed similar kinetics using in vitro 
kinase and dephosphorylation assays performed with recombinant Janus kinase 2 
(JAK2) and Tc45 phosphatase, respectively. This indicates that the two mutations 
neither affected the susceptibility of STAT3 to the enzymatic activity of the 
inactivating tyrosine phosphatase nor to the activating kinase. However, 
experiments triggering intracellular dephosphorylation by the addition of the 
tyrosine-kinase inhibitor staurosporine to cytokine-pretreated cells showed that 
the two mutants partially resisted dephosphorylation. From these data, we 
propose that the F174A missense mutation hinders the exchange from a parallel to 
an anti-parallel dimer conformation, thereby increasing the ratio of 
tyrosine-phosphorylated molecules bound to DNA and enhancing gene-dependent 
transcription. Our data point to the physiological importance of the 
anti-parallel dimer conformation in the inactivation of the cytokine-induced 
STAT3 signalling pathway.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2021.119118
PMID: 34390807 [Indexed for MEDLINE]