1. Nat Commun. 2021 Aug 16;12(1):4939. doi: 10.1038/s41467-021-25143-z.

NGF-TrkA signaling dictates neural ingrowth and aberrant osteochondral 
differentiation after soft tissue trauma.

Lee S(#)(1), Hwang C(#)(2), Marini S(3), Tower RJ(4), Qin Q(1), Negri S(1)(5), 
Pagani CA(2), Sun Y(2), Stepien DM(2), Sorkin M(2), Kubiak CA(2), Visser ND(2), 
Meyers CA(1), Wang Y(1), Rasheed HA(2), Xu J(1), Miller S(1), Huber AK(2), 
Minichiello L(6), Cederna PS(2), Kemp SWP(2), Clemens TL(4)(7), James AW(8), 
Levi B(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(2)Department of Surgery, Center for Organogenesis and Trauma, University of 
Texas, Southwestern, TX, USA.
(3)Department of Epidemiology, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(4)Department of Orthopaedics, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(5)Department of Orthopaedics and Traumatology, University of Verona, Verona, 
Italy.
(6)Department of Pharmacology, Oxford University, Oxford, UK.
(7)Baltimore Veterans Administration Medical Center, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(8)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA. 
awjames@jhmi.edu.
(9)Department of Surgery, Center for Organogenesis and Trauma, University of 
Texas, Southwestern, TX, USA. Benjamin.Levi@utsouthwestern.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Pain is a central feature of soft tissue trauma, which under certain contexts, 
results in aberrant osteochondral differentiation of tissue-specific stem cells. 
Here, the role of sensory nerve fibers in this abnormal cell fate decision is 
investigated using a severe extremity injury model in mice. Soft tissue trauma 
results in NGF (Nerve growth factor) expression, particularly within 
perivascular cell types. Consequently, NGF-responsive axonal invasion occurs 
which precedes osteocartilaginous differentiation. Surgical denervation impedes 
axonal ingrowth, with significant delays in cartilage and bone formation. 
Likewise, either deletion of Ngf or two complementary methods to inhibit its 
receptor TrkA (Tropomyosin receptor kinase A) lead to similar delays in axonal 
invasion and osteochondral differentiation. Mechanistically, single-cell 
sequencing suggests a shift from TGFβ to FGF signaling activation among 
pre-chondrogenic cells after denervation. Finally, analysis of human pathologic 
specimens and databases confirms the relevance of NGF-TrkA signaling in human 
disease. In sum, NGF-mediated TrkA-expressing axonal ingrowth drives abnormal 
osteochondral differentiation after soft tissue trauma. NGF-TrkA signaling 
inhibition may have dual therapeutic use in soft tissue trauma, both as an 
analgesic and negative regulator of aberrant stem cell differentiation.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-021-25143-z
PMCID: PMC8368242
PMID: 34400627 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Research unrelated to the work presented herein 
was supported in the James laboratory by Musculoskeletal Transplant Foundation 
(MTF) Biologics and Novadip Biosciences. A.W.J. is a paid consultant for Novadip 
and Lifesprout. This arrangement has been reviewed and approved by Johns Hopkins 
University in accordance with its conflict of interest policies. The authors 
have declared that no further conflict of interest exists.