1. J Biol Chem. 2021 Oct;297(4):101083. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.101083. Epub 2021
 Aug 19.

ECHDC1 knockout mice accumulate ethyl-branched lipids and excrete abnormal 
intermediates of branched-chain fatty acid metabolism.

Dewulf JP(1), Paquay S(2), Marbaix E(3), Achouri Y(4), Van Schaftingen E(5), 
Bommer GT(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, de Duve Institute, UCLouvain, Brussels, Belgium; 
Walloon Excellence in Lifesciences and Biotechnology (WELBIO), Brussels, 
Belgium; Department of Laboratory Medicine, University Hospital St Luc, 
UCLouvain, Bruxelles, Belgium. Electronic address: joseph.dewulf@uclouvain.be.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, de Duve Institute, UCLouvain, Brussels, Belgium; 
Walloon Excellence in Lifesciences and Biotechnology (WELBIO), Brussels, 
Belgium; Department of Neuropediatrics, University Hospital St Luc, UCLouvain, 
Bruxelles, Belgium.
(3)Department of Anatomical Pathology, University Hospital St Luc, UCLouvain, 
Bruxelles, Belgium; Department of Cell Biology, de Duve Institute, UCLouvain, 
Bruxelles, Belgium.
(4)Transgenesis Platform, de Duve Institute, UCLouvain, Bruxelles, Belgium.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, de Duve Institute, UCLouvain, Brussels, Belgium; 
Walloon Excellence in Lifesciences and Biotechnology (WELBIO), Brussels, 
Belgium. Electronic address: emile.vanschaftingen@uclouvain.be.
(6)Department of Biochemistry, de Duve Institute, UCLouvain, Brussels, Belgium; 
Walloon Excellence in Lifesciences and Biotechnology (WELBIO), Brussels, 
Belgium. Electronic address: guido.bommer@uclouvain.be.

The cytosolic enzyme ethylmalonyl-CoA decarboxylase (ECHDC1) decarboxylates 
ethyl- or methyl-malonyl-CoA, two side products of acetyl-CoA carboxylase. These 
CoA derivatives can be used to synthesize a subset of branched-chain fatty acids 
(FAs). We previously found that ECHDC1 limits the synthesis of these abnormal 
FAs in cell lines, but its effects in vivo are unknown. To further evaluate the 
effects of ECHDC1 deficiency, we generated knockout mice. These mice were 
viable, fertile, showed normal postnatal growth, and lacked obvious macroscopic 
and histologic changes. Surprisingly, tissues from wild-type mice already 
contained methyl-branched FAs due to methylmalonyl-CoA incorporation, but these 
FAs were only increased in the intraorbital glands of ECHDC1 knockout mice. In 
contrast, ECHDC1 knockout mice accumulated 16-20-carbon FAs carrying 
ethyl-branches in all tissues, which were undetectable in wild-type mice. 
Ethyl-branched FAs were incorporated into different lipids, including 
acylcarnitines, phosphatidylcholines, plasmanylcholines, and triglycerides. 
Interestingly, we found a variety of unusual glycine-conjugates in the urine of 
knockout mice, which included adducts of ethyl-branched compounds in different 
stages of oxidation. This suggests that the excretion of potentially toxic 
intermediates of branched-chain FA metabolism might prevent a more dramatic 
phenotype in these mice. Curiously, ECHDC1 knockout mice also accumulated 
2,2-dimethylmalonyl-CoA. This indicates that the broad specificity of ECHDC1 
might help eliminate a variety of potentially dangerous branched-chain 
dicarboxylyl-CoAs. We conclude that ECHDC1 prevents the formation of 
ethyl-branched FAs and that urinary excretion of glycine-conjugates allows mice 
to eliminate potentially deleterious intermediates of branched-chain FA 
metabolism.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.101083
PMCID: PMC8473548
PMID: 34419447 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.