1. Am J Case Rep. 2021 Aug 25;22:e932922. doi: 10.12659/AJCR.932922.

Desmoplastic Neurotropic Melanoma Presenting as Pilonidal Sinus: A Rare Clinical 
Association.

Berger O(1), Lerner I(2), Ohana G(2), Sinelnikov I(3), Talisman R(1).

Author information:
(1)Plastic Surgery Unit, Barzilai University Hospital Medical Center, Ashkelon, 
Israel.
(2)Department of General Surgery, Barzilai University Hospital Medical Center, 
Ashkelon, Israel.
(3)Department of Pathology, Barzilai University Hospital Medical Center, 
Ashkelon, Israel.

BACKGROUND Pilonidal Sinus (PNS) is a small cutaneous orifice in the 
intergluteal region; symptoms include pain and swelling. Disparately, 
desmoplastic neurotropic melanoma (DNM) accounts for 1% of all melanomas and 
mostly occurs in the head and neck region. Because its appearance is generally 
benign, it typically comes to surgical attention only at an advanced stage or 
after recurrence. A perineural involvement occurs in 30-40% of the cases and is 
accompanied by symptoms such as paresthesia, paresis, and/or paralysis. To the 
best of our knowledge, the association between PNS and DNM has not been 
described in the literature before. Here, we present a patient with PNS that was 
diagnosed with DNM. CASE REPORT A 31-year-old healthy man presented with 
coccydynia and sacral cyst that had been present for about a year. While the 
initial diagnosis was of a PNS, after excision and biopsy, the pathology changed 
to PNS with DNM. The patient underwent a work-up for distant metastasis, which 
was negative. Wide local excision (WLE) with sentinel lymph node biopsy (SLNB) 
was also performed. CONCLUSIONS Due to the malignant potential of PNS, we 
support the routine of pathological examination of excised specimens. Once DNM 
is diagnosed, work-up for distant metastasis and further treatment with WLE as 
well as SLNB are recommended. The current report describes an association 
between PNS and DNM. While coccydynia may have been caused by the PNS or the 
melanoma, the presence of the PNS helped with an earlier diagnosis of the 
melanoma. Further research on the possible causative relationship between the 
conditions is required.

DOI: 10.12659/AJCR.932922
PMCID: PMC8404162
PMID: 34429392 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: None declared Conflict of 
Interest None declared.