1. J Biol Chem. 2021 Oct;297(4):101107. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.101107. Epub 2021
 Aug 21.

Structural and functional characterization of ubiquitin variant inhibitors for 
the JAMM-family deubiquitinases STAMBP and STAMBPL1.

Guo Y(1), Liu Q(2), Mallette E(2), Caba C(3), Hou F(4), Fux J(2), LaPlante G(2), 
Dong A(4), Zhang Q(4), Zheng H(5), Tong Y(6), Zhang W(7).

Author information:
(1)Fisheries College, Guangdong Ocean University, Guangdong, China; Structural 
Genomics Consortium, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, College of Biological Science, 
University of Guelph, Guelph, Canada.
(3)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Windsor, Windsor, 
Canada.
(4)Structural Genomics Consortium, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(5)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Infection and Immunity, International Institute of 
Infection and Immunity, Institutes of Biology and Medical Sciences, Soochow 
University, Suzhou, Jiangsu, China.
(6)Structural Genomics Consortium, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada; 
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Windsor, Windsor, 
Canada. Electronic address: ytong@uwindsor.ca.
(7)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, College of Biological Science, 
University of Guelph, Guelph, Canada; CIFAR Azrieli Global Scholars Program, 
Canadian Institute for Advanced Research, Toronto, Canada. Electronic address: 
weizhang@uoguelph.ca.

Ubiquitination is a crucial posttranslational protein modification involved in a 
myriad of biological pathways. This modification is reversed by deubiquitinases 
(DUBs) that deconjugate the single ubiquitin (Ub) moiety or poly-Ub chains from 
substrates. In the past decade, tremendous efforts have been focused on 
targeting DUBs for drug discovery. However, most chemical compounds with 
inhibitory activity for DUBs suffer from mild potency and low selectivity. To 
overcome these obstacles, we developed a phage display-based protein engineering 
strategy for generating Ub variant (UbV) inhibitors, which was previously 
successfully applied to the Ub-specific protease (USP) family of cysteine 
proteases. In this work, we leveraged the UbV platform to selectively target 
STAMBP, a member of the JAB1/MPN/MOV34 (JAMM) metalloprotease family of DUB 
enzymes. We identified two UbVs (UbVSP.1 and UbVSP.3) that bind to STAMBP with 
high affinity but differ in their selectivity for the closely related paralog 
STAMBPL1. We determined the STAMBPL1-UbVSP.1 complex structure by X-ray 
crystallography, revealing hotspots of the JAMM-UbV interaction. Finally, we 
show that UbVSP.1 and UbVSP.3 are potent inhibitors of STAMBP isopeptidase 
activity, far exceeding the reported small-molecule inhibitor BC-1471. This work 
demonstrates that UbV technology is suitable to develop molecules as tools to 
target metalloproteases, which can be used to further understand the cellular 
function of JAMM family DUBs.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.101107
PMCID: PMC8449267
PMID: 34425109 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.