1. Genes (Basel). 2021 Aug 18;12(8):1259. doi: 10.3390/genes12081259.

Genetic Variations Associated with Long-Term Treatment Response in Bipolar 
Depression.

Anmella G(1), Vilches S(2), Espadaler-Mazo J(2), Murru A(1), Pacchiarotti I(1), 
Tuson M(2), Garriga M(1), Solé E(1), Brat M(1), Fico G(1), Vieta E(1).

Author information:
(1)Bipolar and Depressive Disorders Unit, Institute of Neuroscience, Hospital 
Clinic, University of Barcelona, IDIBAPS, CIBERSAM, 170 Villarroel st, 12-0, 
08036 Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
(2)AB-Biotics, S.A., Av. de la Torre Blanca 57, 08172 Sant Cugat del Valles, 
Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.

Several pharmacogenetic-based decision support tools for psychoactive medication 
selection are available. However, the scientific evidence of the gene-drug pairs 
analyzed is mainly based on pharmacogenetic studies in patients with major 
depression or schizophrenia, and their clinical utility is mostly assessed in 
major depression. This study aimed at evaluating the impact of individual genes, 
with pharmacogenetic relevance in other psychiatric conditions, in the response 
to treatment in bipolar depression. Seventy-six patients diagnosed with bipolar 
disorder and an index major depressive episode were included in an observational 
retrospective study. Sociodemographic and clinical data were collected, and all 
patients were genotyped using a commercial multigene pharmacogenomic-based tool 
(Neuropharmagen®, AB-Biotics S.A., Barcelona, Spain). Multiple linear regression 
was used to identify pharmacogenetic and clinical predictors of efficacy and 
tolerability of medications. The pharmacogenetic variables response to 
serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) (ABCB1) and reduced 
metabolism of quetiapine (CYP3A4) predicted patient response to these 
medications, respectively. ABCB1 was also linked to the tolerability of SNRIs. 
An mTOR-related multigenic predictor was also associated with a lower number of 
adverse effects when including switch and autolytical ideation. Our results 
suggest that the predictors identified could be useful to guide the 
pharmacological treatment in bipolar disorder. Additional clinical studies are 
necessary to confirm these findings.

DOI: 10.3390/genes12081259
PMCID: PMC8391230
PMID: 34440433 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: G.A. has received CME-related honoraria, or 
consulting fees from Janssen-Cilag, Lundbeck and Angelini with no financial or 
other relationship relevant to the subject of this article. A.M. has received 
CME-related honoraria or consulting feed from Janssen-Cilag, with no financial 
or other relationship relevant to the subject of this article. I.P. has received 
CME-related honoraria, or consulting fees from ADAMED, Janssen-Cilag and 
Lundbeck and reports no financial or other relationship relevant to the subject 
of this article. G.F. has received CME-related honoraria, or consulting fees 
from Angelini, Janssen-Cilag and Lundbeck. E.V. has received research support 
from or served as consultant, adviser or speaker for AB-Biotics, Abbott, 
Allergan, Angelini, Dainippon Sumitomo Pharma, Ferrer, Gedeon Richter, Janssen, 
Lundbeck, Otsuka, Sage pharmaceuticals, Sanofi-Aventis, Shire, Sunovion, Takeda, 
and reports no financial or other relationship relevant to the subject of this 
article. S.V., M.T. and J.E.-M. are employees of AB-Biotics. All other authors 
declare no conflict of interest.