1. J Imaging. 2019 Apr 16;5(4):49. doi: 10.3390/jimaging5040049.

Evaluating Human Photoreceptoral Inputs from Night-Time Lights Using RGB Imaging 
Photometry.

Sánchez de Miguel A(1)(2)(3), Bará S(4), Aubé M(5), Cardiel N(2), Tapia CE(2), 
Zamorano J(2), Gaston KJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Environment and Sustainability Institute, University of Exeter, Penryn, 
Cornwall TR10 9FE, UK.
(2)Departamento de Física de la Tierra y Astrofísica, Instituto de Física de 
Partículas y del Cosmos (IPARCOS), Universidad Complutense, 28040 Madrid, Spain.
(3)Instituto de Astrofísica de Andalucía, Glorieta de la Astronomía, s/n, 
C.P.18008 Granada, Spain.
(4)Departamento de Física Aplicada, Universidade de Santiago de Compostela, 
15782 Santiago de Compostela, Galicia, Spain.
(5)Physics Department, CEGEP de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC J1E 4K1, Canada.

Night-time lights interact with human physiology through different pathways 
starting at the retinal layers of the eye; from the signals provided by the 
rods; the S-, L- and M-cones; and the intrinsically photosensitive retinal 
ganglion cells (ipRGC). These individual photic channels combine in complex ways 
to modulate important physiological processes, among them the daily entrainment 
of the neural master oscillator that regulates circadian rhythms. Evaluating the 
relative excitation of each type of photoreceptor generally requires full 
knowledge of the spectral power distribution of the incoming light, information 
that is not easily available in many practical applications. One such instance 
is wide area sensing of public outdoor lighting; present-day radiometers onboard 
Earth-orbiting platforms with sufficient nighttime sensitivity are generally 
panchromatic and lack the required spectral discrimination capacity. In this 
paper, we show that RGB imagery acquired with off-the-shelf digital single-lens 
reflex cameras (DSLR) can be a useful tool to evaluate, with reasonable accuracy 
and high angular resolution, the photoreceptoral inputs associated with a wide 
range of lamp technologies. The method is based on linear regressions of these 
inputs against optimum combinations of the associated R, G, and B signals, built 
for a large set of artificial light sources by means of synthetic photometry. 
Given the widespread use of RGB imaging devices, this approach is expected to 
facilitate the monitoring of the physiological effects of light pollution, from 
ground and space alike, using standard imaging technology.

DOI: 10.3390/jimaging5040049
PMCID: PMC8320946
PMID: 34460487

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.