1. J Hepatol. 2022 Jan;76(1):123-134. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2021.08.021. Epub 2021 
Aug 28.

TAZ is indispensable for c-MYC-induced hepatocarcinogenesis.

Wang H(1), Zhang S(2), Zhang Y(2), Jia J(3), Wang J(4), Liu X(5), Zhang J(6), 
Song X(2), Ribback S(7), Cigliano A(8), Evert M(8), Liang B(9), Wu H(10), 
Calvisi DF(11), Zeng Y(12), Chen X(13).

Author information:
(1)Liver Transplantation Division, Department of Liver Surgery, West China 
Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China; Laboratory of Liver Surgery, West 
China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, China; Department of 
Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences and Liver Center, University of 
California, San Francisco, California, USA.
(2)Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences and Liver Center, 
University of California, San Francisco, California, USA.
(3)Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences and Liver Center, 
University of California, San Francisco, California, USA; Department of Oncology 
and Hematology, the Second Hospital, Jilin University, Changchun, China.
(4)Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences and Liver Center, 
University of California, San Francisco, California, USA; School of Life 
Sciences, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine, Beijing, China.
(5)Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences and Liver Center, 
University of California, San Francisco, California, USA; School of Pharmacy, 
Hubei University of Chinese Medicine Wuhan, Hubei, China.
(6)Department of Thoracic Oncology II, Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and 
Translational Research (Ministry of Education), Peking University Cancer 
Hospital and Institute, Beijing, People's Republic of China.
(7)Institute of Pathology, University of Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany.
(8)Institute of Pathology, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany.
(9)Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences and Liver Center, 
University of California, San Francisco, California, USA; Hepatic Surgery 
Center, Department of Surgery, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
(10)Liver Transplantation Division, Department of Liver Surgery, West China 
Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China; Laboratory of Liver Surgery, West 
China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.
(11)Institute of Pathology, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany. 
Electronic address: diego.calvisi@klinik.uni-regensburg.de.
(12)Liver Transplantation Division, Department of Liver Surgery, West China 
Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China; Laboratory of Liver Surgery, West 
China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, China. Electronic address: 
zengyong@medmail.com.cn.
(13)Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences and Liver Center, 
University of California, San Francisco, California, USA. Electronic address: 
xin.chen@ucsf.edu.

Erratum in
    J Hepatol. 2022 Mar;76(3):755-756. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2021.12.006.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Mounting evidence implicates the Hippo downstream effectors 
Yes-associated protein (YAP) and transcriptional co-activator with PDZ-binding 
motif (TAZ) in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). We investigated the functional 
contribution of YAP and/or TAZ to c-MYC-induced liver tumor development.
METHODS: The requirement for YAP and/or TAZ in c-Myc-driven hepatocarcinogenesis 
was analyzed using conditional Yap, Taz, and Yap;Taz knockout (KO) mice. An 
hepatocyte-specific inducible TTR-CreERT2 KO system was applied to evaluate the 
role of YAP and TAZ during tumor progression. Expression patterns of YAP, TAZ, 
c-MYC, and BCL2L12 were analyzed in human HCC samples.
RESULTS: We found that the Hippo cascade is inactivated in c-Myc-induced mouse 
HCC. Intriguingly, TAZ mRNA levels and activation status correlated with c-MYC 
activity in human and mouse HCC, but YAP mRNA levels did not. We demonstrated 
that TAZ is a direct transcriptional target of c-MYC. In c-Myc induced murine 
HCCs, ablation of Taz, but not Yap, completely prevented tumor development. 
Mechanistically, TAZ was required to avoid c-Myc-induced hepatocyte apoptosis 
during tumor initiation. The anti-apoptotic BCL2L12 gene was identified as a 
novel target regulated specifically by YAP/TAZ, whose silencing strongly 
suppressed c-Myc-driven murine hepatocarcinogenesis. In c-Myc murine HCC 
lesions, conditional knockout of Taz, but not Yap, led to tumor regression, 
supporting the requirement of TAZ for c-Myc-driven HCC progression.
CONCLUSIONS: TAZ is a pivotal player at the crossroad between the c-MYC and 
Hippo pathways in HCC. Targeting TAZ might be beneficial for the treatment of 
patients with HCC and c-MYC activation.
LAY SUMMARY: The identification of novel treatment targets and approaches for 
patients with hepatocellular carcinoma is crucial to improve survival outcomes. 
We identified TAZ as a transcriptional target of c-MYC which plays a critical 
role in c-MYC-dependent hepatocarcinogenesis. TAZ could potentially be targeted 
for the treatment of patients with c-MYC-driven hepatocellular carcinoma.

Copyright © 2021 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhep.2021.08.021
PMCID: PMC9569156
PMID: 34464659 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest that pertain to this work. Please refer to the 
accompanying ICMJE disclosure forms for further details.