1. Signal Transduct Target Ther. 2021 Aug 30;6(1):323. doi: 
10.1038/s41392-021-00728-8.

Ribosomal proteins and human diseases: molecular mechanisms and targeted 
therapy.

Kang J(#)(1)(2), Brajanovski N(#)(1), Chan KT(1)(2), Xuan J(1)(2), Pearson 
RB(1)(2)(3)(4), Sanij E(5)(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cancer Research, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, Melbourne, VIC, 
Australia.
(2)Sir Peter MacCallum Department of Oncology, University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University, Clayton, 
VIC, Australia.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(5)Division of Cancer Research, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, Melbourne, VIC, 
Australia. esanij@svi.edu.au.
(6)Sir Peter MacCallum Department of Oncology, University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, VIC, Australia. esanij@svi.edu.au.
(7)Department of Clinical Pathology, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, 
Australia. esanij@svi.edu.au.
(8)St. Vincent's Institute of Medical Research, Fitzroy, VIC, Australia. 
esanij@svi.edu.au.
(#)Contributed equally

Ribosome biogenesis and protein synthesis are fundamental rate-limiting steps 
for cell growth and proliferation. The ribosomal proteins (RPs), comprising the 
structural parts of the ribosome, are essential for ribosome assembly and 
function. In addition to their canonical ribosomal functions, multiple RPs have 
extra-ribosomal functions including activation of p53-dependent or 
p53-independent pathways in response to stress, resulting in cell cycle arrest 
and apoptosis. Defects in ribosome biogenesis, translation, and the functions of 
individual RPs, including mutations in RPs have been linked to a diverse range 
of human congenital disorders termed ribosomopathies. Ribosomopathies are 
characterized by tissue-specific phenotypic abnormalities and higher cancer risk 
later in life. Recent discoveries of somatic mutations in RPs in multiple tumor 
types reinforce the connections between ribosomal defects and cancer. In this 
article, we review the most recent advances in understanding the molecular 
consequences of RP mutations and ribosomal defects in ribosomopathies and 
cancer. We particularly discuss the molecular basis of the transition from hypo- 
to hyper-proliferation in ribosomopathies with elevated cancer risk, a paradox 
termed "Dameshek's riddle." Furthermore, we review the current treatments for 
ribosomopathies and prospective therapies targeting ribosomal defects. We also 
highlight recent advances in ribosome stress-based cancer therapeutics. 
Importantly, insights into the mechanisms of resistance to therapies targeting 
ribosome biogenesis bring new perspectives into the molecular basis of cancer 
susceptibility in ribosomopathies and new clinical implications for cancer 
therapy.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41392-021-00728-8
PMCID: PMC8405630
PMID: 34462428 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.