1. Front Neurol. 2021 Aug 9;12:710572. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2021.710572.
eCollection  2021.

LIPAD (LRRK2/Luebeck International Parkinson's Disease) Study Protocol: Deep 
Phenotyping of an International Genetic Cohort.

Usnich T(1), Vollstedt EJ(1), Schell N(1), Skrahina V(2), Bogdanovic X(2), Gaber 
H(2), Förster TM(2), Heuer A(2), Koleva-Alazeh N(3), Csoti I(3), Basak AN(4), 
Ertan S(5), Genc G(6), Bauer P(2), Lohmann K(1), Grünewald A(7), Schymanski 
EL(7), Trinh J(1), Schaake S(1), Berg D(8), Gruber D(9), Isaacson SH(10), Kühn 
AA(11), Mollenhauer B(12), Pedrosa DJ(13), Reetz K(14), Sammler EM(15), Valente 
EM(16), Valzania F(17), Volkmann J(18), Zittel S(19), Brüggemann N(1)(20), 
Kasten M(1)(21), Rolfs A(2), Klein C(1); LIPAD Study Group.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neurogenetics, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany.
(2)CENTOGENE GmbH, Rostock, Germany.
(3)Gertrudis Clinic Biskirchen, Parkinson-Center, Leun, Germany.
(4)Neurodegeneration Research Laboratory, Suna and Inan Kirac Foundation, Koç 
University Translational Medicine Research Center, Koç University School of 
Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey.
(5)Department of Neurology, Koç University School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey.
(6)Sişli Etfal Training and Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey.
(7)Luxembourg Centre for Systems Biomedicine, University of Luxembourg, 
Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg.
(8)Department of Neurology, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, 
Germany.
(9)Neurologisches Fachkrankenhaus Für Bewegungsstörungen/Parkinson, Beelitz, 
Germany.
(10)Parkinson's Disease and Movement Disorder Center of Boca Raton, Boca Raton, 
FL, United States.
(11)Department of Neurology and Experimental Neurology, Charité Medical 
University Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(12)Paracelsus-Elena-Klinik, Kassel, Germany.
(13)Department of Neurology, University Hospital of Gießen and Marburg, Marburg, 
Germany.
(14)Department of Neurology, University Hospital Rheinisch-Westfälische 
Technische Hochschule Aachen, Aachen, Germany.
(15)Medical Research Council Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit and 
Molecular and Clinical Medicine, Ninewells Hospital and Medical School, 
University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom.
(16)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia and Istituto di 
Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico Mondino Foundation, Pavia, Italy.
(17)Neurology Unit, Azienda USL - IRCCS di Reggio Emilia, Reggio Emilia, Italy.
(18)Department of Neurology, University Hospital Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany.
(19)Department of Neurology, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, 
Hamburg, Germany.
(20)Department of Neurology, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany.
(21)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, 
Germany.

Background: Pathogenic variants in the Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene 
are the most common known monogenic cause of Parkinson's disease (PD). 
LRRK2-linked PD is clinically indistinguishable from idiopathic PD and inherited 
in an autosomal dominant fashion with reduced penetrance and variable 
expressivity that differ across ethnicities and geographic regions. Objective: 
To systematically assess clinical signs and symptoms including non-motor 
features, comorbidities, medication and environmental factors in PD patients, 
unaffected LRRK2 pathogenic variant carriers, and controls. A further focus is 
to enable the investigation of modifiers of penetrance and expressivity of LRRK2 
pathogenic variants using genetic and environmental data. Methods: Eligible 
participants are invited for a personal or online examination which comprises 
completion of a detailed eCRF and collection of blood samples (to obtain DNA, 
RNA, serum/plasma, immune cells), urine as well as household dust. We plan to 
enroll 1,000 participants internationally: 300 with LRRK2-linked PD, 200 with 
LRRK2 pathogenic variants but without PD, 100 PD patients with pathogenic 
variants in the GBA or PRKN genes, 200 patients with idiopathic PD, and 200 
healthy persons without pathogenic variants. Results: The eCRF consists of an 
investigator-rated (1 h) and a self-rated (1.5 h) part. The first part includes 
the Movement Disorder Society Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating, Hoehn &Yahr, 
and Schwab & England Scales, the Brief Smell Identification Test, and Montreal 
Cognitive Assessment. The self-rating part consists of a PD risk factor, food 
frequency, autonomic dysfunction, and quality of life questionnaires, the 
Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Inventory, and the Epworth Sleepiness as well as the 
Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scales. The first 15 centers have been initiated 
and the first 150 participants enrolled (as of March 25th, 2021). Conclusions: 
LIPAD is a large-scale international scientific effort focusing on deep 
phenotyping of LRRK2-linked PD and healthy pathogenic variant carriers, 
including the comparison with additional relatively frequent genetic forms of 
PD, with a future perspective to identify genetic and environmental modifiers of 
penetrance and expressivity Clinical Trial Registration:ClinicalTrials.gov, 
NCT04214509.

Copyright © 2021 Usnich, Vollstedt, Schell, Skrahina, Bogdanovic, Gaber, 
Förster, Heuer, Koleva-Alazeh, Csoti, Basak, Ertan, Genc, Bauer, Lohmann, 
Grünewald, Schymanski, Trinh, Schaake, Berg, Gruber, Isaacson, Kühn, 
Mollenhauer, Pedrosa, Reetz, Sammler, Valente, Valzania, Volkmann, Zittel, 
Brüggemann, Kasten, Rolfs, Klein and The LIPAD Study Group.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2021.710572
PMCID: PMC8406937
PMID: 34475849

Conflict of interest statement: VS, XB, HG, TF, AH, PB, and AR were employed by 
company CENTOGENE GmbH. The authors declare that this study received funding 
from Centogene GmbH. The funder was involved in the study design, organization 
of the research project and review and critique of the manuscript.