1. Mol Metab. 2021 Dec;54:101334. doi: 10.1016/j.molmet.2021.101334. Epub 2021
Sep  4.

A point mutation in the Pdia6 gene results in loss of pancreatic β-cell identity 
causing overt diabetes.

Chhabra NF(1), Amend AL(1), Bastidas-Ponce A(2), Sabrautzki S(3), Tarquis-Medina 
M(2), Sachs S(2), Rubey M(1), Lorenz-Depiereux B(4), Feuchtinger A(5), Bakhti 
M(6), Lickert H(2), Przemeck GKH(1), Hrabě de Angelis M(7).

Author information:
(1)Helmholtz Zentrum München, Institute of Experimental Genetics and German 
Mouse Clinic, Neuherberg, Germany; German Center for Diabetes Research (DZD), 
Neuherberg, Germany.
(2)German Center for Diabetes Research (DZD), Neuherberg, Germany; Helmholtz 
Zentrum München, Institute of Diabetes and Regeneration Research, Neuherberg, 
Germany; Technische Universität München, School of Medicine, Munich, Germany.
(3)Helmholtz Zentrum München, Institute of Experimental Genetics and German 
Mouse Clinic, Neuherberg, Germany; Helmholtz Zentrum München, Research Unit 
Comparative Medicine, Neuherberg, Germany.
(4)Helmholtz Zentrum München, Institute of Human Genetics, Neuherberg, Germany.
(5)Helmholtz Zentrum München, Research Unit Analytical Pathology, Neuherberg, 
Germany.
(6)German Center for Diabetes Research (DZD), Neuherberg, Germany; Helmholtz 
Zentrum München, Institute of Diabetes and Regeneration Research, Neuherberg, 
Germany.
(7)Helmholtz Zentrum München, Institute of Experimental Genetics and German 
Mouse Clinic, Neuherberg, Germany; German Center for Diabetes Research (DZD), 
Neuherberg, Germany; Technische Universität München, TUM School of Life Sciences 
(SoLS), Chair of Experimental Genetics, Freising, Germany. Electronic address: 
hrabe@helmholtz-muenchen.de.

OBJECTIVE: Protein disulfide isomerases (PDIs) are oxidoreductases that are 
involved in catalyzing the formation and rearrangement of disulfide bonds during 
protein folding. One of the PDI members is the PDI-associated 6 (PDIA6) protein, 
which has been shown to play a vital role in β-cell dysfunction and diabetes. 
However, very little is known about the function of this protein in β-cells 
in vivo. This study aimed to describe the consequences of a point mutation in 
Pdia6 on β-cell development and function.
METHODS: We generated an ENU mouse model carrying a missense mutation 
(Phe175Ser) in the second thioredoxin domain of the Pdia6 gene. Using 
biochemical and molecular tools, we determined the effects of the mutation on 
the β-cell development at embryonic day (E)18.5 and β-cell identity as well as 
function at postnatal stages.
RESULTS: Mice homozygous for the Phe175Ser (F175S) mutation were mildly 
hyperglycemic at weaning and subsequently became hypoinsulinemic and overtly 
diabetic at the adult stage. Although no developmental phenotype was detected 
during embryogenesis, mutant mice displayed reduced insulin-expressing β-cells 
at P14 and P21 without any changes in the rate of cell death and proliferation. 
Further analysis revealed an increase in BiP and the PDI family member PDIA4, 
but without any concomitant apoptosis and cell death. Instead, the expression of 
prominent markers of β-cell maturation and function, such as Ins2, Mafa, and 
Slc2a2, along with increased expression of α-cell markers, Mafb, and glucagon 
was observed in adult mice, suggesting loss of β-cell identity.
CONCLUSIONS: The results demonstrate that a global Pdia6 mutation renders mice 
hypoinsulinemic and hyperglycemic. This occurs due to the loss of pancreatic 
β-cell function and identity, suggesting a critical role of PDIA6 specifically 
for β-cells.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier GmbH.. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molmet.2021.101334
PMCID: PMC8515296
PMID: 34487921 [Indexed for MEDLINE]