1. Cancer Med. 2021 Oct;10(19):6579-6589. doi: 10.1002/cam4.4110. Epub 2021 Sep
9.

Merestinib monotherapy or in combination for japanese patients with advanced 
and/or metastatic cancer: A phase 1 study.

Doi T(1), Yamamoto N(2), Naito Y(1), Kuboki Y(1), Koyama T(2), Piao Y(3), 
Tsujimoto N(3), Asou H(3), Inoue K(3), Kondo S(2).

Author information:
(1)National Cancer Center Hospital East, Chiba, Japan.
(2)Department of Experimental Therapeutics, National Cancer Center Hospital, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Eli Lilly Japan K.K, Kobe, Japan.

This phase 1, multi-center, nonrandomized, open-label, dose-escalation study 
consisted of Part A wherein merestinib 80 or 120 mg (40-mg tablets) was 
administered orally QD during a 28-day cycle to patients diagnosed with solid 
tumors and Part B wherein merestinib 80 mg (40-mg tablets) was administered 
orally QD, and cisplatin 25 mg/m2  + gemcitabine 1000 mg/m2 administered IV on 
Day 1 and Day 8 of a 21-day cycle (for a maximum of eight cycles) to patients 
diagnosed with biliary tract carcinoma (BTC). Nineteen patients were screened 
and 18 patients were (Part A, n = 10; Part B, n = 8) enrolled in the trial and 
received treatment. All patients in Parts A and B were from Japan and were 
within an age range of 43-73 years, with an ECOG PS of 0.1. No dose-limiting 
toxicity or deaths were experienced in the study. Dose-limiting toxicity 
equivalent toxicity of Grade 4 platelet count decreased (n = 1) and was observed 
in Part B. In Part A, treatment-related Grade ≥3 TEAEs were reported in one 
patient (PT: ALT increased and AST increased), while in Part B, five patients 
reported treatment-related Grade ≥3 TEAEs with four of the five patients 
reporting an event of neutrophil count decreased. No complete response was 
reported in either Part. One patient in Part B reported partial response while 
four patients in each part reported stable disease. Merestinib monotherapy was 
concluded to be tolerable in Japanese patients, and its combination with 
cisplatin and gemcitabine is a tolerable regimen for Japanese patients with BTC. 
Trial registration: NCT03027284 (ClinicalTrials.gov) registered on 23 January 
2017.

© 2021 The Authors. Cancer Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/cam4.4110
PMCID: PMC8495281
PMID: 34499416 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: TD received consulting fees or honorarium from 
Amgen, MSD, Taiho, Boehringer Ingelheim, Abbvie, Takeda, Rakuten Medical, 
Daiichi Sankyo; payment for lectures from Abbvie, Bristol Myers Squibb, 
Astellas, Ono Pharma, Oncolys BioPharma, Taiho, Rakuten Medical; and grants from 
Lilly, Taiho, Novartis, Merck Serono, MSD, Janssen, Boehringer Ingelheim, Eisai, 
IQVIA, Sumitomo Dainippon, Daiichi Sankyo, Bristol Myers Squibb, Abbvie. NY 
received honoraria from BMS, Pfizer, AstraZeneca, Eli Lilly, ONO, Chugai, Sysmex 
and research funds from Astellas, Chugai, Eisai, Taiho, BMS, Pfizer, Novartis, 
Eli Lilly, AbbVie, Daiichi‐Sankyo, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Kyowa‐Hakko 
Kirin, Takeda, ONO, Janssen Pharma, MSD, MERCK, GSK, Sumitomo Dainippon, Chiome 
Bioscience. YN received lecture fees from Chugai, Pfizer, and Novartis and 
research funds from Roche. YK received grants from Amgen, Takeda, AstraZeneca, 
Ono Pharmaceutical Company Limited, Taiho Pharmaceutical Company Limited, 
Boehringer Ingelheim GmbH. AbbVie, GSK, Chugai Company Limited, Daiichi‐Sankyo 
and Genmab K.K; served as a consultant at Takeda; received personal fees from 
Taiho, Sanofi, Bayer Yakuhin, and Ono Pharmaceutical Company Limited. TK 
received honoraria from Cysmex and Chugai. YP, KI, NT, and HA are employees of 
Eli Lilly Japan K.K. SK received research funding from ASLAN Pharmaceuticals, 
AstraZeneca, Bayer, Eli Lilly, MSD, Boehringer Ingelheim, and Pfizer. The study 
was designed under the responsibility of Eli Lilly and Company, in conjunction 
with the steering committee; The study was funded by Eli Lilly and Company. 
Merestinib was provided by Eli Lilly and Company. Eli Lilly and Company 
collected and analyzed the data and contributed to the interpretation of the 
study. All authors had full access to all of the data in the study and had final 
responsibility for the decision to submit for publication.