1. J Extracell Vesicles. 2021 Sep;10(11):e12139. doi: 10.1002/jev2.12139.

An engineered CD81-based combinatorial library for selecting recombinant binders 
to cell surface proteins: Laminin binding CD81 enhances cellular uptake of 
extracellular vesicles.

Vogt S(1)(2), Bobbili MR(2)(3), Stadlmayr G(4), Stadlbauer K(4), Kjems J(5), 
Rüker F(2), Grillari J(2)(3), Wozniak-Knopp G(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)acib GmbH (Austrian Centre of Industrial Biotechnology), Graz, Austria.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Institute of Molecular Biotechnology, University 
of Natural Resources and Life Sciences (BOKU), Vienna, Austria.
(3)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Experimental and Clinical Traumatology in the 
AUVA Research Center, Vienna, Austria.
(4)Department of Biotechnology, Christian Doppler Laboratory for Innovative 
Immunotherapeutics, University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences (BOKU), 
Vienna, Austria.
(5)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Centre for Cellular Signal 
Patterns (CellPat), Interdisciplinary Nanoscience Centre (iNANO), Aarhus 
University, Aarhus C, Denmark.

The research of extracellular vesicles (EVs) has boomed in the last decade, with 
the promise of them functioning as target-directed drug delivery vehicles, able 
to modulate proliferation, migration, differentiation, and other properties of 
the recipient cell that are vital for health of the host organism. To enhance 
the ability of their targeted delivery, we employed an intrinsically 
overrepresented protein, CD81, to serve for recognition of the desired target 
antigen. Yeast libraries displaying mutant variants of the large extracellular 
loop of CD81 have been selected for binders to human placental laminin as an 
example target. Their specific interaction with laminin was confirmed in a 
mammalian display system. Derived sequences were reformatted to full-length CD81 
and expressed in EVs produced by HeLa cells. These EVs were examined for the 
presence of the recombinant protein and were shown to exhibit an enhanced uptake 
into laminin-secreting mammalian cell lines. For the best candidate, the 
specificity of antigen interaction was demonstrated with a competition 
experiment. To our knowledge, this is the first example of harnessing an EV 
membrane protein as mediator of de novo target antigen recognition via in vitro 
molecular evolution, opening horizons to a broad range of applications in 
various therapeutic settings.

© 2021 The Authors. Journal of Extracellular Vesicles published by Wiley 
Periodicals, LLC on behalf of the International Society for Extracellular 
Vesicles.

DOI: 10.1002/jev2.12139
PMCID: PMC8435527
PMID: 34514736 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: J.G. is co‐founder and shareholder of Evercyte 
GmbH. The technology of antigen recognition via antigen binding marker proteins 
of extracellular vesicles of is covered in the patent application 
PCT/EP2019/071825.