1. Am J Case Rep. 2021 Sep 12;22:e933053. doi: 10.12659/AJCR.933053.

An 11-Year-Old Saudi Arabian Girl Who Presented with Multisystem Inflammatory 
Syndrome in Children (MIS-C) Associated with SARS-CoV-2 Infection with Coronary 
Artery Aneurysm and Cardiac Involvement: A Case Report.

Al Qahtani M(1), Uddin MS(1), Al Fulayyih S(1), Al Baridi S(1), Hamid Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Ministry of National Guard Health Affairs, Dammam, 
Saudi Arabia.

BACKGROUND Early in the COVID-19 pandemic, children who were infected with 
severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus2 (SARS-CoV-2) with vascular 
inflammation were described as having a vasculitis similar to Kawasaki's 
disease. There are now consensus clinical guidelines that have described the 
presentation and diagnosis of multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children 
(MIS-C) associated with SARS-CoV-2 infection. This report aims to describe a 
case of MIS-C in an 11-year-old Saudi Arabian girl who presented with coronary 
artery aneurysm and cardiac involvement. CASE REPORT We describe an 11-year-old 
Saudi girl who was asymptomatic for 3 weeks after contracting SARS-CoV-2. Three 
weeks after suffering a mild flulike illness, she developed a high fever, cough, 
and severe clinical deterioration within 12 h of admission, including shock, 
rash, pleural effusion, high inflammatory markers, and a coronary aneurysm. As 
per current practice, the diagnosis was confirmed as multisystem inflammatory 
syndrome based on a SARS-CoV-2 test with reverse transcription polymerase chain 
reaction (RT-PCR) from 2 nasopharyngeal aspirates. Her condition was 
successfully treated with antibiotics, inotropes, IVIG, aspirin, and 
Tocilizumab, in addition to high-flow oxygen therapy. Eventually, she was able 
to return home after fully recovering. CONCLUSIONS The findings in this report 
suggest that children with MIS-C due to SARS-CoV-2 infection can have a good 
prognosis, even when they suffer from coronary artery and cardiac involvement. 
The increasing number of emerging SARS-CoV-2 variants that affect children 
supports the importance of RT-PCR for the COVID-19 diagnostic test for children 
with multisystem or cardiovascular inflammation, which may guide the most 
appropriate clinical management of the variants of MIS-C.

DOI: 10.12659/AJCR.933053
PMCID: PMC8450426
PMID: 34510156 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: None declared Conflict of 
Interest None declared.