1. J Carcinog. 2021 Aug 13;20:9. doi: 10.4103/jcar.JCar_24_20. eCollection 2021.

Understanding the molecular mechanism associated with reversal of oral submucous 
fibrosis targeting hydroxylysine aldehyde-derived collagen cross-links.

Shetty SS(1), Sharma M(2), Kabekkodu SP(3), Kumar NA(4), Satyamoorthy K(3), 
Radhakrishnan R(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral Pathology, Faculty of Dentistry, Melaka Manipal Medical 
College, Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, Karnataka, India.
(2)Department of Oral Pathology, Sudha Rustagi College of Dental Sciences and 
Research, Faridabad, Haryana, India.
(3)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Manipal School of Life Sciences, 
Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, Karnataka.
(4)Department of Chemistry, Manipal Institute of Technology, Manipal Academy of 
Higher Education, Manipal, Karnataka.
(5)Department of Oral Pathology, Manipal College of Dental Sciences, Manipal 
Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, Karnataka.

Fibrosis is a pathological state characterized by excessive deposition of the 
extracellular matrix components leading to impaired tissue function in the 
affected organ. It results in scarring of the affected tissue akin to an 
over-healing wound as a consequence of chronic inflammation and repair in 
response to injury. Persistent trauma of susceptible oral mucosa due to habitual 
chewing of betel quid resulting in zealous healing of the mucosal tissue is one 
plausible explanation for the onset of oral submucous fibrosis (OSF). The 
irreversibility and resistance of collagen to degradation and its high potential 
to undergo malignant change are a major reason for morbidity in OSF. Hence, 
early diagnosis and timely treatment are crucial to prevent the progression of 
OSF to malignancy. This review focuses on the mechanistic insight into the role 
of collagen cross-links in advancing fibrosis and possible therapeutic targets 
that bring about a reversal of fibrosis. These options may be beneficial if 
attempted as a specific therapeutic modality in OSF as is in organ fibrosis. The 
upregulation of lysyl oxidase and lysyl hydroxylase has been shown to exhibit 
the higher levels of the hydroxylysine aldehyde-derived cross-links in fibrosis 
and tumor stroma promoting the tumor cell survival, resistance, and invasion. 
The in silico analysis highlights the potential drugs that may target the genes 
regulating collagen crosslinking.

Copyright: © 2021 Journal of Carcinogenesis.

DOI: 10.4103/jcar.JCar_24_20
PMCID: PMC8411980
PMID: 34526855

Conflict of interest statement: All the authors of the manuscript hereby state 
that there is no financial implication or personal relationship with other 
people or organization that could inappropriately influence the outcome of this 
work.