1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2021 Sep 7;9:703310. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2021.703310. 
eCollection 2021.

Bacterial Translocation as Inflammatory Driver in Crohn's Disease.

Linares R(1), Francés R(1)(2)(3), Gutiérrez A(2)(3)(4), Juanola O(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Hepatic and Intestinal Immunobiology Group, Department of Clinical Medicine, 
Miguel Hernández University, San Juan de Alicante, Spain.
(2)CIBERehd, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Instituto ISABIAL, Hospital General Universitario de Alicante, Alicante, 
Spain.
(4)Servicio de Medicina Digestiva, Hospital General Universitario de Alicante, 
Alicante, Spain.
(5)Translational Research Laboratory, Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Ente 
Ospedaliero Cantonale, Lugano, Switzerland.
(6)Faculty of Biomedical Sciences, Universitá della Svizzera Italiana, Lugano, 
Switzerland.

Crohn's disease (CD) is a chronic inflammatory disorder of the gastrointestinal 
tract responsible for intestinal lesions. The multifactorial etiology attributed 
to CD includes a combination of environmental and host susceptibility factors, 
which result in an impaired host-microbe gut interaction. Bacterial overgrowth 
and dysbiosis, increased intestinal barrier permeability, and altered 
inflammatory responses in patients with CD have been described in the past. 
Those events explain the pathogenesis of luminal translocation of bacteria or 
its products into the blood, a frequent event in CD, which, in turn, favors a 
sustained inflammatory response in these patients. In this review, we navigate 
through the interaction between bacterial antigen translocation, permeability of 
the intestinal barrier, immunologic response of the host, and genetic 
predisposition as a combined effect on the inflammatory response observed in CD. 
Several lines of evidence support that translocation of bacterial products leads 
to uncontrolled inflammation in CD patients, and as a matter of fact, the 
presence of gut bacterial genomic fragments at a systemic level constitutes a 
marker for increased risk of relapse among CD patients. Also, the significant 
percentage of CD patients who lose response to biologic therapies may be 
influenced by the translocation of bacterial products, which are well-known 
drivers of proinflammatory cytokine production by host immune cells. Further 
mechanistic studies evaluating cellular and humoral immune responses, gut 
microbiota alterations, and genetic predisposition will help clinicians to 
better control and personalize the management of CD patients in the future.

Copyright © 2021 Linares, Francés, Gutiérrez and Juanola.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2021.703310
PMCID: PMC8452966
PMID: 34557484

Conflict of interest statement: AG has served as speaker, consultant, or 
advisory member for, or received research funding from MSD, ABBVIE, TAKEDA, KERN 
PHARMA, PFIZER, OTSUKA, SHIRE, and JANSSEN, outside the submitted work. The 
remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any 
commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential 
conflict of interest.