1. mBio. 2021 Oct 26;12(5):e0183621. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01836-21. Epub 2021 Sep
28.

On the Offensive: the Role of Outer Membrane Vesicles in the Successful 
Dissemination of New Delhi Metallo-β-lactamase (NDM-1).

Martínez MMB(1)(2), Bonomo RA(#)(3)(4)(5)(6)(7)(8)(9)(10), Vila 
AJ(#)(6)(11)(12), Maffía PC(#)(1)(13)(2), González LJ(#)(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)Laboratorio de Microbiología Molecular, Instituto de Microbiología Básica y 
Aplicada, Universidad Nacional de Quilmes, Bernal, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(2)Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), Buenos 
Aires, Argentina.
(3)Research Service, Veterans Affairs Northeast Ohio Healthcare System, 
Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, 
Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(5)Medical Service and GRECC, Veterans Affairs Northeast Ohio Healthcare System, 
Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(6)CWRU-Cleveland VAMC Center for Antimicrobial Resistance and Epidemiology 
(Case VA CARES), Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(7)Department of Pharmacology, Case Western Reserve University School of 
Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(8)Department of Molecular Biology and Microbiology, Case Western Reserve 
University School of Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(9)Department of Biochemistry, Case Western Reserve University School of 
Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(10)Department of Proteomics and Bioinformatics, Case Western Reserve University 
School of Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(11)Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular de Rosario (IBR, CONICET-UNR), 
Rosario, Argentina.
(12)Área Biofísica, Facultad de Ciencias Bioquímicas y Farmacéuticas, 
Universidad Nacional de Rosario, Rosario, Argentina.
(13)Universidad Nacional de Hurlingham, Villa Tesei, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(#)Contributed equally

The emergence and worldwide dissemination of carbapenemase-producing 
Gram-negative bacteria are a major public health threat. Metallo-β-lactamases 
(MBLs) represent the largest family of carbapenemases. Regrettably, these 
resistance determinants are spreading worldwide. Among them, the New Delhi 
metallo-β-lactamase (NDM-1) is experiencing the fastest and largest geographical 
spread. NDM-1 β-lactamase is anchored to the bacterial outer membrane, while 
most MBLs are soluble, periplasmic enzymes. This unique cellular localization 
favors the selective secretion of active NDM-1 into outer membrane vesicles 
(OMVs). Here, we advance the idea that NDM-containing vesicles serve as vehicles 
for the local dissemination of NDM-1. We show that OMVs with NDM-1 can protect a 
carbapenem-susceptible strain of Escherichia coli upon treatment with meropenem 
in a Galleria mellonella infection model. Survival curves of G. mellonella 
revealed that vesicle encapsulation enhances the action of NDM-1, prolonging and 
favoring bacterial protection against meropenem inside the larva hemolymph. We 
also demonstrate that E. coli cells expressing NDM-1 protect a susceptible 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa strain within the larvae in the presence of meropenem. By 
using E. coli variants engineered to secrete variable amounts of NDM-1, we 
demonstrate that the protective effect correlates with the amount of NDM-1 
secreted into vesicles. We conclude that secretion of NDM-1 into OMVs 
contributes to the survival of otherwise susceptible nearby bacteria at 
infection sites. These results disclose that OMVs play a role in the 
establishment of bacterial communities, in addition to traditional horizontal 
gene transfer mechanisms. IMPORTANCE Resistance to carbapenems, last-resort 
antibiotics, is spreading worldwide, raising great concern. NDM-1 is one of the 
most potent and widely disseminated carbapenem-hydrolyzing enzymes spread among 
many bacteria and is secreted to the extracellular medium within outer membrane 
vesicles. We show that vesicles carrying NDM-1 can protect 
carbapenem-susceptible strains of E. coli and P. aeruginosa upon treatment with 
meropenem in a live infection model. These vesicles act as nanoparticles that 
encapsulate and transport NDM-1, prolonging and favoring its action against 
meropenem inside a living organism. Secretion of NDM-1 into vesicles contributes 
to the survival of otherwise susceptible nearby bacteria at infection sites. We 
propose that vesicles play a role in the establishment of bacterial communities 
and the dissemination of antibiotic resistance, in addition to traditional 
horizontal gene transfer mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01836-21
PMCID: PMC8546644
PMID: 34579567 [Indexed for MEDLINE]