1. Polymers (Basel). 2021 Sep 14;13(18):3098. doi: 10.3390/polym13183098.

Ionic Inter-Particle Complexation Effect on the Performance of Waterborne 
Coatings.

Argaiz M(1), Ruipérez F(2), Aguirre M(1), Tomovska R(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)POLYMAT and Departamento de Química Aplicada, Facultad de Ciencias Químicas, 
University of the Basque Country UPV/EHU, Joxe Mari Korta Zentroa, Tolosa 
Hiribidea, 72, 20018 Donostia-San Sebastián, Spain.
(2)POLYMAT and Physical Chemistry Department, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of 
the Basque Country UPV/EHU, 01006 Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain.
(3)Ikerbasque, Basque Foundation for Science, Maria Diaz de Haro 3, 48013 
Bilbao, Spain.

The performance of waterborne (meth)acrylic coatings is critically affected by 
the film formation process, in which the individual polymer particles must join 
to form a continuous film. Consequently, the waterborne polymers present lower 
performance than their solvent-borne counter-polymers. To decrease this effect, 
in this work, ionic complexation between oppositely charged polymer particles 
was introduced and its effect on the performance of waterborne polymer films was 
studied. The (meth)acrylic particles were charged by the addition of a small 
amount of ionic monomers, such as sodium styrene sulfonate and 
2-(dimethylamino)ethyl methacrylate. Density functional theory calculations 
showed that the interaction between the selected main charges of the respective 
functional monomers (sulfonate-amine) is favored against the interactions with 
their counter ions (sulfonate-Na and amine-H). To induce ionic complexation, the 
oppositely charged latexes were blended, either based on the same number of 
charges or the same number of particles. The performance of the ionic complexed 
coatings was determined by means of tensile tests and water uptake measurements. 
The ionic complexed films were compared with reference films obtained at pH at 
which the cationic charges were in neutral form. The mechanical resistance was 
raised slightly by ionic bonding between particles, producing much more flexible 
films, whereas the water penetration within the polymeric films was considerably 
hindered. By exploring the process of polymer chains interdiffusion using 
Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer (FRET) analysis, it was found that the 
ionic complexation was established between the particles, which reduced 
significantly the interdiffusion process of polymer chains. The presented ionic 
complexes of sulfonate-amine functionalized particles open a promising approach 
for reinforcing waterborne coatings.

DOI: 10.3390/polym13183098
PMCID: PMC8470605
PMID: 34578000

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.