1. Cureus. 2021 Aug 27;13(8):e17488. doi: 10.7759/cureus.17488. eCollection 2021 
Aug.

Redifferentiation of BRAF V600E-Mutated Radioiodine Refractory Metastatic 
Papillary Thyroid Cancer After Treatment With Dabrafenib and Trametinib.

Jafri S(1), Yaqub A(2).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, University of Cincinnati, College of Medicine, Cincinnati, 
USA.
(2)Endocrinology, University of Cincinnati, College of Medicine, Cincinnati, 
USA.

Radioactive iodine-refractory metastatic differentiated thyroid cancer (RAIR) is 
associated with a poor prognosis. Multikinase inhibitors have demonstrated 
improvement in progression-free but not overall survival in 
such patients, but usage is limited by significant adverse effects and the 
development of resistance. Clinical research has demonstrated improvement in 
progression-free survival with the combined use of the BRAF/MEK inhibitor in 
patients with metastatic melanoma and anaplastic thyroid cancer with the 
BRAFV600E mutation and has shown promise in redifferentiation of 
BRAF-positive RAIR differentiated thyroid cancer.  A 58-year-old woman went to 
her primary care physician for a growing mass on the left side of her neck. CT 
imaging noted a 6 x 8 x 6 cm mixed cystic and solid mass and 
lymphadenopathy. Core biopsy subsequently showed metastatic papillary thyroid 
cancer (Stage III, PT4a/PN1b), and she underwent a total thyroidectomy with left 
neck dissection. She then received 204mCi 131I post-total thyroidectomy. 
Unfortunately, her thyroglobulin continued to increase post-radioactive iodine 
(RAI) treatment, indicating persistent and/or recurrent thyroid cancer. An 
RAI-131 whole-body scan on the thyrogen protocol showed no significant RAI 
uptake. A fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-positron emission tomography (PET) 
CT scan was then performed, which showed recurrent metastatic disease 
with hypermetabolism noted in the left thyroid bed and FDG-avid bilateral 
cervical lymph nodes and pulmonary nodules. Given these findings, her cancer was 
classified as radioactive iodine refractory (RAIR). Molecular testing indicated 
the BRAFV600E mutation. After a discussion with the patient, it was decided to 
initiate therapy with a BRAF inhibitor (dabrafenib 150 mg twice a day) and MEK 
inhibitor (trametinib 2 mg once a day) in an attempt to redifferentiate RAIR. 
Repeat RAI-131 thyrogen whole body scan one month after initiation of therapy 
demonstrated left level 2 cervical lymphadenopathy radioiodine uptake. The 
patient subsequently received 216 mCi 131I treatment given evidence 
of redifferentiation. Her post-treatment scan indicated additional uptake in a 
left lower lobe pulmonary nodule as well as a left paratracheal mass indicating 
successful RAI-131 uptake by metastases. Her thyroglobulin level, six months 
post-RAI, decreased to 4.0 indicating an encouraging response. Further 
surveillance, including imaging studies, is planned. This case illustrates the 
re-differential potential for dabrafenib and trametinib treatment in patients 
with BRAFV600E-mutated RAIR differentiated thyroid cancer. This therapy has been 
shown to be successful in small series of patients and could potentially be 
offered to RAIR patients with the BRAFV600E mutation as an alternative 
to multikinase treatment given its favorable side-effect profile.

Copyright © 2021, Jafri et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.17488
PMCID: PMC8465644
PMID: 34595070

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.