1. J Immunother Cancer. 2021 Oct;9(10):e003148. doi: 10.1136/jitc-2021-003148.

Novel phosphatidylserine-binding molecule enhances antitumor T-cell responses by 
targeting immunosuppressive exosomes in human tumor microenvironments.

Bhatta M(#)(1), Shenoy GN(#)(2), Loyall JL(2), Gray BD(3), Bapardekar M(4), 
Conway A(4), Minderman H(4), Kelleher RJ Jr(2), Carreno BM(5), Linette G(5), 
Shultz LD(6), Odunsi K(7), Balu-Iyer SV(8), Pak KY(3), Bankert RB(9).

Author information:
(1)Immune Modulatory Therapies LLC, Eden, New York, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, 
New York, USA.
(3)Molecular Targeting Technologies Inc, West Chester, Pennsylvania, USA.
(4)Flow & Image Cytometry Shared Resource, Roswell Park Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, Buffalo, New York, USA.
(5)Center for Cellular Immunotherapies, University of Pennsylvania Perelman 
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(6)Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, Maine, USA.
(7)University of Chicago Biological Sciences Division, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(8)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University at Buffalo-The State 
University of New York, Buffalo, New York, USA.
(9)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, 
New York, USA rbankert@buffalo.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: The human tumor microenvironment (TME) is a complex and dynamic 
milieu of diverse acellular and cellular components, creating an 
immunosuppressive environment, which contributes to tumor progression. We have 
previously shown that phosphatidylserine (PS) expressed on the surface of 
exosomes isolated from human TMEs is causally linked to T-cell 
immunosuppression, representing a potential immunotherapeutic target. In this 
study, we investigated the effect of ExoBlock, a novel PS-binding molecule, on 
T-cell responses in the TME.
METHODS: We designed and synthesized a new compound, (ZnDPA)6-DP-15K, a 
multivalent PS binder named ExoBlock. The PS-binding avidity of ExoBlock was 
tested using an in vitro competition assay. The ability of this molecule to 
reverse exosome-mediated immunosuppression in vitro was tested using human 
T-cell activation assays. The in vivo therapeutic efficacy of ExoBlock was then 
tested in two different human tumor xenograft models, the melanoma-based 
xenomimetic (X-)mouse model, and the ovarian tumor-based omental tumor xenograft 
(OTX) model.
RESULTS: ExoBlock was able to bind PS with high avidity and was found to 
consistently and significantly block the immunosuppressive activity of human 
ovarian tumor and melanoma-associated exosomes in vitro. ExoBlock was also able 
to significantly enhance T cell-mediated tumor suppression in vivo in both the 
X-mouse and the OTX model. In the X-mouse model, ExoBlock suppressed tumor 
recurrence in a T cell-dependent manner. In the OTX model, ExoBlock treatment 
resulted in an increase in the number as well as function of CD4 and CD8 T cells 
in the TME, which was associated with a reduction in tumor burden and 
metastasis, as well as in the number of circulating PS+ exosomes in 
tumor-bearing mice.
CONCLUSION: Our results establish that targeting exosomal PS in TMEs with 
ExoBlock represents a promising strategy to enhance antitumor T-cell responses.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/jitc-2021-003148
PMCID: PMC8488709
PMID: 34599030 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The corresponding author, 
RB, is an officer and founder of Immune Modulatory Therapies LLC. A patent is 
currently pending for ExoBlock.