1. Sci Rep. 2021 Sep 30;11(1):19501. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-99061-x.

Experimental evolution supports the potential of neonicotinoid-pyrethroid 
combination for managing insecticide resistance in malaria vectors.

Zoh MG(1), Bonneville JM(1), Tutagata J(1), Laporte F(1), Fodjo BK(2), 
Mouhamadou CS(2), Sadia CG(2)(3), McBeath J(4), Schmitt F(5), Horstmann S(6), 
Reynaud S(1), David JP(7).

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire d'Ecologie Alpine (LECA) UMR 5553 CNRS Grenoble-Alpes University, 
Grenoble, France.
(2)Centre Suisse de La Recherche Scientifique (CSRS), Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire.
(3)University of Nangui Abrogoua, Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire.
(4)Bayer CropScience Ltd, Cambridge Science Park, Cambridge, UK.
(5)Bayer SAS, 16 rue Jean Marie Leclair, 69009, Lyon, France.
(6)Bayer AG, 50 Alfred Nobel Straße, 40789, Monheim, Germany.
(7)Laboratoire d'Ecologie Alpine (LECA) UMR 5553 CNRS Grenoble-Alpes University, 
Grenoble, France. jean-philippe.david@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr.

The introduction of neonicotinoids for managing insecticide resistance in 
mosquitoes is of high interest as they interact with a biochemical target not 
previously used in public health. In this concern, Bayer developed a combination 
of the neonicotinoid clothianidin and the pyrethroid deltamethrin (brand name 
Fludora Fusion) as a new vector control tool. Although this combination proved 
to be efficient against pyrethroid-resistant mosquitoes, its ability to prevent 
the selection of pyrethroid and neonicotinoid resistance alleles was not 
investigated. In this context, the objective of this work was to study the 
dynamics and the molecular mechanisms of resistance of An. gambiae to the 
separated or combined components of this combination. A field-derived An. 
gambiae line carrying resistance alleles to multiple insecticides at low 
frequencies was used as a starting for 33 successive generations of controlled 
selection. Resistance levels to each insecticide and target site mutation 
frequencies were monitored throughout the selection process. Cross resistance to 
other public health insecticides were also investigated. RNA-seq was used to 
compare gene transcription variations and polymorphisms across all lines. This 
study confirmed the potential of this insecticide combination to impair the 
selection of resistance as compared to its two separated components. 
Deltamethrin selection led to the rapid enrichment of the kdr L1014F target-site 
mutation. Clothianidin selection led to the over-transcription of multiple 
cytochrome P450s including some showing high homology with those conferring 
neonicotinoid resistance in other insects. A strong selection signature 
associated with clothianidin selection was also observed on a P450 gene cluster 
previously associated with resistance. Within this cluster, the gene CYP6M1 
showed the highest selection signature together with a transcription profile 
supporting a role in clothianidin resistance. Modelling the impact of point 
mutations selected by clothianidin on CYP6M1 protein structure showed that 
selection retained a protein variant with a modified active site potentially 
enhancing clothianidin metabolism. In the context of the recent deployment of 
neonicotinoids for mosquito control and their frequent usage in agriculture, the 
present study highlights the benefit of combining them with other insecticides 
for preventing the selection of resistance and sustaining vector control 
activities.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-99061-x
PMCID: PMC8484614
PMID: 34593941 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The funder (Bayer) has developed and 
commercialized a product based on the combination of insecticides used within 
this study and proposed the original hypothesis to be tested. The funder had no 
role in the study design, data collection, analysis and interpretation of 
results. JM, FS and SH were employed by Bayer. MGZ PhD was funded by Bayer and 
hosted at the Laboratoire d’Ecologie Alpine (LECA). JT position was funded by 
Bayer and hosted at LECA. All other authors declare no conflict of interest.