1. Front Pharmacol. 2021 Sep 16;12:744826. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2021.744826. 
eCollection 2021.

Anlotinib Inhibits PFKFB3-Driven Glycolysis in Myofibroblasts to Reverse 
Pulmonary Fibrosis.

Chen W(1), Zhang J(1), Zhong W(1), Liu Y(1), Lu Y(1), Zeng Z(1), Huang H(1), Wan 
X(1), Meng X(2), Zou F(2), Cai S(1), Dong H(1).

Author information:
(1)Chronic Airways Diseases Laboratory, Department of Respiratory and Critical 
Care Medicine, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Tropical Disease Research, Department 
of Occupational Health and Medicine, School of Public Health, Southern Medical 
University, Guangzhou, China.

Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a fatal disease in which the normal 
alveolar network is gradually replaced by fibrotic scars. Current evidence 
suggests that metabolic alterations correlate with myofibroblast activation in 
IPF. Anlotinib has been proposed to have antifibrotic effects, but the efficacy 
and mechanisms of anlotinib against lung fibrosis have not been systematically 
evaluated. The antifibrotic effects of anlotinib were evaluated in 
bleomycin-induced mouse models and transforming growth factor-beta 1 
(TGF-β1)-stimulated lung fibroblasts. We measured lactate levels, 2-NBDG glucose 
uptake and the extracellular acidification rate (ECAR) to assess glycolysis in 
fibroblasts. RNA-protein coimmunoprecipitation (RIP) and polysome analyses were 
performed to investigate novel mechanisms of glycolytic reprogramming in 
pulmonary fibrosis. We found that anlotinib diminished myofibroblast activation 
and inhibited the augmentation of glycolysis. Moreover, we show that PCBP3 
posttranscriptionally increases PFKFB3 expression by promoting its translation 
during myofibroblast activation, thus promoting glycolysis in myofibroblasts. 
Regarding mechanism, anlotinib exerts potent antifibrotic effects by 
downregulating PCBP3, reducing PFKFB3 translation and inhibiting glycolysis in 
myofibroblasts. Furthermore, we observed that anlotinib had preventative and 
therapeutic antifibrotic effects on bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis. 
Therefore, we identify PCBP3 as a protein involved in the regulation of 
glycolysis reprogramming and lung fibrogenesis and propose it as a therapeutic 
target for pulmonary fibrosis. Our data suggest that anlotinib has antifibrotic 
effects on the lungs, and we provide a novel mechanism for this effect. 
Anlotinib may constitute a novel and potent candidate for the treatment of 
pulmonary fibrosis.

Copyright © 2021 Chen, Zhang, Zhong, Liu, Lu, Zeng, Huang, Wan, Meng, Zou, Cai 
and Dong.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2021.744826
PMCID: PMC8481786
PMID: 34603058

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.