1. J Thromb Haemost. 2022 Jan;20(1):104-114. doi: 10.1111/jth.15544. Epub 2021
Oct  15.

Podoplanin promotes tumor growth, platelet aggregation, and venous thrombosis in 
murine models of ovarian cancer.

Sasano T(1), Gonzalez-Delgado R(2), Muñoz NM(3), Carlos-Alcade W(2), Cho MS(2), 
Sheth RA(3), Sood AK(4), Afshar-Kharghan V(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Osaka Saiseikai Nakatsu Hospital, 
Osaka, Japan.
(2)Section of Benign Hematology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, Texas, USA.
(3)Department of Interventional Radiology, University of Texas MD Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA.
(4)Department of Gynecologic Oncology and Reproductive Medicine, University of 
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA.

BACKGROUND: Podoplanin (PDPN) is a sialylated membrane glycoprotein that binds 
to C-type lectin-like receptor 2 on platelets resulting in platelet activation. 
PDPN is expressed on lymphatic endothelial cells, perivascular 
fibroblasts/pericytes, cancer cells, cancer-associated fibroblasts, and tumor 
stromal cells. PDPN's expression on malignant epithelial cells plays a role in 
metastasis. Furthermore, the expression of PDPN in brain tumors (high-grade 
gliomas) was found to correlate with an increased risk of venous thrombosis.
OBJECTIVE: We examined the expression of PDPN and its role in tumor progression 
and venous thrombosis in ovarian cancer.
METHODS: We used mouse models of ovarian cancer and venous thrombosis.
RESULTS: Ovarian cancer cells express PDPN and release PDPN-rich extracellular 
vesicles (EVs), and cisplatin and topotecan (chemotherapies commonly used in 
ovarian cancer) increase the expression of podoplanin in cancer cells. The 
expression of PDPN in ovarian cancer cells promotes tumor growth in a murine 
model of ovarian cancer and that knockdown of PDPN gene expression results in 
smaller primary tumors. Both PDPN-expressing ovarian cancer cells and their EVs 
cause platelet aggregation. In a mouse model of venous thrombosis, 
PDPN-expressing EVs released from HeyA8 ovarian cancer cells produce more 
frequent thrombosis than PDPN-negative EVs derived from PDPN-knockdown HeyA8 
cells. Blood clots induced by PDPN-positive EVs contain more platelets than 
those in blood clots induced by PDPN-negative EVs.
CONCLUSIONS: In summary, our findings demonstrate that the expression of PDPN by 
ovarian cancer cells promotes tumor growth and venous thrombosis in mice.

© 2021 International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis.

DOI: 10.1111/jth.15544
PMCID: PMC8712373
PMID: 34608736 [Indexed for MEDLINE]