1. AIDS Res Ther. 2021 Oct 2;18(1):64. doi: 10.1186/s12981-021-00390-8.

Next generation sequencing based in-house HIV genotyping method: validation 
report.

Ayitewala A(1), Ssewanyana I(2), Kiyaga C(2).

Author information:
(1)National Health Laboratories and Diagnostic Services, Central Public Health 
Laboratories, Ministry of Health, P.O Box 7272, Kampala, Uganda. 
ayitewala@gmail.com.
(2)National Health Laboratories and Diagnostic Services, Central Public Health 
Laboratories, Ministry of Health, P.O Box 7272, Kampala, Uganda.

BACKGROUND: HIV genotyping has had a significant impact on the care and 
treatment of HIV/AIDS. At a clinical level, the test guides physicians on the 
choice of treatment regimens. At the surveillance level, it informs policy on 
consolidated treatment guidelines and microbial resistance control strategies. 
Until recently, the conventional test has utilized the Sanger sequencing (SS) 
method. Unlike Next Generation Sequencing (NGS), SS is limited by low data 
throughput and the inability of detecting low abundant drug-resistant variants. 
NGS can improve sensitivity and quantitatively identify low-abundance variants; 
in addition, it has the potential to improve efficiency as well as lowering 
costs when samples are batched. Despite the NGS benefits, its utilization in 
clinical drug resistance profiling is faced with mixed reactions. These are 
largely based on a lack of a consensus regarding the quality control strategy. 
Nonetheless, transitional views suggest validating the method against the 
gold-standard SS. Therefore, we present a validation report of an NGS-based 
in-house HIV genotyping method against the SS method in Uganda.
RESULTS: Since there were no established proficiency test panels for NGS-based 
HIV genotyping, 15 clinical plasma samples for routine care were utilized. The 
use of clinical samples allowed for accuracy and precision studies. The workflow 
involved four main steps; viral RNA extraction, targeted amplicon generation, 
amplicon sequencing and data analysis. Accuracy of 98% with an average 
percentage error of 3% was reported for the NGS based assay against the SS 
platform demonstrating similar performance. The coefficient of variation (CV) 
findings for both the inter-run and inter-personnel precision showed no 
variability (CV ≤ 0%) at the relative abundance of ≥ 20%. For both inter-run and 
inter-personnel, a variation that affected the precision was observed at 1% 
frequency. Overall, for all the frequencies, CV registered a small range of 
(0-2%).
CONCLUSION: The NGS-based in-house HIV genotyping method fulfilled the minimum 
requirements that support its utilization for drug resistance profiling in a 
clinical setting of a low-income country. For more inclusive quality control 
studies, well-characterized wet panels need to be established.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12981-021-00390-8
PMCID: PMC8487565
PMID: 34600538 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.