1. Front Immunol. 2021 Sep 17;12:752359. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.752359. 
eCollection 2021.

Where Epigenetics Meets Food Intake: Their Interaction in the 
Development/Severity of Gout and Therapeutic Perspectives.

Georgel PT(1), Georgel P(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Cell Differentiation and Development 
Center, Joan C. Edwards School of Medicine, Byrd Biotechnology Science Center, 
Marshall University, Huntington, WV, United States.
(2)Laboratoire d'ImmunoRhumatologie Moléculaire, Institut National de la Santé 
et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM) UMR_S 1109, Institut thématique 
interdisciplinaire (ITI) de Médecine de Précision de Strasbourg, Transplantex 
NG, Faculté de Médecine, Fédération Hospitalo-Universitaire OMICARE, Fédération 
de Médecine Translationnelle de Strasbourg (FMTS), Université de Strasbourg, 
Strasbourg, France.
(3)Unité de Recherche et d'Expertise Immunity and Inflammation, Institut Pasteur 
in New Caledonia, Pasteur Network, Nouméa, New Caledonia.

Gout is the most frequent form of inflammatory arthritis in the world. Its 
prevalence is particularly elevated in specific geographical areas such as in 
the Oceania/Pacific region and is rising in the US, Europe, and Asia. Gout is a 
severe and painful disease, in which co-morbidities are responsible for a 
significant reduction in life expectancy. However, gout patients remain 
ostracized because the disease is still considered "self-inflicted", as a result 
of unhealthy lifestyle and excessive food and alcohol intake. While the etiology 
of gout flares is clearly associated with the presence of monosodium urate (MSU) 
crystal deposits, several major questions remain unanswered, such as the 
relationships between diet, hyperuricemia and gout flares or the mechanisms by 
which urate induces inflammation. Recent advances have identified gene variants 
associated with gout incidence. Nevertheless, genetic origins of gout combined 
to diet-related possible uric acid overproduction account for the symptoms in 
only a minor portion of patients. Hence, additional factors must be at play. 
Here, we review the impact of epigenetic mechanisms in which nutrients (such as 
ω-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids) and/or dietary-derived metabolites (like urate) 
trigger anti/pro-inflammatory responses that may participate in gout 
pathogenesis and severity. We propose that simple dietary regimens may be 
beneficial to complement therapeutic management or contribute to the prevention 
of flares in gout patients.

Copyright © 2021 Georgel and Georgel.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.752359
PMCID: PMC8484966
PMID: 34603340 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.