1. J Biol Chem. 2021 Nov;297(5):101269. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.101269. Epub 2021
 Oct 1.

Discovery of a novel role of tumor suppressor PDCD4 in stimulation of 
translation termination.

Shuvalova E(1), Egorova T(2), Ivanov A(1), Shuvalov A(2), Biziaev N(1), Mukba 
S(1), Pustogarov N(1), Terenin I(3), Alkalaeva E(4).

Author information:
(1)Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, The Russian Academy of Sciences, 
Moscow, Russia.
(2)Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, The Russian Academy of Sciences, 
Moscow, Russia; Center for Precision Genome Editing and Genetic Technologies for 
Biomedicine, Moscow, Russia.
(3)A.N. Belozersky Institute of Physico-Chemical Biology, Lomonosov Moscow State 
University, Moscow, Russia.
(4)Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, The Russian Academy of Sciences, 
Moscow, Russia; Center for Precision Genome Editing and Genetic Technologies for 
Biomedicine, Moscow, Russia. Electronic address: alkalaeva@eimb.ru.

Programmed cell death 4 protein (PDCD4) regulates many vital cell processes, 
although is classified as a tumor suppressor because it inhibits neoplastic 
transformation and tumor growth. For example, PCDC4 has been implicated in the 
regulation of transcription and mRNA translation. PDCD4 is known to inhibit 
translation initiation by binding to eukaryotic initiation factor 4A and 
elongation of oncogenic c- and A-myb mRNAs. Additionally, PDCD4 has been shown 
to interact with poly(A)-binding protein (PABP), which affects translation 
termination, although the significance of this interaction is not fully 
understood. Considering the interaction between PABP and PDCD4, we hypothesized 
that PDCD4 may also be involved in translation termination. Using in vitro 
translation systems, we revealed that PDCD4 directly activates translation 
termination. PDCD4 stimulates peptidyl-tRNA hydrolysis induced by a complex of 
eukaryotic release factors, eRF1-eRF3. Moreover, in combination with the PABP, 
which also stimulates peptide release, PDCD4 activity in translation termination 
increases. PDCD4 regulates translation termination by facilitating the binding 
of release factors to the ribosome, increasing the GTPase activity of eRF3, and 
dissociating eRF3 from the posttermination complex. Using a toe-printing assay, 
we determined the first stage at which PDCD4 functions-binding of release 
factors to the A-site of the ribosome. However, preventing binding of eRF3 with 
PABP, PDCD4 suppresses subsequent rounds of translation termination. Based on 
these data, we assumed that human PDCD4 controls protein synthesis during 
translation termination. The described mechanism of the activity of PDCD4 in 
translation termination provides a new insight into its functioning during 
suppression of protein biosynthesis.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.101269
PMCID: PMC8551656
PMID: 34606825 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest regarding the contents of this article.