1. J Virol. 2021 Nov 23;95(24):e0136821. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01368-21. Epub 2021 Oct
 6.

Highly Efficient SARS-CoV-2 Infection of Human Cardiomyocytes: Spike 
Protein-Mediated Cell Fusion and Its Inhibition.

Navaratnarajah CK(#)(1), Pease DR(#)(2), Halfmann PJ(3), Taye B(1), Barkhymer 
A(1), Howell KG(4), Charlesworth JE(4), Christensen TA(4), Kawaoka Y(3)(5), 
Cattaneo R(1), Schneider JW(2); Wanek Family Program for HLHS-Stem Cell 
Pipeline.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Mayo Clinicgrid.66875.3a, Rochester, 
Minnesota, USA.
(2)Discovery Engine/Program for Hypoplastic Left Heart Syndrome, Mayo 
Clinicgrid.66875.3a, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(3)Influenza Research Institute, Department of Pathobiological Sciences, School 
of Veterinary Medicine, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, 
USA.
(4)Mayo Microscopy and Cell Analysis Core, Mayo Clinicgrid.66875.3a, Rochester, 
Minnesota, USA.
(5)Division of Virology, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of 
Medical Science, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(#)Contributed equally

Severe cardiovascular complications can occur in coronavirus disease of 2019 
(COVID-19) patients. Cardiac damage is attributed mostly to the aberrant host 
response to acute respiratory infection. However, direct infection of cardiac 
tissue by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) also 
occurs. We examined here the cardiac tropism of SARS-CoV-2 in spontaneously 
beating human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes (hiPSC-CMs). 
These cardiomyocytes express the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptor 
but not the transmembrane protease serine 2 (TMPRSS2) that mediates spike 
protein cleavage in the lungs. Nevertheless, SARS-CoV-2 infection of hiPSC-CMs 
was prolific; viral transcripts accounted for about 88% of total mRNA. In the 
cytoplasm of infected hiPSC-CMs, smooth-walled exocytic vesicles contained 
numerous 65- to 90-nm particles with canonical ribonucleocapsid structures, and 
virus-like particles with knob-like spikes covered the cell surface. To better 
understand how SARS-CoV-2 spreads in hiPSC-CMs, we engineered an expression 
vector coding for the spike protein with a monomeric emerald-green fluorescent 
protein fused to its cytoplasmic tail (S-mEm). Proteolytic processing of S-mEm 
and the parental spike were equivalent. Live cell imaging tracked spread of 
S-mEm cell-to-cell and documented formation of syncytia. A cell-permeable, 
peptide-based molecule that blocks the catalytic site of furin and furin-like 
proteases abolished cell fusion. A spike mutant with the single amino acid 
change R682S that disrupts the multibasic furin cleavage motif was fusion 
inactive. Thus, SARS-CoV-2 replicates efficiently in hiPSC-CMs and furin, and/or 
furin-like-protease activation of its spike protein is required for fusion-based 
cytopathology. This hiPSC-CM platform enables target-based drug discovery in 
cardiac COVID-19. IMPORTANCE Cardiac complications frequently observed in 
COVID-19 patients are tentatively attributed to systemic inflammation and 
thrombosis, but viral replication has occasionally been confirmed in cardiac 
tissue autopsy materials. We developed an in vitro model of SARS-CoV-2 spread in 
myocardium using induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes. In these 
highly differentiated cells, viral transcription levels exceeded those 
previously documented in permissive transformed cell lines. To better understand 
the mechanisms of SARS-CoV-2 spread, we expressed a fluorescent version of its 
spike protein that allowed us to characterize a fusion-based cytopathic effect. 
A mutant of the spike protein with a single amino acid mutation in the 
furin/furin-like protease cleavage site lost cytopathic function. Of note, the 
fusion activities of the spike protein of other coronaviruses correlated with 
the level of cardiovascular complications observed in infections with the 
respective viruses. These data indicate that SARS-CoV-2 may cause cardiac damage 
by fusing cardiomyocytes.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01368-21
PMCID: PMC8610601
PMID: 34613786 [Indexed for MEDLINE]