1. Cell Rep. 2021 Oct 19;37(3):109841. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109841. Epub
2021  Sep 30.

The N-terminal domain of SARS-CoV-2 nsp1 plays key roles in suppression of 
cellular gene expression and preservation of viral gene expression.

Mendez AS(1), Ly M(2), González-Sánchez AM(3), Hartenian E(2), Ingolia NT(4), 
Cate JH(5), Glaunsinger BA(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant & Microbial Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA, USA; Comparative Biochemistry Graduate Program, University of 
California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA, USA; California Institute for Quantitative Biosciences, University 
of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA.
(5)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA, USA; California Institute for Quantitative Biosciences, University 
of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA; Innovative Genomics Institute, 
University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA; Department of Chemistry, 
University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA; Molecular Biophysics & 
Integrated Bioimaging Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, 
CA, USA.
(6)Department of Plant & Microbial Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA, USA; Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of 
California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA; California Institute for Quantitative 
Biosciences, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA; Innovative 
Genomics Institute, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA; 
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Berkeley, CA, USA. Electronic address: 
glaunsinger@berkeley.edu.

Nonstructural protein 1 (nsp1) is a coronavirus (CoV) virulence factor that 
restricts cellular gene expression by inhibiting translation through blocking 
the mRNA entry channel of the 40S ribosomal subunit and by promoting mRNA 
degradation. We perform a detailed structure-guided mutational analysis of 
severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS)-CoV-2 nsp1, revealing insights into how 
it coordinates these activities against host but not viral mRNA. We find that 
residues in the N-terminal and central regions of nsp1 not involved in docking 
into the 40S mRNA entry channel nonetheless stabilize its association with the 
ribosome and mRNA, both enhancing its restriction of host gene expression and 
enabling mRNA containing the SARS-CoV-2 leader sequence to escape translational 
repression. These data support a model in which viral mRNA binding functionally 
alters the association of nsp1 with the ribosome, which has implications for 
drug targeting and understanding how engineered or emerging mutations in 
SARS-CoV-2 nsp1 could attenuate the virus.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109841
PMCID: PMC8481097
PMID: 34624207 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests B.A.G. is a member of 
the Vaccine Advisory Board for Celsion Corporation.