1. Elife. 2021 Oct 8;10:e73425. doi: 10.7554/eLife.73425.

Intergenerational adaptations to stress are evolutionarily conserved, 
stress-specific, and have deleterious trade-offs.

Burton NO(1)(2)(3), Willis A(4), Fisher K(5), Braukmann F(2), Price J(2), 
Stevens L(6)(7), Baugh LR(5)(8), Reinke A(4), Miska EA(2)(7)(9).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Trophoblast Research, Department of Physiology, Development and 
Neuroscience, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(2)Gurdon Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(3)Van Andel Institute, Grand Rapids, United States.
(4)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(5)Department of Biology, Duke University, Durham, United States.
(6)Department of Molecular Biosciences, Northwestern University, Evanston, 
United States.
(7)Wellcome Sanger Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(8)Center for Genomic and Computational Biology, Duke University, Durham, United 
States.
(9)Department of Genetics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Despite reports of parental exposure to stress promoting physiological 
adaptations in progeny in diverse organisms, there remains considerable debate 
over the significance and evolutionary conservation of such multigenerational 
effects. Here, we investigate four independent models of intergenerational 
adaptations to stress in Caenorhabditis elegans - bacterial infection, 
eukaryotic infection, osmotic stress, and nutrient stress - across multiple 
species. We found that all four intergenerational physiological adaptations are 
conserved in at least one other species, that they are stress -specific, and 
that they have deleterious tradeoffs in mismatched environments. By profiling 
the effects of parental bacterial infection and osmotic stress exposure on 
progeny gene expression across species, we established a core set of 587 genes 
that exhibited a greater than twofold intergenerational change in expression in 
response to stress in C. elegans and at least one other species, as well as a 
set of 37 highly conserved genes that exhibited a greater than twofold 
intergenerational change in expression in all four species tested. Furthermore, 
we provide evidence suggesting that presumed adaptive and deleterious 
intergenerational effects are molecularly related at the gene expression level. 
Lastly, we found that none of the effects we detected of these stresses on C. 
elegans F1 progeny gene expression persisted transgenerationally three 
generations after stress exposure. We conclude that intergenerational responses 
to stress play a substantial and evolutionarily conserved role in regulating 
animal physiology and that the vast majority of the effects of parental stress 
on progeny gene expression are reversible and not maintained 
transgenerationally.

© 2021, Burton et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.73425
PMCID: PMC8570697
PMID: 34622777 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: NB, AW, KF, FB, JP, LS, LB, AR, EM No competing 
interests declared