1. Front Behav Neurosci. 2021 Sep 24;15:735387. doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2021.735387. 
eCollection 2021.

Measuring Behavior in the Home Cage: Study Design, Applications, Challenges, and 
Perspectives.

Grieco F(1), Bernstein BJ(2), Biemans B(3), Bikovski L(4)(5), Burnett CJ(6), 
Cushman JD(2), van Dam EA(1), Fry SA(2), Richmond-Hacham B(7), Homberg JR(8), 
Kas MJH(9), Kessels HW(10), Koopmans B(11), Krashes MJ(12), Krishnan V(13), 
Logan S(14), Loos M(11), McCann KE(2), Parduzi Q(3), Pick CG(7)(15)(16), Prevot 
TD(17), Riedel G(18), Robinson L(18), Sadighi M(8), Smit AB(19), Sonntag W(20), 
Roelofs RF(1), Tegelenbosch RAJ(1), Noldus LPJJ(1)(21).

Author information:
(1)Noldus Information Technology BV, Wageningen, Netherlands.
(2)Neurobiology Laboratory, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, 
National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, NC, United States.
(3)Roche Innovation Center Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(4)Myers Neuro-Behavioral Core Facility, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv 
University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(5)School of Behavioral Sciences, Netanya Academic College, Netanya, Israel.
(6)Nash Family Department of Neuroscience, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount 
Sinai, New York, NY, United States.
(7)Department of Anatomy and Anthropology, Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv 
University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(8)Department of Cognitive Neuroscience, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition 
and Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, 
Netherlands.
(9)Groningen Institute for Evolutionary Life Sciences, University of Groningen, 
Groningen, Netherlands.
(10)Swammerdam Institute for Life Sciences, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, 
Netherlands.
(11)Sylics (Synaptologics BV), Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(12)National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States.
(13)Laboratory of Epilepsy and Emotional Behavior, Baylor Comprehensive Epilepsy 
Center, Departments of Neurology, Neuroscience, and Psychiatry & Behavioral 
Sciences, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States.
(14)Department of Rehabilitation Sciences, College of Allied Health, University 
of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK, United States.
(15)Sagol School of Neuroscience, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(16)The Dr. Miriam and Sheldon G. Adelson Chair and Center for the Biology of 
Addictive Diseases, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(17)Centre for Addiction and Mental Health and Department of Psychiatry, 
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(18)Institute of Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, United 
Kingdom.
(19)Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Center for Neurogenomics 
and Cognitive Research, VU University Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(20)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Center for Geroscience, 
University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK, United States.
(21)Department of Biophysics, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 
Behaviour, Radboud University, Nijmegen, Netherlands.

The reproducibility crisis (or replication crisis) in biomedical research is a 
particularly existential and under-addressed issue in the field of behavioral 
neuroscience, where, in spite of efforts to standardize testing and assay 
protocols, several known and unknown sources of confounding environmental 
factors add to variance. Human interference is a major contributor to 
variability both within and across laboratories, as well as novelty-induced 
anxiety. Attempts to reduce human interference and to measure more "natural" 
behaviors in subjects has led to the development of automated home-cage 
monitoring systems. These systems enable prolonged and longitudinal recordings, 
and provide large continuous measures of spontaneous behavior that can be 
analyzed across multiple time scales. In this review, a diverse team of 
neuroscientists and product developers share their experiences using such an 
automated monitoring system that combines Noldus PhenoTyper® home-cages and the 
video-based tracking software, EthoVision® XT, to extract digital biomarkers of 
motor, emotional, social and cognitive behavior. After presenting our working 
definition of a "home-cage", we compare home-cage testing with more conventional 
out-of-cage tests (e.g., the open field) and outline the various advantages of 
the former, including opportunities for within-subject analyses and assessments 
of circadian and ultradian activity. Next, we address technical issues 
pertaining to the acquisition of behavioral data, such as the fine-tuning of the 
tracking software and the potential for integration with biotelemetry and 
optogenetics. Finally, we provide guidance on which behavioral measures to 
emphasize, how to filter, segment, and analyze behavior, and how to use analysis 
scripts. We summarize how the PhenoTyper has applications to study 
neuropharmacology as well as animal models of neurodegenerative and 
neuropsychiatric illness. Looking forward, we examine current challenges and the 
impact of new developments. Examples include the automated recognition of 
specific behaviors, unambiguous tracking of individuals in a social context, the 
development of more animal-centered measures of behavior and ways of dealing 
with large datasets. Together, we advocate that by embracing standardized 
home-cage monitoring platforms like the PhenoTyper, we are poised to directly 
assess issues pertaining to reproducibility, and more importantly, measure 
features of rodent behavior under more ethologically relevant scenarios.

Copyright © 2021 Grieco, Bernstein, Biemans, Bikovski, Burnett, Cushman, van 
Dam, Fry, Richmond-Hacham, Homberg, Kas, Kessels, Koopmans, Krashes, Krishnan, 
Logan, Loos, McCann, Parduzi, Pick, Prevot, Riedel, Robinson, Sadighi, Smit, 
Sonntag, Roelofs, Tegelenbosch and Noldus.

DOI: 10.3389/fnbeh.2021.735387
PMCID: PMC8498589
PMID: 34630052

Conflict of interest statement: BB and QP were employed by F. Hoffman-La Roche 
Ltd. BK and ML are employed by Synaptologics BV. ED, FG, LN, RFR, and RT are 
employed by Noldus Information Technology BV. AS participates in a holding that 
owns shares of Synaptologics BV. The remaining authors declare that the research 
was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that 
could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.