1. J Neuromuscul Dis. 2022;9(1):95-109. doi: 10.3233/JND-200628.

Distinct and Recognisable Muscle MRI Pattern in a Series of Adults Harbouring an 
Identical GMPPB Gene Mutation.

Siddiqui S(1), Polavarapu K(2)(3), Bardhan M(2), Preethish-Kumar V(2), Joshi 
A(4), Nashi S(2), Vengalil S(2), Raju S(2), Chawla T(2), Leena S(2), Mathur 
A(4), Nayak S(4), Mohan D(2), Shamim U(4), Prasad C(1), Lochmüller H(3), Faruq 
M(4), Nalini A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroimaging and Interventional radiology, National Institute 
of Mental Health and Neurosciences, Bengaluru, India.
(2)Department of Neurology, National Institute of Mental Health and 
Neurosciences, Bengaluru, India.
(3)Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Institute; Division of 
Neurology, Department of Medicine, The Ottawa Hospital; Brain and Mind Research 
Institute, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(4)Genomics and Molecular Medicine, CSIR-Institute of Genomics and Integrative 
Biology, New Delhi, India.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Mutations in the GMPPB gene affect glycosylation of 
α-dystroglycan, leading to varied clinical phenotypes. We attempted to delineate 
the muscle MR imaging spectrum of GMPPB-related Congenital Myasthenic syndrome 
(CMS) in a single-center cohort study.
OBJECTIVE: To identify the distinct patterns of muscle involvement in GMPPB gene 
mutations.
METHODS: We analyzed the muscle MR images of 7 genetically proven cases of GMPPB 
dystroglycanopathy belonging to three families and studied the potential 
qualitative imaging pattern to aid in clinico -radiological diagnosis in 
neuromuscular practice. All individuals underwent muscle MRI (T1, T2, STIR/PD 
Fat sat. sequences in 1.5 T machine) of the lower limbs. Qualitative assessment 
and scoring were done for muscle changes using Mercuri staging for fibro-fatty 
replacement on T1 sequence and Borsato score for myoedema on STIR sequence.
RESULTS: All patients were of South Indian origin and presented as slowly 
progressive childhood to adult-onset fatigable limb-girdle muscle weakness, 
elevated creatine kinase level, and positive decrement response in proximal 
muscles. Muscle biopsy revealed features of dystrophy. All patients demonstrated 
identical homozygous mutation c.1000G > A in the GMPPB gene. MRI demonstrated 
early and severe involvement of paraspinal muscles, gluteus minimus, and 
relatively less severe involvement of the short head of the biceps femoris. A 
distinct proximo-distal gradient of affliction was identified in the glutei, 
vasti, tibialis anterior and peronei. Also, a postero-anterior gradient was 
observed in the gracilis muscle.
CONCLUSION: Hitherto unreported, the distinctive MR imaging pattern described 
here, coupled with relatively slowly progressive symptoms of fatigable 
limb-girdle weakness, would facilitate an early diagnosis of the milder form of 
GMPPB- dystroglycanopathy associated with homozygous GMPPB gene mutation.

DOI: 10.3233/JND-200628
PMID: 34633329 [Indexed for MEDLINE]