1. PLoS Pathog. 2021 Oct 12;17(10):e1009965. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1009965. 
eCollection 2021 Oct.

Efficacy of epetraborole against Mycobacterium abscessus is increased with 
norvaline.

Sullivan JR(1)(2)(3), Lupien A(2)(3), Kalthoff E(4)(5), Hamela C(6), Taylor 
L(7), Munro KA(4)(5), Schmeing TM(4)(5), Kremer L(6)(8), Behr MA(1)(2)(3)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, McGill University, Montréal, Canada.
(2)Infectious Diseases and Immunity in Global Health Program, Research Institute 
of the McGill University Health Centre, Montréal, Canada.
(3)McGill International TB Centre, Montréal, Canada.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montréal, Canada.
(5)Centre de Recherche en Biologie Structural, McGill University, Montréal, 
Canada.
(6)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique UMR 9004, Institut de Recherche 
en Infectiologie de Montpellier (IRIM), Université de Montpellier, Montpellier, 
France.
(7)Clinical Proteomics Platform, Research Institute of the McGill University 
Health Centre, Montréal, Canada.
(8)INSERM, IRIM, Montpellier, France.
(9)Department of Medicine, McGill University Health Centre, Montréal, Canada.

Mycobacterium abscessus is the most common rapidly growing non-tuberculous 
mycobacteria to cause pulmonary disease in patients with impaired lung function 
such as cystic fibrosis. M. abscessus displays high intrinsic resistance to 
common antibiotics and inducible resistance to macrolides like clarithromycin. 
As such, M. abscessus is clinically resistant to the entire regimen of 
front-line M. tuberculosis drugs, and treatment with antibiotics that do inhibit 
M. abscessus in the lab results in cure rates of 50% or less. Here, we 
identified epetraborole (EPT) from the MMV pandemic response box as an inhibitor 
against the essential protein leucyl-tRNA synthetase (LeuRS) in M. abscessus. 
EPT protected zebrafish from lethal M. abscessus infection and did not induce 
self-resistance nor against clarithromycin. Contrary to most antimycobacterials, 
the whole-cell activity of EPT was greater against M. abscessus than M. 
tuberculosis, but crystallographic and equilibrium binding data showed that EPT 
binds LeuRSMabs and LeuRSMtb with similar residues and dissociation constants. 
Since EPT-resistant M. abscessus mutants lost LeuRS editing activity, these 
mutants became susceptible to misaminoacylation with leucine mimics like the 
non-proteinogenic amino acid norvaline. Proteomic analysis revealed that when M. 
abscessus LeuRS mutants were fed norvaline, leucine residues in proteins were 
replaced by norvaline, inducing the unfolded protein response with temporal 
changes in expression of GroEL chaperonins and Clp proteases. This supports our 
in vitro data that supplementation of media with norvaline reduced the emergence 
of EPT mutants in both M. abscessus and M. tuberculosis. Furthermore, the 
combination of EPT and norvaline had improved in vivo efficacy compared to EPT 
in a murine model of M. abscessus infection. Our results emphasize the 
effectiveness of EPT against the clinically relevant cystic fibrosis pathogen M. 
abscessus, and these findings also suggest norvaline adjunct therapy with EPT 
could be beneficial for M. abscessus and other mycobacterial infections like 
tuberculosis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1009965
PMCID: PMC8535176
PMID: 34637487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.