1. Elife. 2021 Oct 12;10:e70317. doi: 10.7554/eLife.70317.

Switch-like and persistent memory formation in individual Drosophila larvae.

Lesar A(1), Tahir J(1), Wolk J(1), Gershow M(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physics, New York University, New York, United States.
(2)Center for Neural Science, New York University, New York, United States.
(3)NYU Neuroscience Institute, New York University Langone Medical Center, New 
York, United States.

Associative learning allows animals to use past experience to predict future 
events. The circuits underlying memory formation support immediate and sustained 
changes in function, often in response to a single example. Larval Drosophila is 
a genetic model for memory formation that can be accessed at molecular, 
synaptic, cellular, and circuit levels, often simultaneously, but existing 
behavioral assays for larval learning and memory do not address individual 
animals, and it has been difficult to form long-lasting memories, especially 
those requiring synaptic reorganization. We demonstrate a new assay for learning 
and memory capable of tracking the changing preferences of individual larvae. We 
use this assay to explore how activation of a pair of reward neurons changes the 
response to the innately aversive gas carbon dioxide (CO2). We confirm that when 
coupled to CO2 presentation in appropriate temporal sequence, optogenetic reward 
reduces avoidance of CO2. We find that learning is switch-like: all-or-none and 
quantized in two states. Memories can be extinguished by repeated unrewarded 
exposure to CO2 but are stabilized against extinction by repeated training or 
overnight consolidation. Finally, we demonstrate long-lasting protein synthesis 
dependent and independent memory formation.

Plain Language Summary: Brains learn from experience. They take events from the 
past, link them together, and use them to predict the future. This is true for 
fruit flies, Drosophila melanogaster, as well as for humans. One of the main 
questions in the field of neuroscience is, how does this kind of associative 
learning happen? Fruit fly larvae can learn to associate a certain smell with a 
sugar reward. When a group of larvae learn to associate a smell with sugar, most 
but not all of them will approach that smell in the future. This shows 
associative learning in action, but it raises a big question. Did the larvae 
that failed to approach the smell fail to learn, or did they just happen to make 
a mistake finding the smell? Given another chance, would exactly the same larvae 
approach the smell as the first time? In other words, did all the larvae learn a 
little, or did some larvae learn completely and others learn nothing? To find 
out, Lesar et al. built a computer-controlled maze to test whether individual 
fruit fly larvae liked or avoided a smell. Whenever a larva reached the middle 
of the Y-shaped maze, it could choose to go down one of two remaining corridors. 
One corridor contained air and the other carbon dioxide, a gas they would 
naturally avoid. Lesar et al. taught each larva to like carbon dioxide by 
activating reward neurons in its brain while filling the maze with carbon 
dioxide gas. Studying each larva as it navigated the maze revealed that they 
learn in a single jump, a 'lightbulb moment'. When Lesar et al. activated the 
reward neurons, the larva either ‘got it’ and stopped avoiding carbon dioxide 
altogether, or it did not. In the second case, it behaved as if it had received 
no training at all. Classic and modern experiments on people suggest that humans 
might also learn in jumps, but research on our own brains is challenging. Fruit 
flies are an excellent model organism to study memory formation because they are 
easy to breed, and it is easy to manipulate their genetic code. Work in flies 
has already revealed many of the genes and cells responsible for learning and 
memory. But, to find the specific brain changes that explain learning, 
researchers need to know whether the animals they are examining have actually 
learned something. This new maze could help researchers to identify those 
individuals, making it easier to find out exactly how associative learning 
works.

© 2021, Lesar et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.70317
PMCID: PMC8510578
PMID: 34636720 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: AL, JT, JW, MG No competing interests declared