1. Gene. 2022 Jan 30;809:146022. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2021.146022. Epub 2021 Oct
18.

Genetic variants in splicing factor genes and susceptibility to bladder cancer.

Wang X(1), Guo Z(2), Zhu H(1), Xin J(1), Yuan L(3), Qin C(4), Wang M(1), Zhang 
Z(5), Wang Y(6), Chu H(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Genomics, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Cancer 
Biomarkers, Prevention and Treatment, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer 
Personalized Medicine, School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical University, 
Nanjing, China; Department of Genetic Toxicology, The Key Laboratory of Modern 
Toxicology of Ministry of Education, Center for Global Health, School of Public 
Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.
(2)Department of Environmental Genomics, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Cancer 
Biomarkers, Prevention and Treatment, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer 
Personalized Medicine, School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical University, 
Nanjing, China; Xuzhou Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Xuzhou, China.
(3)Department of Urology, Jiangsu Province Hospital of Traditional Chinese 
Medicine, Nanjing, China.
(4)Department of Urology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medicial 
University, Nanjing, China.
(5)Department of Environmental Genomics, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Cancer 
Biomarkers, Prevention and Treatment, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer 
Personalized Medicine, School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical University, 
Nanjing, China; Department of Genetic Toxicology, The Key Laboratory of Modern 
Toxicology of Ministry of Education, Center for Global Health, School of Public 
Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China. Electronic address: 
drzdzhang@njmu.edu.cn.
(6)Department of Urology, The Affiliated Huai'an No. 1 Hospital of Nanjing 
Medical University, Huai'an, China. Electronic address: 
hayywangyunyan@njmu.edu.cn.
(7)Department of Environmental Genomics, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Cancer 
Biomarkers, Prevention and Treatment, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer 
Personalized Medicine, School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical University, 
Nanjing, China; Department of Genetic Toxicology, The Key Laboratory of Modern 
Toxicology of Ministry of Education, Center for Global Health, School of Public 
Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China. Electronic address: 
chy_grape@njmu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Genome-wide association studies have demonstrated that genetic 
variants are closely related to tumorigenesis and progression of cancer. 
However, the correlation between genetic variants in splicing factor genes and 
bladder cancer susceptibility remains unclear.
METHOD: A case-control study with 580 cases of bladder cancer and 1,101 controls 
was conducted to explore the association of single-nucleotide polymorphisms 
(SNPs) in splicing factors with bladder cancer susceptibility by logistic 
regression models, and multiple testing errors were justified by the false 
discovery rate (FDR) method. Next, we used the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) 
database and the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) datasets to further analyze the 
differential expression of candidate genes.
RESULTS: We found that rs978416 G>A in RBFOX3 contributed to a reduced risk of 
bladder cancer [adjusted odds ratio (OR) = 0.72, 95% confidence internal 
(CI) = 0.62-0.84, P = 3.54 × 10-5], especially in individuals who never smoked 
(P = 7.83 × 10-5). Stratified analysis showed that the protective effect of 
rs978416 was more significant in the subgroup of low grade and non-muscle 
invasive bladder cancer. Furthermore, the RBFOX3 mRNA expression was decreased 
in bladder tumor tissues. However, the relatively high expression of RBFOX3 was 
related to a higher bladder cancer stage.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicated that SNP rs978416 G>A in RBFOX3 may be 
related to bladder cancer predisposition in Chinese population and might serve 
as a novel biomarker for bladder cancer risk.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2021.146022
PMID: 34673209 [Indexed for MEDLINE]