1. PLoS One. 2021 Oct 26;16(10):e0258872. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258872. 
eCollection 2021.

Dpp/TGFβ-superfamily play a dual conserved role in mediating the damage response 
in the retina.

Kramer J(1)(2), Neves J(2)(3), Koniikusic M(2), Jasper H(2)(4), Lamba DA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of California, The Eli and Edythe 
Broad Center of Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research, San Francisco, CA, 
United States of America.
(2)Buck Institute for Research on Aging, Novato, CA, United States of America.
(3)Faculdade de Medicina, Instituto de Medicina Molecular (iMM), Universidade de 
Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal.
(4)Immunology Discovery, Genentech, Inc., South San Francisco, CA, United States 
of America.

Retinal homeostasis relies on intricate coordination of cell death and survival 
in response to stress and damage. Signaling mechanisms that coordinate this 
process in the adult retina remain poorly understood. Here we identify 
Decapentaplegic (Dpp) signaling in Drosophila and its mammalian homologue 
Transforming Growth Factor-beta (TGFβ) superfamily, that includes TGFβ and Bone 
Morphogenetic Protein (BMP) signaling arms, as central mediators of retinal 
neuronal death and tissue survival following acute damage. Using a Drosophila 
model for UV-induced retinal damage, we show that Dpp released from immune cells 
promotes tissue loss after UV-induced retinal damage. Interestingly, we find a 
dynamic response of retinal cells to this signal: in an early phase, 
Dpp-mediated stimulation of Saxophone/Smox signaling promotes apoptosis, while 
at a later stage, stimulation of the Thickveins/Mad axis promotes tissue repair 
and survival. This dual role is conserved in the mammalian retina through the 
TGFβ/BMP signaling, as supplementation of BMP4 or inhibition of TGFβ using small 
molecules promotes retinal cell survival, while inhibition of BMP negatively 
affects cell survival after light-induced photoreceptor damage and NMDA induced 
inner retinal neuronal damage. Our data identify key evolutionarily conserved 
mechanisms by which retinal homeostasis is maintained.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258872
PMCID: PMC8547621
PMID: 34699550 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: I have read the journal’s policy and the 
following authors of this manuscript have the following competing interests: 
Heinrich Jasper is an employee of Genentech Inc. This commercial affiliation 
does not alter author’s adherence to all PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and 
materials.