1. Taiwan J Ophthalmol. 2021 Apr 30;11(3):207-215. doi: 10.4103/tjo.tjo_4_21. 
eCollection 2021 Jul-Sep.

Nutrigenetic reprogramming of oxidative stress.

Ryu J(1), Gulamhusein H(1)(2)(3), Oh JK(1)(4), Chang JH(1)(2), Chen J(1)(5), 
Tsang SH(1)(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Jonas Children's Vision Care and the Bernard and 
Shirlee Brown Glaucoma Laboratory, Columbia Stem Cell Initiative, Columbia 
University, New York, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Institute of Human Nutrition, Columbia 
University, New York, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley School 
of Medicine, Edinburg, TX, USA.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology, State University of New York at Downstate 
Medical Center, Brooklyn, USA.
(5)Department of Ophthalmology, Columbia University, New York, USA.
(6)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, 
Institute of Human Nutrition, Columbia University, NY, USA.

Retinal disorders such as retinitis pigmentosa, age-related retinal 
degeneration, oxygen-induced retinopathy, and ischemia-reperfusion injury cause 
debilitating and irreversible vision loss. While the exact mechanisms underlying 
these conditions remain unclear, there has been a growing body of evidence 
demonstrating the pathological contributions of oxidative stress across 
different cell types within the eye. Nuclear factor erythroid-2-related factor 
(Nrf2), a transcriptional activator of antioxidative genes, and its regulator 
Kelch-like ECH-associated protein 1 (Keap1) have emerged as promising 
therapeutic targets. The purpose of this review is to understand the protective 
role of the Nrf2-Keap1 pathway in different retinal tissues and shed light on 
the complex mechanisms underlying these processes. In the photoreceptors, we 
highlight that Nrf2 preserves their survival and function by maintaining 
oxidation homeostasis. In the retinal pigment epithelium, Nrf2 similarly plays a 
critical role in oxidative stabilization but also maintains mitochondrial 
motility and autophagy-related lipid metabolic processes. In endothelial cells, 
Nrf2 seems to promote proper vascularization and revascularization through 
concurrent activation of antioxidative and angiogenic factors as well as 
inhibition of inflammatory cytokines. Finally, Nrf2 protects retinal ganglion 
cells against apoptotic cell death. Importantly, we show that Nrf2-mediated 
protection of the various retinal tissues corresponds to a preservation of 
functional vision. Altogether, this review underscores the potential of the 
Nrf2-Keap1 pathway as a powerful tool against retinal degeneration. Key insights 
into this elegant oxidative defense mechanism may ultimately pave the path 
toward a universal therapy for various inherited and environmental retinal 
disorders.

Copyright: © 2021 Taiwan J Ophthalmol.

DOI: 10.4103/tjo.tjo_4_21
PMCID: PMC8493979
PMID: 34703735

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflicts 
of interests of this paper.