1. J Adv Vet Anim Res. 2021 Jun 2;8(3):355-360. doi: 10.5455/javar.2021.h522. 
eCollection 2021 Sep.

Parameters of nonspecific resistance of calves with respiratory pathology before 
and after treatment.

Naef H(1), Alhussen MA(1), Vatnikov YA(1), Cheskidova LV(2), Semenova VI(1), 
Parshin PA(2), Alsalh MA(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Medicine, Peoples' Friendship University of Russia 
(RUDN University), Moscow, Russia.
(2)Federal State Budgetary Scientific Institution, Russian Ministry of 
Agriculture, All-Russian Veterinary Research Institute of Pathology, 
Pharmacology and Therapy, Farong, Russia.
(3)Department of Animal Husbandry, College of Veterinary Medicine, Al Furat 
University, Deirez-Zor, Syria.

OBJECTIVE: The research was conducted to study the effect of a complex 
antimicrobial drug with an anti-inflammatory effect and an antimicrobial drug 
with an immunostimulating effect on the parameters of nonspecific resistance in 
calves.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Two groups (n = 5 each) of sick calves with respiratory 
pathology were selected for this study. For the treatment of the first 
experimental group, a complex antimicrobial drug Sulfetrisan® was used. The 
second experimental group of the calves was intramuscularly injected with the 
experimental drug gentaaminoseleferon (GIA). To assess the cellular component of 
immunity in the blood before and after treatment, the number of white blood 
cells, T-lymphocytes, B-lymphocytes, phagocytic activity of leukocytes, 
phagocytic number, and phagocytic index (PhI) were determined. In addition, for 
assessing the humoral component, serum complement activity (SCA), serum lysozyme 
activity, serum bactericidal activity (SBA), circulating immune complexes (CIC), 
and total immunoglobulins (total Ig) were measured. The results were compared 
with the baseline parameters of healthy calves of the control group.
RESULTS: When studying the parameters of the humoral and cellular components of 
nonspecific resistance, it was found that in sick animals, compared with healthy 
ones, respiratory pathology was accompanied by an imbalance in the immune 
system. In the process of recovery in animals of the experimental groups under 
the effect of the drugs, positive changes occurred. However, many of the studied 
parameters did not reach the values of healthy animals. In the group of calves 
that received GIA, compared with the calves given Sulfetrisan®, a significant 
increase in PhI (p < 0.05), SBA (p < 0.006), SCA (p < 0.05), total Ig (p < 
0.0005), and CIC (p < 0.05) was observed, which indicated an increase in natural 
resistance due to the immunostimulating action.
CONCLUSION: The use of GIA in sick animals added to an increase in the general 
nonspecific cellular and humoral resistance of calves, which made it possible to 
increase therapeutic efficacy and shorten their recovery time.

Copyright: © Journal of Advanced Veterinary and Animal Research.

DOI: 10.5455/javar.2021.h522
PMCID: PMC8520147
PMID: 34722732

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interests.