1. Res Pract Thromb Haemost. 2021 Nov 2;5(7):e12612. doi: 10.1002/rth2.12612. 
eCollection 2021 Oct.

Interlaboratory variability of activated protein C resistance using the 
ETP-based APC resistance assay.

Morimont L(1)(2), Didembourg M(2), Haguet H(1)(2), Modaffari É(1), Tillier M(3), 
Bouvy C(1), Lebreton A(3), Dogné JM(2), Douxfils J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Qualiblood sa Namur Belgium.
(2)Faculty of Medicine Department of Pharmacy Namur Research Institute for Life 
Sciences (NARILIS) Namur Thrombosis and Hemostasis Center (NTHC) University of 
Namur Namur Belgium.
(3)Service d'hématologie Biologique CHU Clermont-Ferrand Clermont-Ferrand 
France.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Although the endogenous thrombin potential (ETP)-based 
activated protein C (APC) resistance is recommended for the development of 
steroid contraceptive agents, one of the main limitations of this technique was 
its lack of standardization, which hampered study-to-study comparison. A 
validated methodology that meets all the regulatory requirements in terms of 
analytical performances has been developed recently. To ensure a wide 
implementation of this test, the assessment of the interlaboratory variability 
was needed.
METHOD: The assay was implemented in three testing laboratories. First, 
dose-response curves were performed to locally define APC concentration leading 
to 90% of ETP inhibition on healthy donors. Intra- and inter-run repeatability 
were assessed on a reference plasma and three quality controls. To investigate 
the variability in results among the different testing units, 60 donor samples 
were analyzed at each site.
RESULTS: The APC concentration leading to 90% of ETP inhibition was defined at 
1.21 µg/ml and 1.14 µg/ml in the two receiving units. Intra- and inter-run 
repeatability showed standard deviation below 3%. Analyses of the 60 donor 
samples showed no statistically significant difference. The sensitivity of the 
test in the different laboratories was maintained and subgroup analyses still 
reported significant differences depending on hormonal status of donors.
CONCLUSION: This study is the first reporting the interlaboratory variability of 
the ETP-based APC resistance assay. Data revealed excellent intra- and 
interlaboratory reproducibility. These results support the concept that this 
blood coagulation test provides an appropriate sensitivity irrespective of the 
laboratory in which analyses are performed.

© 2021 The Authors. Research and Practice in Thrombosis and Haemostasis 
published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of International Society on 
Thrombosis and Haemostasis (ISTH).

DOI: 10.1002/rth2.12612
PMCID: PMC8563922
PMID: 34761157