1. J Parkinsons Dis. 2022;12(1):153-171. doi: 10.3233/JPD-212818.

Insights on Genetic and Environmental Factors in Parkinson's Disease from a 
Regional Swedish Case-Control Cohort.

Brolin K(1), Bandres-Ciga S(2), Blauwendraat C(2), Widner H(3)(4), Odin P(3)(4), 
Hansson O(5)(6), Puschmann A(3)(4), Swanberg M(1).

Author information:
(1)Lund University, Translational Neurogenetics Unit, Department of Experimental 
Medical Science, Lund, Sweden.
(2)Laboratory of Neurogenetics, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes 
of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(3)Lund University, Department of Clinical Sciences Lund, Neurology, Sweden.
(4)Department of Neurology, Skåne University Hospital, Sweden.
(5)Department of Clinical Sciences Malmö, Clinical Memory Research Unit, Lund 
University, Sweden.
(6)Memory Clinic, Skåne University Hospital, Malmö, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Risk factors for Parkinson's disease (PD) can be more or less 
relevant to a population due to population-specific genetic architecture, local 
lifestyle habits, and environmental exposures. Therefore, it is essential to 
study PD at a local, regional, and continental scale in order to increase the 
knowledge on disease etiology.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to investigate the contribution of genetic and environmental 
factors to PD in a new Swedish case-control cohort.
METHODS: PD patients (n = 929) and matched population-based controls (n = 935) 
from the southernmost county in Sweden were included in the cohort. Information 
on environmental exposures was obtained using questionnaires at inclusion. 
Genetic analyses included a genome-wide association study (GWAS), haplotype 
assessment, and a risk profile analysis using cumulative genetic risk scores.
RESULTS: The cohort is a representative PD case-control cohort (64% men, mean 
age at diagnosis = 67 years, median Hoehn and Yahr score 2.0), in which 
previously reported associations between PD and environmental factors, such as 
tobacco, could be confirmed. We describe the first GWAS of PD solely composed of 
PD patients from Sweden, and confirm associations to well-established risk 
alleles in SNCA. In addition, we nominate an unconfirmed and potentially 
population-specific genome-wide significant association in the PLPP4 locus 
(rs12771445).
CONCLUSION: This work provides an in-depth description of a new PD case-control 
cohort from southern Sweden, giving insights into environmental and genetic risk 
factors for PD in the Swedish population.

DOI: 10.3233/JPD-212818
PMCID: PMC8842752
PMID: 34776419 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: KB, MS, SBC, CB, AP, PO, and HW have no 
conflicts of interest to report. OH has acquired research support (for the 
institution) from AVID Radiopharmaceuticals, Biogen, Eli Lilly, Eisai, GE 
Healthcare, Pfizer, and Roche. In the past 2 years, he has received 
consultancy/speaker fees from AC Immune, Alzpath, Biogen, Cerveau, and Roche.