1. Neural Regen Res. 2022 Jun;17(6):1210-1227. doi: 10.4103/1673-5374.325012.

All roads lead to Rome - a review of the potential mechanisms by which exerkines 
exhibit neuroprotective effects in Alzheimer's disease.

Liang YY(1), Zhang LD(1), Luo X(1), Wu LL(2), Chen ZW(3), Wei GH(3), Zhang 
KQ(3), Du ZA(4), Li RZ(5), So KF(6), Li A(7).

Author information:
(1)Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macau Institute of CNS Regeneration, Jinan University; 
Key Laboratory of CNS Regeneration (Jinan University), Ministry of Education, 
Guangzhou, Guangdong Province, China.
(2)Department of Medical Ultrasonics, Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen 
University; Guangdong Key Laboratory of Liver Disease Research, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong Province, China.
(3)Department of Clinical Medicine, School of Medicine, Jinan University, 
Guangzhou, Guangdong Province, China.
(4)Department of Clinical Medicine, International School, Jinan University, 
Guangzhou, Guangdong Province, China.
(5)International Department of the Affiliated High School of South China Normal 
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong Province, China.
(6)Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macau Institute of CNS Regeneration, Jinan University; 
Key Laboratory of CNS Regeneration (Jinan University), Ministry of Education; 
Bioland Laboratory (Guangzhou Regenerative Medicine and Health Guangdong 
Laboratory), Guangzhou, Guangdong Province; Co-Innovation Center of 
Neuroregeneration, Nantong University, Nantong, Jiangsu Province, China.
(7)Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macau Institute of CNS Regeneration, Jinan University; 
Key Laboratory of CNS Regeneration (Jinan University), Ministry of Education; 
Bioland Laboratory (Guangzhou Regenerative Medicine and Health Guangdong 
Laboratory), Guangzhou, Guangdong Province, China.

Age-related neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer's disease (AD) have 
become a critical public health issue due to the significantly extended human 
lifespan, leading to considerable economic and social burdens. Traditional 
therapies for AD such as medicine and surgery remain ineffective, impractical, 
and expensive. Many studies have shown that a variety of bioactive substances 
released by physical exercise (called "exerkines") help to maintain and improve 
the normal functions of the brain in terms of cognition, emotion, and 
psychomotor coordination. Increasing evidence suggests that exerkines may exert 
beneficial effects in AD as well. This review summarizes the neuroprotective 
effects of exerkines in AD, focusing on the underlying molecular mechanism and 
the dynamic expression of exerkines after physical exercise. The findings 
described in this review will help direct research into novel targets for the 
treatment of AD and develop customized exercise therapy for individuals of 
different ages, genders, and health conditions.

DOI: 10.4103/1673-5374.325012
PMCID: PMC8643060
PMID: 34782555

Conflict of interest statement: None