1. Cancer Cell Int. 2021 Nov 17;21(1):607. doi: 10.1186/s12935-021-02306-y.

Anticancer effects of mifepristone on human uveal melanoma cells.

Alvarez PB(#)(1)(2), Laskaris A(#)(1)(2), Goyeneche AA(1)(2), Chen Y(1)(2), 
Telleria CM(#)(3)(4), Burnier JV(#)(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Experimental Pathology Unit, Department of Pathology, McGill University, 
Montreal, QC, Canada.
(2)Cancer Research Program, Research Institute of the McGill University Health 
Centre, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(3)Experimental Pathology Unit, Department of Pathology, McGill University, 
Montreal, QC, Canada. carlos.telleria@mcgill.ca.
(4)Cancer Research Program, Research Institute of the McGill University Health 
Centre, Montreal, QC, Canada. carlos.telleria@mcgill.ca.
(5)Experimental Pathology Unit, Department of Pathology, McGill University, 
Montreal, QC, Canada. julia.burnier@mcgill.ca.
(6)Cancer Research Program, Research Institute of the McGill University Health 
Centre, Montreal, QC, Canada. julia.burnier@mcgill.ca.
(7)Gerald Bronfman Department of Oncology, McGill University, Montreal, QC, 
Canada. julia.burnier@mcgill.ca.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Uveal melanoma (UM), the most prevalent intraocular tumor in adults, 
is a highly metastatic and drug resistant lesion. Recent studies have 
demonstrated cytotoxic and anti-metastatic effects of the antiprogestin and 
antiglucocorticoid mifepristone (MF) in vitro and in clinical trials involving 
meningioma, colon, breast, and ovarian cancers. Drug repurposing is a 
cost-effective approach to bring approved drugs with good safety profiles to the 
clinic. This current study assessed the cytotoxic effects of MF in human UM cell 
lines of different genetic backgrounds.
METHODS: The effects of incremental concentrations of MF (0, 5, 10, 20, or 
40 μM) on a panel of human UM primary (MEL270, 92.1, MP41, and MP46) and 
metastatic (OMM2.5) cells were evaluated. Cells were incubated with MF for up to 
72 h before subsequent assays were conducted. Cellular functionality and 
viability were assessed by Cell Counting Kit-8, trypan blue exclusion assay, and 
quantitative label-free IncuCyte live-cell analysis. Cell death was analyzed by 
binding of Annexin V-FITC and/or PI, caspase-3/7 activity, and DNA 
fragmentation. Additionally, the release of cell-free DNA was assessed by 
droplet digital PCR, while the expression of progesterone and glucocorticoid 
receptors was determined by quantitative real-time reverse transcriptase PCR.
RESULTS: MF treatment reduced cellular proliferation and viability of all UM 
cell lines studied in a concentration-dependent manner. A reduction in cell 
growth was observed at lower concentrations of MF, with evidence of cell death 
at higher concentrations. A significant increase in Annexin V-FITC and PI double 
positive cells, caspase-3/7 activity, DNA fragmentation, and cell-free DNA 
release suggests potent cytotoxicity of MF. None of the tested human UM cells 
expressed the classical progesterone receptor in the absence or presence of MF 
treatment, suggesting a mechanism independent of the modulation of the cognate 
nuclear progesterone receptor. In turn, all cells expressed non-classical 
progesterone receptors and the glucocorticoid receptor.
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrates that MF impedes the proliferation of UM 
cells in a concentration-dependent manner. We report that MF treatment at lower 
concentrations results in cell growth arrest, while increasing the concentration 
leads to lethality. MF, which has a good safety profile, could be a reliable 
adjuvant of a repurposing therapy against UM.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12935-021-02306-y
PMCID: PMC8597220
PMID: 34789240

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.