1. Acta Neuropathol. 2022 Jan;143(1):93-104. doi: 10.1007/s00401-021-02386-0.
Epub  2021 Nov 19.

DNA methylation-based classification of malformations of cortical development in 
the human brain.

Jabari S(#)(1), Kobow K(#)(2), Pieper T(3), Hartlieb T(3)(4), Kudernatsch 
M(5)(4), Polster T(6), Bien CG(6), Kalbhenn T(7), Simon M(7), Hamer H(8), 
Rössler K(9)(10), Feucht M(11), Mühlebner A(12)(13), Najm I(14)(15), 
Peixoto-Santos JE(16), Gil-Nagel A(17), Delgado RT(17), Aledo-Serrano A(17), Hou 
Y(18)(19), Coras R(1), von Deimling A(#)(18), Blümcke I(#)(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropathology, Affiliated Partner of the ERN EpiCARE, 
Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nürnberg 
(FAU), Erlangen, Germany.
(2)Department of Neuropathology, Affiliated Partner of the ERN EpiCARE, 
Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nürnberg 
(FAU), Erlangen, Germany. katja.kobow@uk-erlangen.de.
(3)Center for Pediatric Neurology, Neurorehabilitation and Epileptology, 
Vogtareuth, Germany.
(4)Research Institute, Rehabilitation, Transition, Palliation", PMU Salzburg, 
Salzburg, Austria.
(5)Center for Neurosurgery and Epilepsy Surgery, Schön Klinik Vogtareuth, 
Vogtareuth, Germany.
(6)Department of Epileptology (Krankenhaus Mara), Medical School, Bielefeld 
University, Bielefeld, Germany.
(7)Department of Neurosurgery - Epilepsy Surgery, Evangelisches Klinikum Bethel, 
Universitätsklinikum OWL, Bielefeld University, Bielefeld, Germany.
(8)Department of Neurology, Epilepsy Center, Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, 
Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), Erlangen, Germany.
(9)Department of Neurosurgery, Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, 
Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), Erlangen, Germany.
(10)Department of Neurosurgery, Medical University Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(11)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Affiliated Partner of the 
ERN EpiCARE, Medical University Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(12)Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The 
Netherlands.
(13)Department of (Neuro) Pathology, Amsterdam UMC, Location AMC, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(14)Charles Shor Epilepsy Center, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(15)Department of Neurology, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(16)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Paulista Medical School, UNIFESP, 
Sao Paulo, Brazil.
(17)Epilepsy Program, Hospital Ruber Internacional, Madrid, Spain.
(18)Department of Neuropathology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), 
Universitätsklinikum Heidelberg, and CCU Neuropathology, Heidelberg, Germany.
(19)Institute of Pathology and Southwest Cancer Center, Southwest Hospital, 
Third Military Medical University (Army Medical University), Chongqing, China.
(#)Contributed equally

Malformations of cortical development (MCD) comprise a broad spectrum of 
structural brain lesions frequently associated with epilepsy. Disease definition 
and diagnosis remain challenging and are often prone to arbitrary judgment. 
Molecular classification of histopathological entities may help rationalize the 
diagnostic process. We present a retrospective, multi-center analysis of 
genome-wide DNA methylation from human brain specimens obtained from epilepsy 
surgery using EPIC 850 K BeadChip arrays. A total of 308 samples were included 
in the study. In the reference cohort, 239 formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded 
(FFPE) tissue samples were histopathologically classified as MCD, including 12 
major subtype pathologies. They were compared to 15 FFPE samples from surgical 
non-MCD cortices and 11 FFPE samples from post-mortem non-epilepsy controls. We 
applied three different statistical approaches to decipher the DNA methylation 
pattern of histopathological MCD entities, i.e., pairwise comparison, machine 
learning, and deep learning algorithms. Our deep learning model, which 
represented a shallow neuronal network, achieved the highest level of accuracy. 
A test cohort of 43 independent surgical samples from different epilepsy centers 
was used to test the precision of our DNA methylation-based MCD classifier. All 
samples from the test cohort were accurately assigned to their disease classes 
by the algorithm. These data demonstrate DNA methylation-based MCD 
classification suitability across major histopathological entities amenable to 
epilepsy surgery and age groups and will help establish an integrated diagnostic 
classification scheme for epilepsy-associated MCD.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-021-02386-0
PMCID: PMC8732912
PMID: 34797422 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None of the authors have a conflict of interest 
to disclose. Ingmar Blümcke and Andreas von Deimling are members of Acta 
Neuropathologica’s Editorial Board. They were not involved in the assessment or 
decision-making process for this manuscript.