1. Iran J Basic Med Sci. 2021 Aug;24(8):997-1013. doi: 
10.22038/ijbms.2021.54800.12291.

Marine algae as emerging therapeutic alternatives for depression: A review.

Subermaniam K(1)(2), Teoh SL(3), Yow YY(4), Tang YQ(5), Lim LW(6), Wong KH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine, Universiti Malaya, 50603 Kuala 
Lumpur, Malaysia.
(2)Training Management Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia, 62675 Putrajaya, 
Malaysia.
(3)Department of Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia 
Medical Center, Jalan Yaacob Latif, Bandar Tun Razak, 56000 Kuala Lumpur, 
Malaysia.
(4)Department of Biological Sciences, School of Medical and Life Sciences, 
Sunway University, 47500 Bandar Sunway, Selangor Darul Ehsan, Malaysia.
(5)School of Biosciences, Faculty of Health & Medical Sciences, Taylor's 
University Lakeside Campus, 47500 Subang Jaya, Selangor Darul Ehsan, Malaysia.
(6)Neuromodulation Laboratory, School of Biomedical Sciences, Li Ka Shing 
Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, 21 Sassoon Road, Pokfulam, 
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China.

Depression is a complex heterogeneous brain disorder characterized by a range of 
symptoms, resulting in psychomotor and cognitive disabilities and suicidal 
thoughts. Its prevalence has reached an alarming level affecting millions of 
people globally. Despite advances in current pharmacological treatments, the 
heterogenicity of clinical response and incidences of adverse effects have 
shifted research focus to identification of new natural substances with minimal 
or no adverse effects as therapeutic alternatives. Marine algae-derived extracts 
and their constituents are considered potential sources of secondary metabolites 
with diverse beneficial effects. Marine algae with enormous health benefits are 
emerging as a natural source for discovering new alternative antidepressants. 
Its medicinal properties exhibited shielding efficacy against neuroinflammation, 
oxidative stress, and mitochondrial dysfunction, which are indicated to underlie 
the pathogenesis of many neurological disorders. Marine algae have been found to 
ameliorate depressive-like symptoms and behaviors in preclinical and clinical 
studies by restoring monoaminergic neurotransmission, 
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis function, neuroplasticity, and continuous 
neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus via modulating 
brain-derived neurotrophic factors and antineuroinflammatory activity. Although 
antidepressant effects of marine algae have not been validated in comparison 
with currently available synthetic antidepressants, they have been reported to 
have effects on the pathophysiology of depression, thus suggesting their 
potential as novel antidepressants. In this review, we analyzed the currently 
available research on the potential benefits of marine algae on depression, 
including their effects on the pathophysiology of depression, potential clinical 
relevance of their antidepressant effects in preclinical and clinical studies, 
and the underlying mechanisms of these effects.

DOI: 10.22038/ijbms.2021.54800.12291
PMCID: PMC8591755
PMID: 34804417

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest, 
financial or otherwise.