1. Eur J Histochem. 2021 Nov 25;65(s1):3289. doi: 10.4081/ejh.2021.3289.

Novel understanding on genetic mechanisms of enteric neuropathies leading to 
severe gut dysmotility.

Bianco F(1), Lattanzio G(2), Lorenzini L(3), Diquigiovanni C(4), Mazzoni M(5), 
Clavenzani P(6), Calzà L(7), Giardino L(8), Sternini C(9), Bonora E(10), De 
Giorgio R(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Sciences; Department of Medical and Surgical 
Sciences, University of Bologna. francesca.bianco5@unibo.it.
(2)Department of Veterinary Sciences, University of Bologna. 
giulia.lattanzio2@unibo.it.
(3)IRET Foundation, Ozzano Emilia. luca.lorenzini8@unibo.it.
(4)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, University of Bologna. 
chiara.diquigiovanni@unibo.it.
(5)Department of Veterinary Sciences, University of Bologna. m.mazzoni@unibo.it.
(6)Department of Veterinary Sciences, University of Bologna. 
paolo.clavenzani@unibo.it.
(7)IRET Foundation, Ozzano Emilia. laura.calza@unibo.it.
(8)IRET Foundation, Ozzano Emilia. luciana.giardino@unibo.it.
(9)UCLA/DDRC, Division of Digestive Diseases, Departments Medicine and 
Neurobiology, David Geffen School of Medicine, UCLA, Los Angeles CA. 
csternin@g.ucla.edu.
(10)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, University of Bologna. 
elena.bonora6@unibo.it.
(11)Department of Translational Medicine, University of Ferrara. 
dgrrrt@unife.it.

The enteric nervous system (ENS) is the third division of the autonomic 
autonomic nervous system and the largest collection of neurons outside the 
central nervous system (CNS). The ENS has been referred to as "the brain in the 
gut" or "the second brain of the human body" because of its highly integrated 
neural circuits controlling a vast repertoire of gut functions, including 
absorption/secretion, splanchnic blood vessels, some immunological aspects, 
intestinal epithelial barrier, and gastrointestinal (GI) motility. The latter 
function is the result of the ENS fine-tuning over smooth musculature, along 
with the contribution of other key cells, such as enteric glia (astrocyte like 
cells supporting and contributing to neuronal activity), interstitial cells of 
Cajal (the pacemaker cells of the GI tract involved in neuromuscular 
transmission), and enteroendocrine cells (releasing bioactive substances, which 
affect gut physiology). Any noxa insult perturbing the ENS complexity may 
determine a neuropathy with variable degree of neuro-muscular dysfunction. In 
this review, we aim to cover the most recent update on genetic mechanisms 
leading to enteric neuropathies ranging from Hirschsprung's disease 
(characterized by lack of any enteric neurons in the gut wall) up to more 
generalized form of dysmotility such as chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction 
(CIPO) with a significant reduction of enteric neurons. In this line, we will 
discuss the role of the RAD21 mutation, which we have demonstrated in a family 
whose affected members exhibited severe gut dysmotility. Other genes 
contributing to gut motility abnormalities will also be presented. In 
conclusion, the knowledge on the molecular mechanisms involved in enteric 
neuropathy may unveil strategies to better manage patients with neurogenic gut 
dysmotility and pave the way to targeted therapies.

DOI: 10.4081/ejh.2021.3289
PMCID: PMC8636838
PMID: 34818877 [Indexed for MEDLINE]