1. BMC Biol. 2021 Nov 24;19(1):252. doi: 10.1186/s12915-021-01187-x.

Flexible and stretchable polymer optical fibers for chronic brain and vagus 
nerve optogenetic stimulations in free-behaving animals.

Cao Y(1)(2), Pan S(1)(2), Yan M(2), Sun C(2), Huang J(2), Zhong C(3), Wang L(4), 
Yi L(5).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, Division of Life Sciences and Medicine, University 
of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, 230001, China.
(2)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Brain Connectome and Behavior, CAS Key 
Laboratory of Brain Connectome and Manipulation, the Brain Cognition and Brain 
Disease Institute, Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Shenzhen-Hong Kong Institute of Brain Science-Shenzhen Fundamental 
Research Institutions, Shenzhen, 518055, China.
(3)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Brain Connectome and Behavior, CAS Key 
Laboratory of Brain Connectome and Manipulation, the Brain Cognition and Brain 
Disease Institute, Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Shenzhen-Hong Kong Institute of Brain Science-Shenzhen Fundamental 
Research Institutions, Shenzhen, 518055, China. cheng.zhong@siat.ac.cn.
(4)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Brain Connectome and Behavior, CAS Key 
Laboratory of Brain Connectome and Manipulation, the Brain Cognition and Brain 
Disease Institute, Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Shenzhen-Hong Kong Institute of Brain Science-Shenzhen Fundamental 
Research Institutions, Shenzhen, 518055, China. lp.wang@siat.ac.cn.
(5)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Brain Connectome and Behavior, CAS Key 
Laboratory of Brain Connectome and Manipulation, the Brain Cognition and Brain 
Disease Institute, Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Shenzhen-Hong Kong Institute of Brain Science-Shenzhen Fundamental 
Research Institutions, Shenzhen, 518055, China. luyi@siat.ac.cn.

BACKGROUND: Although electrical stimulation of the peripheral and central 
nervous systems has attracted much attention owing to its potential therapeutic 
effects on neuropsychiatric diseases, its non-cell-type-specific activation 
characteristics may hinder its wide clinical application. Unlike electrical 
methodologies, optogenetics has more recently been applied as a cell-specific 
approach for precise modulation of neural functions in vivo, for instance on the 
vagus nerve. The commonly used implantable optical waveguides are silica optical 
fibers, which for brain optogenetic stimulation (BOS) are usually fixed on the 
skull bone. However, due to the huge mismatch of mechanical properties between 
the stiff optical implants and deformable vagal tissues, vagus nerve optogenetic 
stimulation (VNOS) in free-behaving animals continues to be a great challenge.
RESULTS: To resolve this issue, we developed a simplified method for the 
fabrication of flexible and stretchable polymer optical fibers (POFs), which 
show significantly improved characteristics for in vivo optogenetic 
applications, specifically a low Young's modulus, high stretchability, improved 
biocompatibility, and long-term stability. We implanted the POFs into the 
primary motor cortex of C57 mice after the expression of CaMKIIα-ChR2-mCherry 
detected frequency-dependent neuronal activity and the behavioral changes during 
light delivery. The viability of POFs as implantable waveguides for VNOS was 
verified by the increased firing rate of the fast-spiking GABAergic interneurons 
recorded in the left vagus nerve of VGAT-ChR2 transgenic mice. Furthermore, VNOS 
was carried out in free-moving rodents via chronically implanted POFs, and an 
inhibitory influence on the cardiac system and an anxiolytic effect on behaviors 
was shown.
CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrate the feasibility and advantages of the use of 
POFs in chronic optogenetic modulations in both of the central and peripheral 
nervous systems, providing new information for the development of novel 
therapeutic strategies for the treatment of neuropsychiatric disorders.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12915-021-01187-x
PMCID: PMC8611887
PMID: 34819062 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.