1. Microbiol Spectr. 2021 Dec 22;9(3):e0182621. doi: 10.1128/Spectrum.01826-21. 
Epub 2021 Nov 24.

Mapping Molecular Recognition of β1,3-1,4-Glucans by a Surface Glycan-Binding 
Protein from the Human Gut Symbiont Bacteroides ovatus.

Correia VG(1)(2), Trovão F(1)(2), Pinheiro BA(1)(2), Brás JLA(3), Silva LM(4), 
Nunes C(5), Coimbra MA(6), Liu Y(4), Feizi T(4), Fontes CMGA(3)(7), Mulloy B(4), 
Chai W(4), Carvalho AL(1)(2), Palma AS(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)UCIBIO, Applied Molecular Biosciences Unit, Department of Chemistry, School 
of Science and Technology, NOVA University Lisbon, Caparica, Portugal.
(2)Associate Laboratory i4HB-Institute for Health and Bioeconomy, School of 
Science and Technology, NOVA University Lisbon, Caparica, Portugal.
(3)NZYTech Genes & Enzymes, Lisbon, Portugal.
(4)Glycosciences Laboratory, Department of Metabolism, Digestion and 
Reproduction, Imperial College Londongrid.7445.2, London, United Kingdom.
(5)CICECO, Department of Chemistry, University of Aveiro, Aveiro, Portugal.
(6)LAQV-REQUIMTE, Department of Chemistry, University of Aveiro, Aveiro, 
Portugal.
(7)CIISA, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Lisbon, Lisbon, 
Portugal.

A multigene polysaccharide utilization locus (PUL) encoding enzymes and surface 
carbohydrate (glycan)-binding proteins (SGBPs) was recently identified in 
prominent members of Bacteroidetes in the human gut and characterized in 
Bacteroides ovatus. This PUL-encoded system specifically targets mixed-linkage 
β1,3-1,4-glucans, a group of diet-derived carbohydrates that promote a healthy 
microbiota and have potential as prebiotics. The BoSGBPMLG-A protein encoded by 
the BACOVA_2743 gene is a SusD-like protein that plays a key role in the PUL's 
specificity and functionality. Here, we perform a detailed analysis of the 
molecular determinants underlying carbohydrate binding by BoSGBPMLG-A, combining 
carbohydrate microarray technology with quantitative affinity studies and a 
high-resolution X-ray crystallography structure of the complex of BoSGBPMLG-A 
with a β1,3-1,4-nonasaccharide. We demonstrate its unique binding specificity 
toward β1,3-1,4-gluco-oligosaccharides, with increasing binding affinities up to 
the octasaccharide and dependency on the number and position of β1,3 linkages. 
The interaction is defined by a 41-Å-long extended binding site that 
accommodates the oligosaccharide in a mode distinct from that of previously 
described bacterial β1,3-1,4-glucan-binding proteins. In addition to the shape 
complementarity mediated by CH-π interactions, a complex hydrogen bonding 
network complemented by a high number of key ordered water molecules establishes 
additional specific interactions with the oligosaccharide. These support the 
twisted conformation of the β-glucan backbone imposed by the β1,3 linkages and 
explain the dependency on the oligosaccharide chain length. We propose that the 
specificity of the PUL conferred by BoSGBPMLG-A to import long β1,3-1,4-glucan 
oligosaccharides to the bacterial periplasm allows Bacteroidetes to outcompete 
bacteria that lack this PUL for utilization of β1,3-1,4-glucans. IMPORTANCE With 
the knowledge of bacterial gene systems encoding proteins that target dietary 
carbohydrates as a source of nutrients and their importance for human health, 
major efforts are being made to understand carbohydrate recognition by various 
commensal bacteria. Here, we describe an integrative strategy that combines 
carbohydrate microarray technology with structural studies to further elucidate 
the molecular determinants of carbohydrate recognition by BoSGBPMLG-A, a key 
protein expressed at the surface of Bacteroides ovatus for utilization of 
mixed-linkage β1,3-1,4-glucans. We have mapped at high resolution interactions 
that occur at the binding site of BoSGBPMLG-A and provide evidence for the role 
of key water-mediated interactions for fine specificity and affinity. 
Understanding at the molecular level how commensal bacteria, such as prominent 
members of Bacteroidetes, can differentially utilize dietary carbohydrates with 
potential prebiotic activities will shed light on possible ways to modulate the 
microbiome to promote human health.

DOI: 10.1128/Spectrum.01826-21
PMCID: PMC8612152
PMID: 34817219 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: We declare no conflicts of interest.