1. Sci Immunol. 2021 Nov 26;6(65):eabe3981. doi: 10.1126/sciimmunol.abe3981. Epub
 2021 Nov 26.

Germline biallelic mutation affecting the transcription factor Helios causes 
pleiotropic defects of immunity.

Shahin T(1)(2)(3)(4), Kuehn HS(5), Shoeb MR(1), Gawriyski L(6), Giuliani 
S(1)(2), Repiscak P(1), Hoeger B(1)(2), Yüce Petronczki Ö(1)(2), Bal SK(1)(2), 
Zoghi S(1)(2), Dmytrus J(1)(2), Seruggia D(1), Castanon I(1), Rezaei N(7)(8)(9), 
Varjosalo M(6), Halbritter F(1), Rosenzweig SD(5), Boztug K(1)(2)(3)(4)(10).

Author information:
(1)St. Anna Children's Cancer Research Institute (CCRI), Vienna, Austria.
(2)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Rare and Undiagnosed Diseases, Vienna, 
Austria.
(3)CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of 
Sciences, Vienna, Austria.
(4)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Medical University of 
Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(5)Immunology Service, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Clinical Center, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20814, USA.
(6)Institute of Biotechnology, Helsinki Institute of Life Science, Proteomics 
Unit, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(7)Research Center for Immunodeficiencies, Children's Medical Center, Tehran 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(8)Department of Immunology, School of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(9)Network of Immunity in Infection, Malignancy and Autoimmunity (NIIMA), 
Universal Scientific Education and Research Network (USERN), Tehran, Iran.
(10)St. Anna Children's Hospital, Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent 
Medicine, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

Helios, a member of the Ikaros family of transcription factors, is predominantly 
expressed in developing thymocytes, activated T cells, and regulatory T cells 
(Tregs). Studies in mice have emphasized its role in maintenance of Treg 
immunosuppressive functions by stabilizing Foxp3 expression and silencing the 
Il2 locus. However, its contribution to human immune homeostasis and the precise 
mechanisms by which Helios regulates other T cell subsets remain unresolved. 
Here, we investigated a patient with recurrent respiratory infections and 
hypogammaglobulinemia and identified a germline homozygous missense mutation in 
IKZF2 encoding Helios (p.Ile325Val). We found that HeliosI325V retains DNA 
binding and dimerization properties but loses interaction with several partners, 
including epigenetic remodelers. Whereas patient Tregs showed increased IL-2 
production, patient conventional T cells had decreased accessibility of the IL2 
locus and consequently reduced IL-2 production. Reduced chromatin accessibility 
was not exclusive to the IL2 locus but involved a variety of genes associated 
with T cell activation. Single-cell RNA sequencing of peripheral blood 
mononuclear cells revealed gene expression signatures indicative of a shift 
toward a proinflammatory, effector-like status in patient CD8+ T cells. 
Moreover, patient CD4+ T cells exhibited a pronounced defect in proliferation 
with delayed expression of surface checkpoint inhibitors, suggesting an impaired 
onset of the T cell activation program. Collectively, we identified a previously 
uncharacterized, germline-encoded inborn error of immunity and uncovered a 
cell-specific defect in Helios-dependent epigenetic regulation. Binding of 
Helios with specific partners mediates this regulation, which is ultimately 
necessary for the transcriptional programs that enable T cell homeostasis in 
health and disease.

DOI: 10.1126/sciimmunol.abe3981
PMCID: PMC7612971
PMID: 34826259 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare that 
they have no competing interests.