1. Epilepsia Open. 2022 Jun;7(2):280-292. doi: 10.1002/epi4.12564. Epub 2022 Feb
8.

Astrocyte reactivity in a mouse model of SCN8A epileptic encephalopathy.

Thompson JA(1)(2), Miralles RM(1)(2), Wengert ER(1)(2), Wagley PK(1), Yu W(3), 
Wenker IC(1), Patel MK(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, University of Virginia Health System, 
Charlottesville, VA, USA.
(2)Neuroscience Graduate Program, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, 
USA.
(3)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

OBJECTIVE: SCN8A epileptic encephalopathy is caused predominantly by de novo 
gain-of-function mutations in the voltage-gated sodium channel Nav 1.6. The 
disorder is characterized by early onset of seizures and developmental delay. 
Most patients with SCN8A epileptic encephalopathy are refractory to current 
anti-seizure medications. Previous studies determining the mechanisms of this 
disease have focused on neuronal dysfunction as Nav 1.6 is expressed by neurons 
and plays a critical role in controlling neuronal excitability. However, glial 
dysfunction has been implicated in epilepsy and alterations in glial physiology 
could contribute to the pathology of SCN8A encephalopathy. In the current study, 
we examined alterations in astrocyte and microglia physiology in the development 
of seizures in a mouse model of SCN8A epileptic encephalopathy.
METHODS: Using immunohistochemistry, we assessed microglia and astrocyte 
reactivity before and after the onset of spontaneous seizures. Expression of 
glutamine synthetase and Nav 1.6, and Kir 4.1 channel currents were assessed in 
astrocytes in wild-type (WT) mice and mice carrying the N1768D SCN8A mutation 
(D/+).
RESULTS: Astrocytes in spontaneously seizing D/+ mice become reactive and 
increase expression of glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), a marker of 
astrocyte reactivity. These same astrocytes exhibited reduced barium-sensitive 
Kir 4.1 currents compared to age-matched WT mice and decreased expression of 
glutamine synthetase. These alterations were only observed in spontaneously 
seizing mice and not before the onset of seizures. In contrast, microglial 
morphology remained unchanged before and after the onset of seizures.
SIGNIFICANCE: Astrocytes, but not microglia, become reactive only after the 
onset of spontaneous seizures in a mouse model of SCN8A encephalopathy. Reactive 
astrocytes have reduced Kir 4.1-mediated currents, which would impair their 
ability to buffer potassium. Reduced expression of glutamine synthetase would 
modulate the availability of neurotransmitters to excitatory and inhibitory 
neurons. These deficits in potassium and glutamate handling by astrocytes could 
exacerbate seizures in SCN8A epileptic encephalopathy. Targeting astrocytes may 
provide a new therapeutic approach to seizure suppression.

© 2021 The Authors. Epilepsia Open published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf 
of International League Against Epilepsy.

DOI: 10.1002/epi4.12564
PMCID: PMC9159254
PMID: 34826216 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None of the authors has any conflict of interest 
to disclose. Experiments have been performed with all national and international 
guidelines. The principles outlined in the ARRIVE guidelines, Basel declaration, 
including the 3R concept, were considered when planning experiments. Our Animal 
Welfare Assurance Number is A3245‐01. We confirm that we have read the Journal's 
position on issues involved in ethical publication and affirm that this report 
is consistent with those guidelines.