1. Iran J Med Sci. 2021 Nov;46(6):454-467. doi: 10.30476/ijms.2020.86984.1705.

Engineering of Ocriplasmin Variants by Bioinformatics Methods for the Reduction 
of Proteolytic and Autolytic Activities.

Baghban R(1)(2)(3), Farajnia S(4), Ghasemi Y(5)(6), Mortazavi M(7), Ghasemali 
S(1), Zakariazadeh M(8), Zarghami N(1), Samadi N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biotechnology, School of Advanced Medical Science, 
Tabriz University of Medical Sciences,Tabriz, Iran.
(2)Student Research Committee, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, 
Iran.
(3)Poostchi Ophthalmology Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical 
Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.
(4)Drug Applied Research Center, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, 
Iran.
(5)Pharmaceutical Sciences Research Center, School of Pharmacy, Shiraz 
University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.
(6)Department of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, School of Pharmacy, Shiraz 
University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.
(7)Department of Biotechnology, Institute of Science and High Technology and 
Environmental Sciences, Graduate University of Advanced Technology, Kerman, 
Iran.
(8)Department of Biology, Payame Noor University, Tehran, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Ocriplasmin has been developed for the induction of posterior 
vitreous detachment in patients with vitreomacular adhesion. At physiological 
pH, ocriplasmin is susceptible to autolytic and proteolytic degradation, 
limiting its activity duration. These undesirable properties of ocriplasmin can 
be reduced by site-directed mutagenesis, so that its enzymatic activities can be 
augmented. This study aimed to design ocriplasmin variants with improved 
biological/physicochemical characteristics via bioinformatics tools.
METHODS: This study was performed in Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, 
Tabriz, Iran, 2019. Through site-directed mutagenesis, three ocriplasmin 
variants were designed. Structural analysis was performed on the wild-type 
variant and the mutant variants using the Protein Interactions Calculator (PIC) 
server. The interactions between the S-2403 substrate and the ocriplasmin 
variants were studied by molecular docking simulations, and binding capability 
was evaluated by the calculation of free binding energy. The conformational 
features of protein-substrate complex systems for all the variants were 
evaluated using molecular dynamic simulations at 100 nanoseconds.
RESULTS: The structural analysis of ocriplasmin revealed that the substitution 
of threonine for alanine 59 significantly reduced proteolytic activity, while 
the substitution of glutamic acid for lysine 156 influenced autolytic function. 
The molecular docking simulation results indicated the appropriate binding of 
the substrate to the ocriplasmin variants with high-to-low affinities. The 
binding affinity of the wild-type variant for the substrate was higher than that 
between the mutant variants and the substrate. Simulation analyses, consisting 
of the root-mean-square deviation, the root-mean-square fluctuation, and the 
center-of-mass average distance showed a higher affinity of the substrate for 
the wild type than for the mutant variants.
CONCLUSION: The mutational analysis of ocriplasmin revealed that A59T and K156E 
mutagenesis could be used for the development of a new variant with higher 
therapeutic efficacy.

Copyright: © Iranian Journal of Medical Sciences.

DOI: 10.30476/ijms.2020.86984.1705
PMCID: PMC8611222
PMID: 34840386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]