1. G3 (Bethesda). 2021 Aug 7;11(8):jkab205. doi: 10.1093/g3journal/jkab205.

Post-replicative nick translation occurs on the lagging strand during prolonged 
depletion of DNA ligase I in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Koussa NC(1), Smith DJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, New York University, New York, NY 10003, USA.

During lagging-strand synthesis, strand-displacement synthesis by DNA polymerase 
delta (Pol ∂), coupled to nucleolytic cleavage of DNA flap structures, produces 
a nick-translation reaction that replaces the DNA at the 5' end of the preceding 
Okazaki fragment. Previous work following depletion of DNA ligase I in 
Saccharomyces cerevisae suggests that DNA-bound proteins, principally 
nucleosomes and the transcription factors Abf1/Rap1/Reb1, pose a barrier to Pol 
∂ synthesis and thereby limit the extent of nick translation in vivo. However, 
the extended ligase depletion required for these experiments could lead to 
ongoing, non-physiological nick translation. Here, we investigate nick 
translation by analyzing Okazaki fragments purified after transient nuclear 
depletion of DNA ligase I in synchronized or asynchronous Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae cultures. We observe that, even with a short ligase depletion, 
Okazaki fragment termini are enriched around nucleosomes and 
Abf1/Reb1/Rap1-binding sites. However, protracted ligase depletion leads to a 
global change in the location of these termini, moving them toward nucleosome 
dyads from a more upstream location and further enriching termini at 
Abf1/Reb1/Rap1-binding sites. In addition, we observe an under-representation of 
DNA derived from DNA polymerase alpha-the polymerase that initiates Okazaki 
fragment synthesis-around the sites of Okazaki termini obtained from very brief 
ligase depletion. Our data suggest that, while nucleosomes and transcription 
factors do limit strand-displacement synthesis by Pol ∂ in vivo, 
post-replicative nick translation can occur at unligated Okazaki fragment 
termini such that previous analyses represent an overestimate of the extent of 
nick translation occurring during normal lagging-strand synthesis.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Genetics 
Society of America.

DOI: 10.1093/g3journal/jkab205
PMCID: PMC8496332
PMID: 34849819 [Indexed for MEDLINE]