1. AIMS Neurosci. 2021 Sep 3;8(4):510-525. doi: 10.3934/Neuroscience.2021027. 
eCollection 2021.

Ventrolateral ventromedial hypothalamic nucleus GABA neuron adaptation to 
recurring Hypoglycemia correlates with up-regulated 5'-AMP-activated protein 
kinase activity.

Alhamyani A(1), Napit PR(1), Ali H(1), Ibrahim MM(1), Briski KP(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Basic Pharmaceutical and Toxicological Sciences, College of 
Pharmacy, University of Louisiana Monroe, Monroe, LA 71201, USA.

Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) acts on ventromedial hypothalamic targets to 
suppress counter-regulatory hormone release, thereby lowering blood glucose. 
Maladaptive up-regulation of GABA signaling is implicated in impaired 
counter-regulatory outflow during recurring insulin-induced hypoglycemia (RIIH). 
Ventromedial hypothalamic nucleus (VMN) GABAergic neurons express the sensitive 
energy gauge 5'-AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK). Current research used 
high-neuroanatomical resolution single-cell microdissection tools to address the 
premise that GABAergic cells in the VMNvl, the primary location of 
'glucose-excited' metabolic-sensory neurons in the VMN, exhibit attenuated 
sensor activation during RIIH. Data show that during acute hypoglycemia, VMNvl 
glutamate decarboxylase65/67 (GAD)-immunoreactive neurons maintain energy 
stability, yet a regional subset of this population exhibited decreased GAD 
content. GABA neurons located along the rostrocaudal length of the VMNvl 
acclimated to RIIH through a shift to negative energy imbalance, e.g. increased 
phosphoAMPK expression, alongside amplification/gain of inhibition of GAD 
profiles. Acquisition of negative GAD sensitivity may involve altered cellular 
receptivity to noradrenergic input via α2-AR and/or β1-AR. Suppression of VMNvl 
GABA nerve cell signaling during RIIH may differentiate this neuroanatomical 
population from other, possibly non-metabolic-sensory GABA neurons in the MBH. 
Data here also provide novel evidence that VMNvl GABA neurons are direct targets 
of glucocorticoid control, and show that glucocorticoid receptors may inhibit 
RIIH-associated GAD expression in rostral VMNvl GABAergic cells through 
AMPK-independent mechanisms.

© 2021 the Author(s), licensee AIMS Press.

DOI: 10.3934/Neuroscience.2021027
PMCID: PMC8611193
PMID: 34877402

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors declare no 
conflict of interest.