1. PLoS Pathog. 2021 Dec 9;17(12):e1010137. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010137. 
eCollection 2021 Dec.

Cytotoxic CD4+ T-cells specific for EBV capsid antigen BORF1 are maintained in 
long-term latently infected healthy donors.

Dowell AC(1), Haigh TA(1), Ryan GB(1), Turner JE(2), Long HM(1), Taylor GS(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Immunology and Immunotherapy, College of Medical and Dental 
Sciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom.
(2)Department for Health, University of Bath, Claverton Down, Bath, United 
Kingdom.

Epstein Barr Virus (EBV) infects more than 95% of the population whereupon it 
establishes a latent infection of B-cells that persists for life under immune 
control. Primary EBV infection can cause infectious mononucleosis (IM) and 
long-term viral carriage is associated with several malignancies and certain 
autoimmune diseases. Current efforts developing EBV prophylactic vaccination 
have focussed on neutralising antibodies. An alternative strategy, that could 
enhance the efficacy of such vaccines or be used alone, is to generate T-cell 
responses capable of recognising and eliminating newly EBV-infected cells before 
the virus initiates its growth transformation program. T-cell responses against 
the EBV structural proteins, brought into the newly infected cell by the 
incoming virion, are prime candidates for such responses. Here we show the 
structural EBV capsid proteins BcLF1, BDLF1 and BORF1 are frequent targets of 
T-cell responses in EBV infected people, identify new CD8+ and CD4+ T-cell 
epitopes and map their HLA restricting alleles. Using T-cell clones we 
demonstrate that CD4+ but not CD8+ T-cell clones specific for the capsid 
proteins can recognise newly EBV-infected B-cells and control B-cell outgrowth 
via cytotoxicity. Using MHC-II tetramers we show a CD4+ T-cell response to an 
epitope within the BORF1 capsid protein epitope is present during acute EBV 
infection and in long-term viral carriage. In common with other EBV-specific 
CD4+ T-cell responses the BORF1-specific CD4+ T-cells in IM patients expressed 
perforin and granzyme-B. Unexpectedly, perforin and granzyme-B expression was 
sustained over time even when the donor had entered the long-term infected 
state. These data further our understanding of EBV structural proteins as 
targets of T-cell responses and how CD4+ T-cell responses to EBV change from 
acute disease into convalescence. They also identify new targets for 
prophylactic EBV vaccine development.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1010137
PMCID: PMC8691624
PMID: 34882759 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.