1. Int J Cardiol. 2022 Feb 1;348:1-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2021.12.013. Epub
2021  Dec 11.

Ischemia and no obstructive coronary arteries in patients with stable ischemic 
heart disease.

Mehta PK(1), Quesada O(2), Al-Badri A(3), Fleg JL(4), Volgman AS(5), Pepine 
CJ(6), Merz CNB(2), Shaw LJ(7).

Author information:
(1)Emory Women's Heart Center, Division of Cardiology, Emory University, 
Atlanta, GA, United States of America. Electronic address: pkmehta@emory.edu.
(2)Barbra Streisand Women's Heart Center, Cedars-Sinai Smidt Heart Institute, 
Los Angeles, CA, United States of America.
(3)Emory Women's Heart Center, Division of Cardiology, Emory University, 
Atlanta, GA, United States of America.
(4)Division of Cardiovascular Sciences, National Heart, Lung, and Blood 
Institute, Bethesda, MD, United States of America.
(5)Section of Cardiology, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL, United 
States of America.
(6)Division of Cardiology, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, United States 
of America.
(7)Department of Radiology, Weill-Cornell Medical College, New York, NY, United 
States of America.

A large proportion of patients with suspected obstructive coronary artery 
disease (CAD) is found to have ischemia with no obstructive coronary artery 
disease (INOCA). Based on current evidence, these patients are at increased risk 
of adverse cardiovascular events, even though they have no obstructive CAD. 
Importantly, INOCA is associated with recurrent clinical presentations with 
chest pain, impaired functional capacity, reduced health-related quality of 
life, and high healthcare costs. Underlying coronary microvascular dysfunction 
(CMD), through endothelium-dependent and independent mechanisms contribute to 
these adverse outcomes in INOCA. While non-invasive and invasive diagnostic 
testing has typically focused on identification of obstructive CAD in 
symptomatic patients, functional testing to detect coronary epicardial and 
microvascular dysfunction should be considered in those with INOCA who have 
persistent angina. Current diagnostic methods to clarify functional 
abnormalities and treatment strategies for epicardial and/or microvascular 
dysfunction in INOCA are reviewed.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2021.12.013
PMCID: PMC8779638
PMID: 34902504 [Indexed for MEDLINE]