1. Ayu. 2020 Apr-Jun;41(2):136-141. doi: 10.4103/ayu.AYU_99_20. Epub 2021 Oct 23.

Prevention of in vitro glucose-induced cataract by Vasanjana prepared by 
Yashtimadhu Kalka (paste of Glycyrrhyza glabra Linn).

Rajagopala M(1), Ravishankar B(2), Ashok BK(3), Varun BG(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Shalakya Tantra, All India Institute of Ayurveda, Sarita Vihar, 
New Delhi, India.
(2)Former Director, SDM Centre for Research in Ayurveda and Allied Sciences, SDM 
College of Ayurveda, Udupi, Karnataka, India.
(3)Discovery Scientist, Himalaya Drug Company, Bengaluru, Karnataka, India.
(4)Project Manager, Rashtriya Ayurveda Vidyapeeth, New Delhi, India.

BACKGROUND: Cataract is a major cause of blindness worldwide. Researchers 
received much attention from the traditional systems such as Ayurveda for the 
solutions of cataract through antioxidant activities apart from the surgical 
extraction.
AIMS: A To study, the anti-cataract activity of Vasanjana (VK) prepared with 
Yashtimadhu (Glycyrrhyza glabra Linn) Kalka (paste) in Vasa (fat) of the 
domestic fowl (Gallus gallus) on glucose-induced cataract in ovine (sheep) 
lenses.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Artificial aqueous humor with 55 mM glucose was used to 
induce cataract in sheep eye lenses. Treatment was given with cow ghee (CG), 
plain fat, Vasanjana, and Vitamin E to the same media and lenses were incubated 
at the room temperature for 72 h. Biochemical parameters studied in the lens 
were total proteins, malondialdehyde (MDA), Na+ K+ ATPase activity and 
electrolytes (Na+ and K+). Photographic evaluation was also done.
RESULTS: The complete opacification induced by the glucose in ovine lens was 
observed in 72 h. Cataractous lenses showed significant increase in Na+, MDA 
level and significant decrease in Na+ K+ ATPase activity and total protein 
content. Lenses treated with Vasanjana showed non-significant increase of total 
protein content and decreased MDA level and prevented formation and progress of 
cataract by glucose, as evidenced by photographic evaluation. Glucose-induced 
biochemical changes were found to be reversed in statistically significant 
manner in CG and Vitamin E treated lenses.
CONCLUSION: The anti-cataract activity of Vasanjana and CG may be because of the 
antioxidant and free radical scavenging activity. Further in vitro and in vivo 
studies in various experimental models are required to validate their 
anti-cataract activity.

Copyright: © 2021 AYU (An international quarterly journal of research in 
Ayurveda).

DOI: 10.4103/ayu.AYU_99_20
PMCID: PMC8614204
PMID: 34908799

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.