1. mBio. 2021 Dec 21;12(6):e0239721. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02397-21. Epub 2021 Dec
14.

Cross Talk between ARF1 and RhoA Coordinates the Formation of Cytoskeletal 
Scaffolds during Chlamydia Infection.

Haines A(#)(1), Wesolowski J(#)(1), Ryan NM(1), Monteiro-Brás T(1)(2)(3), Paumet 
F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, Thomas Jefferson 
Universitygrid.265008.9, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Life and Health Sciences Research Institute (ICVS), School of Medicine, 
University of Minho, Braga, Portugal.
(3)ICVS/3B's, PT Government Associate Laboratory, Braga/Guimarães, Portugal.
(#)Contributed equally

Chlamydia trachomatis is an obligate intracellular bacterium that has developed 
sophisticated mechanisms to survive inside its infectious compartment, the 
inclusion. Notably, Chlamydia weaves an extensive network of microtubules (MTs) 
and actin filaments to enable interactions with host organelles and enhance its 
stability. Despite the global health and economic burden caused by this sexually 
transmitted pathogen, little is known about how actin and MT scaffolds are 
integrated into an increasingly complex virulence system. Previously, we 
established that the chlamydial effector InaC interacts with ARF1 to stabilize 
MTs. We now demonstrate that InaC regulates RhoA to control actin scaffolds. 
InaC relies on cross talk between ARF1 and RhoA to coordinate MTs and actin, 
where the presence of RhoA downregulates stable MT scaffolds and ARF1 activation 
inhibits actin scaffolds. Understanding how Chlamydia hijacks complex networks 
will help elucidate how this clinically significant pathogen parasitizes its 
host and reveal novel cellular signaling pathways. IMPORTANCE Chlamydia 
trachomatis is a major cause of human disease worldwide. The ability of 
Chlamydia to establish infection and cause disease depends on the maintenance of 
its parasitic niche, called the inclusion. To accomplish this feat, Chlamydia 
reorganizes host actin and microtubules around the inclusion membrane. How 
Chlamydia orchestrates these complex processes, however, is largely unknown. 
Here, we discovered that the chlamydial effector InaC activates Ras homolog 
family member A (RhoA) to control the formation of actin scaffolds around the 
inclusion, an event that is critical for inclusion stability. Furthermore, InaC 
directs the kinetics of actin and posttranslationally modified microtubule 
scaffolds by mediating cross talk between the GTPases that control these 
cytoskeletal elements, RhoA and ADP-ribosylation factor 1 (ARF1). The precise 
timing of these events is essential for the maintenance of the inclusion. 
Overall, this study provides the first evidence of ARF1-RhoA-mediated cross talk 
by a bacterial pathogen to coopt the host cytoskeleton.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02397-21
PMCID: PMC8669492
PMID: 34903051 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.