1. Biomedicines. 2021 Dec 18;9(12):1943. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines9121943.

Azadirachtin Attenuates Lipopolysaccharide-Induced ROS Production, DNA Damage, 
and Apoptosis by Regulating JNK/Akt and AMPK/mTOR-Dependent Pathways in Rin-5F 
Pancreatic Beta Cells.

John A(1), Raza H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine and 
Health Sciences, United Arab Emirates University, Al Ain P.O. Box 17666, United 
Arab Emirates.

Pancreatic inflammation and the resulting cellular responses have been 
implicated in pancreatitis, diabetes, and pancreatic cancer. Inflammatory 
responses due to the bacterial endotoxin, lipopolysaccharide (LPS), have been 
demonstrated to alter cellular metabolism, autophagy, apoptosis, and cell 
proliferation in different cell populations, and hence increases the risks for 
organ toxicity including cancer. The exact molecular mechanism is however not 
clear. In the present study, we investigated the role and mechanism of an 
antioxidant, azadirachtin (AZD), a limonoid extracted from the neem tree 
(Azadirachta indica), against LPS-induced oxidative stress in the pancreatic 
β-cell line, Rin-5F. We demonstrated that cells treated with LPS (1 µg/mL for 24 
h) showed increased reactive oxygen species (ROS) production, DNA damage, cell 
cycle arrest, and apoptosis. Our results also showed that LPS induced 
alterations in the AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK)/mammalian target of 
rapamycin (mTOR) pathways, suppressing autophagy and augmenting apoptosis. 
Treatment with Azadirachtin (25 µM for 24 h), on the other hand, rendered some 
degree of protection to the pancreatic cells from apoptosis by inducing the 
autophagy signals required for cell survival. These results may have 
significance in elucidating the mechanisms of pancreatic β-cell survival and 
death by balancing the molecular communication between autophagy and apoptosis 
under inflammatory and pathological conditions.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines9121943
PMCID: PMC8698279
PMID: 34944759

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.