1. PLoS One. 2021 Dec 23;16(12):e0261474. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0261474. 
eCollection 2021.

Protocol for Escitalopram and Language Intervention for Subacute Aphasia 
(ELISA): A randomized, double blind, placebo-controlled trial.

Stockbridge MD(1), Fridriksson J(2), Sen S(3), Bonilha L(4), Hillis AE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.
(2)Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, University of South 
Carolina, Columbia, South Carolina, United States of America.
(3)Department of Neurology, University of South Carolina School of Medicine, 
Columbia, South Carolina, United States of America.
(4)Department of Neurology, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, 
South Carolina, United States of America.

In this forthcoming multicenter, prospective, randomized, double-blind 
placebo-controlled trial, we will investigate the augmentative effects of a 
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor, escitalopram, on language therapy in 
individuals with post-stroke aphasia. We hypothesize that, when combined with 
language therapy, daily escitalopram will result in greater improvement than 
placebo in an untrained picture naming task (Philadelphia Naming Test short 
form) administered one week after the end of language therapy. We also will 
examine whether escitalopram's effect on language is independent of its effect 
on depression, varies with lesion location, or is associated with increased 
functional connectivity within the left hemisphere. Finally, we will examine 
whether individuals with BDNF met alleles show reduced response to treatment and 
reduced changes in connectivity. We expect to enroll 88 participants over four 
years. Participants are given escitalopram or placebo within one week of their 
stroke for 90 days and receive fifteen 45-minute computer-delivered sessions of 
language treatment beginning 60 days from the start of drug therapy. Patients 
then complete a comprehensive assessment of language at one, five, and twenty 
weeks after the last language therapy session. ELISA is the first randomized, 
controlled trial evaluating the effect of a selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitor on the improvement of language in people with aphasia undergoing 
language treatment during the acute to subacute post-stroke period. Trial 
registration: The trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov NCT03843463.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0261474
PMCID: PMC8699636
PMID: 34941929 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.