1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Nov 30;12:783750. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.783750. 
eCollection 2021.

Genomic Relatedness, Antibiotic Resistance and Virulence Traits of Campylobacter 
jejuni HS19 Isolates From Cattle in China Indicate Pathogenic Potential.

Zang X(1), Huang P(2), Li J(1), Jiao X(3), Huang J(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Zoonosis, Jiangsu Co-Innovation Center for 
Prevention and Control of Important Animal Infectious Diseases and Zoonoses, 
Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Prevention and Control of Biological Hazard Factors (Animal 
Origin) for Agrifood Safety and Quality, Ministry of Agriculture of China, 
Yangzhou, China.
(3)Joint International Research Laboratory of Agriculture and Agri-Product 
Safety, Ministry of Education of China, Yangzhou, China.

Although campylobacteriosis is a zoonotic foodborne illness, high-risk isolates 
from animal sources are rarely characterized, and the pathogenic potential of 
zoonotic strains remains an obstacle to effective intervention against human 
infection. HS19 has been acknowledged as a maker serotype represented by 
Campylobacter jejuni (C. jejuni) isolates from patients with post-infection 
Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS), which is circulation in developed countries. 
However, a previous serotype epidemiological study of C. jejuni isolates in an 
animal population revealed that HS19 was also prevalent in isolates from cattle 
in China. In this study, to investigate the hazardous potential of zoonotic 
strains, 14 HS19 isolates from cattle were systematically characterized both by 
genotype and phenotype. The results showed that all of these cattle isolates 
belonged to the ST-22 complex, a high-risk lineage represented by 77.2% HS19 
clinical isolates from patients worldwide in the PubMLST database, indicating 
that the ST-22 complex is the prominent clonal complex of HS19 isolates, as well 
as the possibility of clonal spread of HS19 isolates across different regions 
and hosts. Nevertheless, these cattle strains clustered closely with the HS19 
isolates from patients, suggesting a remarkable phylogenetic relatedness and 
genomic similarity. Importantly, both tetracycline genes tet(O) and gyrA (T86I) 
reached a higher proportional representation among the cattle isolates than 
among the human clinical isolates. A worrying level of multidrug resistance 
(MDR) was observed in all the cattle isolates, and two MDR profiles of the 
cattle isolates also existed in human clinical isolates. Notably, although 
shared with the same serotype HS19 and sequence type ST-22, 35.7% of cattle 
isolates induced severe gastrointestinal pathology in the IL-10-/- C57BL/6 mice 
model, indicating that some bacteria could change due to host adaptation to 
induce a disease epidemic, thus the associated genetic elements deserve further 
investigation. In this study, HS19 isolates from cattle were first characterized 
by a systematic evaluation of bacterial genomics and in vitro virulence, which 
improved our understanding of the potential zoonotic hazard from food animal 
isolates with high-risk serotypes, and provided critical information for the 
development of targeted C. jejuni mitigation strategies.

Copyright © 2021 Zang, Huang, Li, Jiao and Huang.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.783750
PMCID: PMC8698899
PMID: 34956150

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.