1. Kidney Int. 2022 Apr;101(4):779-792. doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2021.11.031. Epub
2021  Dec 22.

Glomerular endothelial cell-podocyte stresses and crosstalk in structurally 
normal kidney transplants.

Menon R(1), Otto EA(2), Berthier CC(2), Nair V(2), Farkash EA(3), Hodgin JB(3), 
Yang Y(3), Luo J(3), Woodside KJ(4), Zamani H(5), Norman SP(2), Wiggins RC(2), 
Kretzler M(2), Naik AS(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA. Electronic address: rajmenon@med.umich.edu.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, 
USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(4)Division of Transplant Surgery, Department of Surgery, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(5)School of Arts and Sciences, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, 
USA.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, 
USA. Electronic address: abhinaik@umich.edu.

Comment in
    Kidney Int. 2022 Apr;101(4):673-676. doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2022.01.008.

Increased podocyte detachment begins immediately after kidney transplantation 
and is associated with long-term allograft failure. We hypothesized that 
cell-specific transcriptional changes in podocytes and glomerular endothelial 
cells after transplantation would offer mechanistic insights into the podocyte 
detachment process. To test this, we evaluated cell-specific transcriptional 
profiles of glomerular endothelial cells and podocytes from 14 patients of their 
first-year surveillance biopsies with normal histology from low immune risk 
recipients with no post-transplant complications and compared these to biopsies 
of 20 healthy living donor controls. Glomerular endothelial cells from these 
surveillance biopsies were enriched for genes related to fluid shear stress, 
angiogenesis, and interferon signaling. In podocytes, pathways were enriched for 
genes in response to growth factor signaling and actin cytoskeletal 
reorganization but also showed evidence of podocyte stress as indicated by 
reduced nephrin (adhesion protein) gene expression. In parallel, transcripts 
coding for proteins required to maintain podocyte adherence to the underlying 
glomerular basement membrane were downregulated, including the major glomerular 
podocyte integrin α3 and the actin cytoskeleton-related gene synaptopodin. The 
reduction in integrin α3 protein expression in surveillance biopsies was 
confirmed by immunoperoxidase staining. The combined growth and stress response 
of patient allografts post-transplantation paralleled similar changes in a 
rodent model of nephrectomy-induced glomerular hypertrophic stress that progress 
to develop proteinuria and glomerulosclerosis with shortened kidney life span. 
Thus, even among patients with apparently healthy allografts with no detectable 
histologic abnormality including alloimmune injury, transcriptomic changes 
reflecting cell stresses are already set in motion that could drive 
hypertrophy-associated glomerular disease progression.

Copyright © 2021 International Society of Nephrology. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.kint.2021.11.031
PMCID: PMC9067613
PMID: 34952098 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DISCLOSURE MK reports grants from the National 
Institutes of Health (NIH); nonfinancial support from the University of 
Michigan; grants from JDRF, AstraZeneca, Novo Nordisk, Eli Lilly, Gilead, 
Goldfinch Bio, Merck, Janssen, Boehringer Ingelheim, Moderna, European Union 
Innovative Medicine Initiative, Chan Zuckerberg Initiative, Certa, Chinook, 
amfAR, Angion Pharmaceuticals, Renalytix, Travere Therapeutics, Regeneron, and 
Ionis Pharmaceuticals; and other grants from Astellas, Poxel, and Shire 
Pharmaceuticals (outside the submitted work). In addition, MK has a patent 
PCT/EP2014/073413 “Biomarkers and methods for progression prediction for chronic 
kidney disease” licensed. EAF is a consultant for Novartis. JBH reports grants 
from the NIH, AstraZeneca, Novo Nordisk, Eli Lilly, Gilead, and Janssen. All the 
other authors declared no competing interests.