1. Front Oncol. 2021 Dec 13;11:750677. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2021.750677. eCollection
 2021.

Role of HMGB1 in Cisplatin-Persistent Lung Adenocarcinoma Cell Lines.

Chavez-Dominguez RL(1)(2), Perez-Medina MA(1)(3), Lopez-Gonzalez JS(1), 
Galicia-Velasco M(1), Matias-Florentino M(4), Avila-Rios S(4), Rumbo-Nava U(5), 
Salgado-Aguayo A(6), Gonzalez-Gonzalez C(7), Aguilar-Cazares D(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratorio de Cancer Pulmonar, Departamento de Enfermedades 
Cronico-Degenerativas, Instituto Nacional de Enfermedades Respiratorias "Ismael 
Cosio Villegas", Mexico, Mexico.
(2)Posgrado en Ciencias Biologicas, Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, 
Mexico, Mexico.
(3)Laboratorio de Quimioterapia Experimental, Escuela Nacional de Ciencias 
Biologicas, Instituto Politecnico Nacional, Mexico, Mexico.
(4)Centro de Investigacion en Enfermedades Infecciosas, Instituto Nacional de 
Enfermedades Respiratorias "Ismael Cosio Villegas", Mexico, Mexico.
(5)Clinica de Neumo-Oncologia, Instituto Nacional de Enfermedades Respiratorias 
"Ismael Cosio Villegas", Mexico, Mexico.
(6)Laboratorio de Enfermedades Reumaticas, Departmento de Fibrosis Pulmonar, 
Instituto Nacional de Enfermedades Respiratorias "Ismael Cosio Villegas", 
Mexico, Mexico.
(7)Facultad de Economia, Universidad Autonoma Benito Juarez de Oaxaca, Oaxaca, 
Mexico.

Significant advances have been made recently in the development of targeted 
therapy for lung adenocarcinoma. However, platinum-based chemotherapy remains as 
the cornerstone in the treatment of this neoplasm. This is the treatment option 
for adenocarcinomas without EGFR gain-of-function mutations or tumors that have 
developed resistance to targeted therapy. The High-Mobility Group Box 1 (HMGB1) 
is a multifunctional protein involved in intrinsic resistance to cisplatin. 
HMGB1 is released when cytotoxic agents, such as cisplatin, induce cell death. 
In the extracellular milieu, HMGB1 acts as adjuvant to induce an antitumor 
immune response. However, the opposite effect favoring tumor progression has 
also been reported. In this study, the effects of cisplatin in lung 
adenocarcinoma cell lines harboring clinically relevant mutations, such as EGFR 
mutations, were studied. Subcellular localization of HMGB1 was detected in the 
cell lines and in viable cells after a single exposure to cisplatin, which are 
designated as cisplatin-persistent cells. The mRNA expression of the receptor 
for advanced glycation end products (RAGE), TLR-2, and TLR-4 receptors was 
measured in parental cell lines and their persistent variants. Finally, changes 
in plasma HMGB1 from a cohort of lung adenocarcinoma patients without EGFR 
mutation and treated with cisplatin-based therapy were analyzed. 
Cisplatin-susceptible lung adenocarcinoma cell lines died by apoptosis or 
necrosis and released HMGB1. In cisplatin-persistent cells, nuclear 
relocalization of HMGB1 and overexpression of HMGB1 and RAGE, but not TLR-2 or 
TLR-4, were observed. In tumor cells, this HMGB1-RAGE interaction may be 
associated with the development of cisplatin resistance. The results indicate a 
direct relationship between the plasma levels of HMGB1 and overall survival. In 
conclusion, HMGB1 may be an effective biomarker associated with increased 
overall survival of lung adenocarcinoma patients.

Copyright © 2021 Chavez-Dominguez, Perez-Medina, Lopez-Gonzalez, 
Galicia-Velasco, Matias-Florentino, Avila-Rios, Rumbo-Nava, Salgado-Aguayo, 
Gonzalez-Gonzalez and Aguilar-Cazares.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2021.750677
PMCID: PMC8710495
PMID: 34966671

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.