1. Mol Genet Metab. 2022 Jan;135(1):93-101. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2021.12.006.
Epub  2021 Dec 18.

Advanced approach for comprehensive mtDNA genome testing in mitochondrial 
disease.

Wang J(1), Balciuniene J(2), Diaz-Miranda MA(2), McCormick EM(3), Aref-Eshghi 
E(2), Muir AM(2), Cao K(2), Troiani J(2), Moseley A(2), Fan Z(2), 
Zolkipli-Cunningham Z(4), Goldstein A(4), Ganetzky RD(4), Muraresku CC(3), 
Peterson JT(3), Spinner NB(1), Wallace DC(5), Dulik MC(6), Falk MJ(7).

Author information:
(1)Division of Genomic Diagnostics, Department of Pathology, The Children's 
Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Department of Pathology and 
Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)Division of Genomic Diagnostics, Department of Pathology, The Children's 
Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(3)Mitochondrial Medicine Frontier Program, Division of Human Genetics, 
Department of Pediatrics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, 
PA, USA.
(4)Mitochondrial Medicine Frontier Program, Division of Human Genetics, 
Department of Pediatrics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, 
PA, USA; Department of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(5)Center for Mitochondrial and Epigenomic Medicine, Division of Human Genetics, 
Department of Pediatrics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, USA; 
Department of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(6)Division of Genomic Diagnostics, Department of Pathology, The Children's 
Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Department of Pathology and 
Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA. Electronic address: DulikM@chop.edu.
(7)Mitochondrial Medicine Frontier Program, Division of Human Genetics, 
Department of Pediatrics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, 
PA, USA; Department of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. Electronic address: FALKM@chop.edu.

Mitochondrial disease diagnosis requires interrogation of both nuclear and 
mitochondrial (mtDNA) genomes for single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) and copy 
number alterations, both in the proband and often maternal relatives, together 
with careful phenotype correlation. We developed a comprehensive mtDNA 
sequencing test ('MitoGenome') using long-range PCR (LR-PCR) to amplify the full 
length of the mtDNA genome followed by next generation sequencing (NGS) to 
accurately detect SNVs and large-scale mtDNA deletions (LSMD), combined with 
droplet digital PCR (ddPCR) for LSMD heteroplasmy quantification. Overall, 
MitoGenome tests were performed on 428 samples from 394 patients with suspected 
or confirmed mitochondrial disease. The positive yield was 11% (43/394), 
including 34 patients with pathogenic or likely pathogenic SNVs (the most common 
being m.3243A > G in 8/34 (24%) patients), 8 patients with single LSMD, and 3 
patients with multiple LSMD exceeding 10% heteroplasmy levels. Two patients with 
both LSMD and pathogenic SNV were detected. Overall, this LR-PCR/NGS assay 
provides a highly accurate and comprehensive diagnostic method for simultaneous 
mtDNA SNV detection at heteroplasmy levels as low as 1% and LSMD detection at 
heteroplasmy levels below 10%. Inclusion of maternal samples for variant 
classification and ddPCR to quantify LSMD heteroplasmy levels further enables 
accurate pathogenicity assessment and clinical correlation interpretation of 
mtDNA genome sequence variants and copy number alterations.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2021.12.006
PMCID: PMC8877466
PMID: 34969639 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest None.