1. Elife. 2021 Dec 31;10:e74272. doi: 10.7554/eLife.74272.

Robust T cell activation requires an eIF3-driven burst in T cell receptor 
translation.

De Silva D(1)(2), Ferguson L(1), Chin GH(1), Smith BE(3), Apathy RA(4), Roth 
TL(4), Blaeschke F(5), Kudla M(1), Marson A(4)(5)(6)(7)(8)(9)(10), Ingolia 
NT(1)(11), Cate JH(1)(2)(10)(11)(12)(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California-Berkeley, 
Berkeley, United States.
(2)The J. David Gladstone Institutes, San Francisco, United States.
(3)School of Optometry, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, United 
States.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of California, San 
Francisco, San Francisco, United States.
(5)Gladstone-UCSF Institute of Genomic Immunology, San Francisco, United States.
(6)Diabetes Center, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, 
United States.
(7)Chan Zuckerberg Biohub, San Francisco, United States.
(8)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, United States.
(9)Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy, San Francisco, United States.
(10)Innovative Genomics Institute, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, 
United States.
(11)California Institute for Quantitative Biosciences, University of California, 
Berkeley, Berkeley, United States.
(12)Department of Chemistry, University of California-Berkeley, Berkeley, United 
States.
(13)Molecular Biophysics and Integrated Bioimaging Division, Lawrence Berkeley 
National Laboratory, Berkeley, United States.

Activation of T cells requires a rapid surge in cellular protein synthesis. 
However, the role of translation initiation in the early induction of specific 
genes remains unclear. Here, we show human translation initiation factor eIF3 
interacts with select immune system related mRNAs including those encoding the T 
cell receptor (TCR) subunits TCRA and TCRB. Binding of eIF3 to the TCRA and TCRB 
mRNA 3'-untranslated regions (3'-UTRs) depends on CD28 coreceptor signaling and 
regulates a burst in TCR translation required for robust T cell activation. Use 
of the TCRA or TCRB 3'-UTRs to control expression of an anti-CD19 chimeric 
antigen receptor (CAR) improves the ability of CAR-T cells to kill tumor cells 
in vitro. These results identify a new mechanism of eIF3-mediated translation 
control that can aid T cell engineering for immunotherapy applications.

© 2021, De Silva et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.74272
PMCID: PMC8758144
PMID: 34970966 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DD, JC A provisional patent application has been 
filed on some of the work presented herein, LF, GC, BS, RA, FB, MK, NI No 
competing interests declared, TR is a co-founder of Arsenal Therapeutics, AM is 
a compensated co-founder, member of the boards of directors, and a member of the 
scientific advisory boards of Spotlight Therapeutics and Arsenal Biosciences. 
Was a compensated member of the scientific advisory board at PACT Pharma and was 
a compensated advisor to Juno Therapeutics. Owns stock in Arsenal Biosciences, 
Spotlight Therapeutics, PACT Pharma and Merck. AM has received fees from Vertex, 
Merck, Amgen, Trizell, Genentech, AlphaSights, Rupert Case Management and 
Bernstein. Is an investor in and informal advisor to Offline Ventures. The 
Marson lab has received research support from Juno Therapeutics, Epinomics, 
Sanofi, GlaxoSmithKline, Gilead, and Anthem