1. J Biol Chem. 2022 Feb;298(2):101533. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.101533. Epub 2021
 Dec 29.

Development of a potent high-affinity human therapeutic antibody via novel 
application of recombination signal sequence-based affinity maturation.

Kielczewska A(1), D'Angelo I(2), Amador MS(3), Wang T(3), Sudom A(4), Min X(4), 
Rathanaswami P(3), Pigott C(5), Foltz IN(3).

Author information:
(1)Amgen British Columbia, Therapeutic Discovery, Burnaby, British Columbia, 
Canada. Electronic address: akielcze@amgen.com.
(2)Amgen Inc, Therapeutic Discovery, Thousand Oaks, California, USA.
(3)Amgen British Columbia, Therapeutic Discovery, Burnaby, British Columbia, 
Canada.
(4)Amgen San Francisco, Therapeutic Discovery, San Francisco, California, USA.
(5)Innovative Targeting Solutions, Burnaby, British Columbia, Canada.

Therapeutic antibody development requires discovery of an antibody molecule with 
desired specificities and drug-like properties. For toxicological studies, a 
therapeutic antibody must bind the ortholog antigen with a similar affinity to 
the human target to enable relevant dosing regimens, and antibodies falling 
short of this affinity design goal may not progress as therapeutic leads. 
Herein, we report the novel use of mammalian recombination signal sequence 
(RSS)-directed recombination for complementarity-determining region-targeted 
protein engineering combined with mammalian display to close the species 
affinity gap of human interleukin (IL)-13 antibody 731. This fully human 
antibody has not progressed as a therapeutic in part because of a 400-fold 
species affinity gap. Using this nonhypothesis-driven affinity maturation 
method, we generated multiple antibody variants with improved IL-13 affinity, 
including the highest affinity antibody reported to date (34 fM). Resolution of 
a cocrystal structure of the optimized antibody with the cynomolgus monkey (or 
nonhuman primate) IL-13 protein revealed that the RSS-derived mutations 
introduced multiple successive amino-acid substitutions resulting in a de novo 
formation of a π-π stacking-based protein-protein interaction between the 
affinity-matured antibody heavy chain and helix C on IL-13, as well as an 
introduction of an interface-distant residue, which enhanced the light 
chain-binding affinity to target. These mutations synergized binding of heavy 
and light chains to the target protein, resulting in a remarkably tight 
interaction, and providing a proof of concept for a new method of protein 
engineering, based on synergizing a mammalian display platform with novel 
RSS-mediated library generation.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.101533
PMCID: PMC8808179
PMID: 34973336 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest A. K., I. D., S. G., T. W., 
A. S., X. M., P. R., and I. N. F. are employees and stock holders of Amgen at 
the time of data collection. C. P. is an employee of Innovative Targeting 
Solutions. The authors have submitted a patent application based on results 
covered in the article.