1. PLoS Genet. 2022 Jan 4;18(1):e1009988. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1009988. 
eCollection 2022 Jan.

Gene by Environment Interactions reveal new regulatory aspects of signaling 
network plasticity.

Vandermeulen MD(1), Cullen PJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York, 
United States of America.

Phenotypes can change during exposure to different environments through the 
regulation of signaling pathways that operate in integrated networks. How 
signaling networks produce different phenotypes in different settings is not 
fully understood. Here, Gene by Environment Interactions (GEIs) were used to 
explore the regulatory network that controls filamentous/invasive growth in the 
yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. GEI analysis revealed that the regulation of 
invasive growth is decentralized and varies extensively across environments. 
Different regulatory pathways were critical or dispensable depending on the 
environment, microenvironment, or time point tested, and the pathway that made 
the strongest contribution changed depending on the environment. Some regulators 
even showed conditional role reversals. Ranking pathways' roles across 
environments revealed an under-appreciated pathway (OPI1) as the single 
strongest regulator among the major pathways tested (RAS, RIM101, and MAPK). One 
mechanism that may explain the high degree of regulatory plasticity observed was 
conditional pathway interactions, such as conditional redundancy and conditional 
cross-pathway regulation. Another mechanism was that different pathways 
conditionally and differentially regulated gene expression, such as target genes 
that control separate cell adhesion mechanisms (FLO11 and SFG1). An exception to 
decentralized regulation of invasive growth was that morphogenetic changes (cell 
elongation and budding pattern) were primarily regulated by one pathway (MAPK). 
GEI analysis also uncovered a round-cell invasion phenotype. Our work suggests 
that GEI analysis is a simple and powerful approach to define the regulatory 
basis of complex phenotypes and may be applicable to many systems.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1009988
PMCID: PMC8759647
PMID: 34982769 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.