1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2022 Mar 8;88(5):e0174021. doi: 10.1128/AEM.01740-21. 
Epub 2022 Jan 5.

A Sensitive and Rapid Wastewater Test for SARS-COV-2 and Its Use for the Early 
Detection of a Cluster of Cases in a Remote Community.

Daigle J(1), Racher K(2), Hazenberg J(3), Yeoman A(2), Hannah H(4), Duong D(2), 
Mohammed U(1), Spreitzer D(1), Gregorchuk BSJ(5), Head BM(5), Meyers AFA(5)(6), 
Sandstrom PA(5)(6), Nichani A(7), Brooks JI(8)(9), Mulvey MR(1)(6)(10), Mangat 
CS(#)(1)(6), Becker MG(#)(5)(11).

Author information:
(1)Wastewater Surveillance Unit, National Microbiology Laboratory, Public Health 
Agency of Canadagrid.415368.d, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.
(2)Taiga Environmental Laboratory, Department of Environmental and Natural 
Resources, Government of the Northwest Territories, Yellowknife, Northwest 
Territories, Canada.
(3)Department of Municipal and Community Affairs, Government of the Northwest 
Territories, Yellowknife, Northwest Territories, Canada.
(4)Department of Health and Social Services, Government of the Northwest 
Territories, Yellowknife, Northwest Territories, Canada.
(5)JC Wilt Infectious Diseases Research Centre, National Microbiology 
Laboratory, Public Health Agency of Canadagrid.415368.d, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 
Canada.
(6)Department of Medical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, University of 
Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.
(7)One Health Division, National Microbiology Laboratory, Public Health Agency 
of Canadagrid.415368.d, Guelph, Ontario, Canada.
(8)Antimicrobial Resistance Division, Centre for Communicable Diseases and 
Infection Control, Public Health Agency of Canadagrid.415368.d, Ottawa, Ontario, 
Canada.
(9)Division of Infectious Diseases, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, 
Canada.
(10)Antimicrobial Resistance and Nosocomial Infections, National Microbiology 
Laboratory, Public Health Agency of Canadagrid.415368.d, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 
Canada.
(11)Department of Microbiology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 
Canada.
(#)Contributed equally

Throughout the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, wastewater 
surveillance has been used to monitor trends in severe acute respiratory 
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) prevalence in the community. A major 
challenge in establishing wastewater surveillance programs, especially in remote 
areas, is the need for a well-equipped laboratory for sample analysis. 
Currently, no options exist for rapid, sensitive, mobile, and easy-to-use 
wastewater tests for SARS-CoV-2. The performance of the GeneXpert system, which 
offers cartridge-based, rapid molecular clinical testing for SARS-CoV-2 in a 
portable platform, was evaluated using wastewater as the input. The GeneXpert 
demonstrated a SARS-CoV-2 limit of detection in wastewater below 32 copies/mL 
with a sample processing time of less than an hour. Using wastewater samples 
collected from multiple sites across Canada during February and March 2021, a 
high overall agreement (97.8%) was observed between the GeneXpert assay and 
laboratory-developed tests regarding the presence or absence of SARS-CoV-2. 
Additionally, with the use of centrifugal filters, the detection threshold of 
the GeneXpert system was improved to <10 copies/mL in wastewater. Finally, to 
support on-site wastewater surveillance, GeneXpert testing was implemented in 
Yellowknife, a remote community in Northern Canada, where its use successfully 
alerted public health authorities to undetected transmission of COVID-19. The 
identification of SARS-CoV-2 in wastewater triggered clinical testing of recent 
travelers and identification of new COVID-19 cases/clusters. Taken together, 
these results suggest that GeneXpert is a viable option for surveillance of 
SARS-CoV-2 in wastewater in locations that do not have access to established 
testing laboratories. IMPORTANCE Wastewater-based surveillance is a powerful 
tool that provides an unbiased measure of COVID-19 prevalence in a community. 
This work describes a sensitive wastewater rapid test for SARS-CoV-2 based on a 
widely distributed technology, the GeneXpert. The advantages of an easy-to-use 
wastewater test for SARS-CoV-2 are clear: it supports surveillance in remote 
communities, improves access to testing, and provides faster results allowing 
for an immediate public health response. The application of wastewater rapid 
testing in a remote community facilitated the detection of a COVID-19 cluster 
and triggered public health action, clearly demonstrating the utility of this 
technology. Wastewater surveillance will become increasingly important in the 
postvaccination pandemic landscape as individuals with asymptomatic/mild 
infections continue transmitting SARS-CoV-2 but are unlikely to be tested.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01740-21
PMCID: PMC8904056
PMID: 34985977 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.