1. Infect Drug Resist. 2021 Dec 19;14:5543-5553. doi: 10.2147/IDR.S274872. 
eCollection 2021.

Candidemia: Evolution of Drug Resistance and Novel Therapeutic Approaches.

Tortorano AM(1), Prigitano A(1), Morroni G(2), Brescini L(2)(3), Barchiesi 
F(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences for Health, Università degli Studi di 
Milano, Milano, Italy.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Public Health, Università Politecnica 
delle Marche, Ancona, Italy.
(3)Clinic of Infectious Diseases, Azienda Ospedaliero Universitaria, Ospedali 
Riuniti Umberto I-Lancisi-Salesi, Ancona, Italy.
(4)Clinic of Infectious Diseases, Azienda Ospedaliera Ospedali Riuniti Marche 
Nord, Pesaro, Italy.

Candidemia and invasive candidiasis are the most common healthcare-associated 
invasive fungal infections, with a crude mortality rate of 25-50%. Candida 
albicans remains the most frequent etiology, followed by C. glabrata, C. 
parapsilosis and C. tropicalis. With the exception of a limited number of 
species (ie: C. krusei, C. glabrata and rare Candida species), resistance to 
fluconazole and other triazoles are quite uncommon. However, recently 
fluconazole-resistant C. parapsilosis, echinocandin-resistant C. glabrata and 
the multidrug resistant C. auris have emerged. Resistance to amphotericin B is 
even more rare due to the reduced fitness of resistant isolates. The mechanisms 
of antifungal resistance in Candida (altered drug-target interactions, reduced 
cellular drug concentrations, and physical barriers associated with biofilms) 
are analyzed. The choice of the antifungal therapy for candidemia must take into 
account several factors such as type of patient, presence of devices, severity 
of illness, recent exposure to antifungals, local epidemiology, organs 
involvement, and Candida species. The first-line therapy in non-neutropenic 
critical patient is an echinocandin switching to fluconazole in clinically 
stable patients with negative blood cultures and azole susceptible isolate. 
Similarly, an echinocandin is the drug of choice also in neutropenic patients. 
The treatment duration is 14 days after the first negative blood culture or 
longer in cases of organ involvement. An early removal of vascular catheter 
improves the outcome. The promising results of new antifungal molecules, such as 
the terpenoid derivative ibrexafungerp, the novel echinocandin with an enhanced 
half-life rezafungin, oteseconazole and fosmanogepix, representative of new 
classes of antifungals, are discussed.

© 2021 Tortorano et al.

DOI: 10.2147/IDR.S274872
PMCID: PMC8702982
PMID: 34984009

Conflict of interest statement: AP and AMT received speaker honorarium from 
Gilead. The other authors report no conflicts of interest in this work.