1. Microbiol Spectr. 2022 Feb 23;10(1):e0150421. doi: 10.1128/spectrum.01504-21. 
Epub 2022 Jan 5.

Cyclosporine A Inhibits Viral Infection and Release as Well as Cytokine 
Production in Lung Cells by Three SARS-CoV-2 Variants.

Fenizia C(1)(2), Galbiati S(3), Vanetti C(1)(2), Vago R(4)(5), Clerici M(1)(6), 
Tacchetti C(5)(7), Daniele T(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, Milano University Medical 
School, Milan, Italy.
(2)Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences "L Sacco," Milano University 
Medical School, Milan, Italy.
(3)Complication of Diabetes Unit, Diabetes Research Institute, IRCCS San 
Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.
(4)Urological Research Institute, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute, 
Milan, Italy.
(5)Vita-Salute San Raffaele University, Milan, Italy.
(6)IRCCS Don Carlo Gnocchi Foundation, Milan, Italy.
(7)Cancer Imaging Unit, Experimental Imaging Centre, IRCCS San Raffaele 
Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.

In December 2019, a new severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 
(SARS-CoV-2) started spreading worldwide causing the coronavirus disease 2019 
(COVID-19) pandemic. The hyperactivation of the immune system has been proposed 
to account for disease severity and death in COVID-19 patients. Despite several 
approaches having been tested, no therapeutic protocol has been approved. Given 
that Cyclosporine A (CsA) is well-known to exert a strong antiviral activity on 
several viral strains and an anti-inflammatory role in different organs with 
relevant benefits in diverse pathological contexts, we tested its effects on 
SARS-CoV-2 infection of lung cells. We found that treatment with CsA either 
before or after infection of CaLu3 cells by three SARS-CoV-2 variants: (i) 
reduces the expression of both viral RNA and proteins in infected cells; (ii) 
decreases the number of progeny virions released by infected cells; (iii) 
dampens the virus-triggered synthesis of cytokines (including IL-6, IL-8, IL1α 
and TNF-α) that are involved in cytokine storm in patients. Altogether, these 
data provide a rationale for CsA repositioning for the treatment of severe 
COVID-19 patients. IMPORTANCE SARS-CoV-2 is the most recently identified member 
of the betacoronavirus genus responsible for the COVID-19 pandemic. Repurposing 
of available drugs has been a "quick and dirty" approach to try to reduce 
mortality and severe symptoms in affected patients initially, and can still 
represent an undeniable and valuable approach to face COVID-19 as the continuous 
appearance and rapid diffusion of more "aggressive"/transmissible variants, 
capable of eluding antibody neutralization, challenges the effectiveness of some 
anti-SARS-CoV-2 vaccines. Here, we tested a known antiviral and 
anti-inflammatory drug, Cyclosporine A (CsA), and found that it dampens viral 
infection and cytokine release from lung cells upon exposure to three different 
SARS-CoV-2 variants. Knock down of the main intracellular target of CsA, 
Cyclophilin A, does not phenocopy the drug inhibition of viral infection. 
Altogether, these findings shed new light on the cellular mechanisms of 
SARS-CoV-2 infection and provide the rationale for CsA repositioning to treat 
severe COVID-19 patients.

DOI: 10.1128/spectrum.01504-21
PMCID: PMC8729790
PMID: 34985303 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.