1. Mol Metab. 2022 Mar;57:101436. doi: 10.1016/j.molmet.2022.101436. Epub 2022
Jan  6.

NFE2L1-mediated proteasome function protects from ferroptosis.

Kotschi S(1), Jung A(1), Willemsen N(1), Ofoghi A(1), Proneth B(2), Conrad M(3), 
Bartelt A(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Cardiovascular Prevention (IPEK), Ludwig-Maximilians-University 
Munich, Munich, Germany.
(2)Institute of Metabolism and Cell Death, Helmholtz Center Munich, Neuherberg, 
Germany.
(3)Institute of Metabolism and Cell Death, Helmholtz Center Munich, Neuherberg, 
Germany; Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University, Laboratory of 
Experimental Oncology, Moscow, Russia.
(4)Institute for Cardiovascular Prevention (IPEK), Ludwig-Maximilians-University 
Munich, Munich, Germany; Institute for Diabetes and Cancer (IDC), Helmholtz 
Center Munich, Neuherberg, Germany; German Center for Cardiovascular Research, 
Partner Site Munich Heart Alliance, Munich, Germany; Department of Molecular 
Metabolism & Sabri Ülker Center for Metabolic Research, Harvard T.H. Chan School 
of Public Health, Boston, MA, United States. Electronic address: 
alexander.bartelt@med.uni-muenchen.de.

OBJECTIVE: Ferroptosis continues to emerge as a novel modality of cell death 
with important therapeutic implications for a variety of diseases, most notably 
cancer and degenerative diseases. While susceptibility, initiation, and 
execution of ferroptosis have been linked to reprogramming of cellular lipid 
metabolism, imbalances in iron-redox homeostasis, and aberrant mitochondrial 
respiration, the detailed mechanisms of ferroptosis are still insufficiently 
well understood.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Here we show that diminished proteasome function is a new 
mechanistic feature of ferroptosis. The transcription factor nuclear factor 
erythroid-2, like-1 (NFE2L1) protects from ferroptosis by sustaining proteasomal 
activity. In cellular systems, loss of NFE2L1 reduced cellular viability after 
the induction of both chemically and genetically induced ferroptosis, which was 
linked to the regulation of proteasomal activity under these conditions. 
Importantly, this was reproduced in a Sedaghatian-type Spondylometaphyseal 
Dysplasia (SSMD) patient-derived cell line carrying mutated glutathione 
peroxidase-4 (GPX4), a critical regulator of ferroptosis. Also, reduced 
proteasomal activity was associated with ferroptosis in Gpx4-deficient mice. In 
a mouse model for genetic Nfe2l1 deficiency, we observed brown adipose tissue 
(BAT) involution, hyperubiquitination of ferroptosis regulators, including the 
GPX4 pathway, and other hallmarks of ferroptosis.
CONCLUSION: Our data highlight the relevance of the NFE2L1-proteasome pathway in 
ferroptosis. Manipulation of NFE2L1 activity might enhance ferroptosis-inducing 
cancer therapies as well as protect from aberrant ferroptosis in 
neurodegeneration, general metabolism, and beyond.

Copyright © 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier GmbH.. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molmet.2022.101436
PMCID: PMC8814388
PMID: 34999280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]