1. Mol Neurodegener. 2022 Jan 6;17(1):1. doi: 10.1186/s13024-021-00511-x.

Constitutively active SARM1 variants that induce neuropathy are enriched in ALS 
patients.

Bloom AJ(1), Mao X(2), Strickland A(2), Sasaki Y(2), Milbrandt J(3), DiAntonio 
A(4).

Author information:
(1)Needleman Center for Neurometabolism and Axonal Therapeutics and Department 
of Genetics, Washington University School of Medicine in Saint Louis, St. Louis, 
MO, USA. ajbloom@wustl.edu.
(2)Needleman Center for Neurometabolism and Axonal Therapeutics and Department 
of Genetics, Washington University School of Medicine in Saint Louis, St. Louis, 
MO, USA.
(3)Needleman Center for Neurometabolism and Axonal Therapeutics and Department 
of Genetics, Washington University School of Medicine in Saint Louis, St. Louis, 
MO, USA. jmilbrandt@wustl.edu.
(4)Needleman Center for Neurometabolism and Axonal Therapeutics and Department 
of Developmental Biology, Washington University School of Medicine in Saint 
Louis, St. Louis, MO, USA. diantonio@wustl.edu.

BACKGROUND: In response to injury, neurons activate a program of organized axon 
self-destruction initiated by the NAD+ hydrolase, SARM1. In healthy neurons 
SARM1 is autoinhibited, but single amino acid changes can abolish autoinhibition 
leading to constitutively active SARM1 enzymes that promote degeneration when 
expressed in cultured neurons.
METHODS: To investigate whether naturally occurring human variants might disrupt 
SARM1 autoinhibition and potentially contribute to risk for neurodegenerative 
disease, we assayed the enzymatic activity of all 42 rare SARM1 alleles 
identified among 8507 amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) patients and 9671 
controls. We then intrathecally injected mice with virus expressing SARM1 
constructs to test the capacity of an ALS-associated constitutively active SARM1 
variant to promote neurodegeneration in vivo.
RESULTS: Twelve out of 42 SARM1 missense variants or small in-frame deletions 
assayed exhibit constitutive NADase activity, including more than half of those 
that are unique to the ALS patients or that occur in multiple patients. There is 
a > 5-fold enrichment of constitutively active variants among patients compared 
to controls. Expression of constitutively active ALS-associated SARM1 alleles in 
cultured dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons is pro-degenerative and cytotoxic. 
Intrathecal injection of an AAV expressing the common SARM1 reference allele is 
innocuous to mice, but a construct harboring SARM1V184G, the constitutively 
active variant found most frequently among the ALS patients, causes axon loss, 
motor dysfunction, and sustained neuroinflammation.
CONCLUSIONS: These results implicate rare hypermorphic SARM1 alleles as 
candidate genetic risk factors for ALS and other neurodegenerative conditions.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13024-021-00511-x
PMCID: PMC8739729
PMID: 34991663 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: A.D. and J.M. are co-founders, scientific 
advisory board members and shareholders of Disarm Therapeutics, a wholly owned 
subsidiary of Eli Lilly. A.J.B. and Y.S. are consultants to Disarm Therapeutics. 
The authors have no other competing conflicts or financial interests.