1. Front Pharmacol. 2021 Dec 23;12:809994. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2021.809994. 
eCollection 2021.

Approaches to Decrease Hyperglycemia by Targeting Impaired Hepatic Glucose 
Homeostasis Using Medicinal Plants.

Mata-Torres G(1), Andrade-Cetto A(1), Espinoza-Hernández F(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratorio de Etnofarmacología, Departamento de Biología Celular, Facultad 
de Ciencias, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico City, Mexico.

Liver plays a pivotal role in maintaining blood glucose levels through complex 
processes which involve the disposal, storage, and endogenous production of this 
carbohydrate. Insulin is the hormone responsible for regulating hepatic glucose 
production and glucose storage as glycogen, thus abnormalities in its function 
lead to hyperglycemia in obese or diabetic patients because of higher production 
rates and lower capacity to store glucose. In this context, two different but 
complementary therapeutic approaches can be highlighted to avoid the 
hyperglycemia generated by the hepatic insulin resistance: 1) enhancing insulin 
function by inhibiting the protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B, one of the main 
enzymes that disrupt the insulin signal, and 2) direct regulation of key enzymes 
involved in hepatic glucose production and glycogen synthesis/breakdown. It is 
recognized that medicinal plants are a valuable source of molecules with special 
properties and a wide range of scaffolds that can improve hepatic glucose 
metabolism. Some molecules, especially phenolic compounds and terpenoids, 
exhibit a powerful inhibitory capacity on protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B and 
decrease the expression or activity of the key enzymes involved in the 
gluconeogenic pathway, such as phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase or glucose 
6-phosphatase. This review shed light on the progress made in the past 7 years 
in medicinal plants capable of improving hepatic glucose homeostasis through the 
two proposed approaches. We suggest that Coreopsis tinctoria, Lithocarpus 
polystachyus, and Panax ginseng can be good candidates for developing herbal 
medicines or phytomedicines that target inhibition of hepatic glucose output as 
they can modulate the activity of PTP-1B, the expression of gluconeogenic 
enzymes, and the glycogen content.

Copyright © 2021 Mata-Torres, Andrade-Cetto and Espinoza-Hernández.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2021.809994
PMCID: PMC8733686
PMID: 35002743

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.