1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2022 Jan 10;16(1):e0010075. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pntd.0010075. eCollection 2022 Jan.

Epidemiology of West Nile virus in Africa: An underestimated threat.

Mencattelli G(1)(2), Ndione MHD(3), Rosà R(1)(2), Marini G(1), Diagne CT(3), 
Diagne MM(3), Fall G(3), Faye O(3), Diallo M(4), Faye O(3), Savini G(5), Rizzoli 
A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biodiversity and Molecular Ecology, Research and Innovation 
Centre, Fondazione Edmund Mach, San Michele all'Adige, Trento, Italy.
(2)Center Agriculture Food Environment, University of Trento, San Michele 
all'Adige, Trento, Italy.
(3)Department of Virology, Fondation Institut Pasteur de Dakar, Dakar, Senegal.
(4)Department of Zoology, Fondation Institut Pasteur de Dakar, Dakar, Senegal.
(5)Department of Public Health, OIE Reference Laboratory for WND, Istituto 
Zooprofilattico Sperimentale dell'Abruzzo e del Molise "G. Caporale", Teramo, 
Italy.

BACKGROUND: West Nile virus is a mosquito-borne flavivirus which has been posing 
continuous challenges to public health worldwide due to the identification of 
new lineages and clades and its ability to invade and establish in an increasing 
number of countries. Its current distribution, genetic variability, ecology, and 
epidemiological pattern in the African continent are only partially known 
despite the general consensus on the urgency to obtain such information for 
quantifying the actual disease burden in Africa other than to predict future 
threats at global scale.
METHODOLOGY AND PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: References were searched in PubMed and 
Google Scholar electronic databases on January 21, 2020, using selected 
keywords, without language and date restriction. Additional manual searches of 
reference list were carried out. Further references have been later added 
accordingly to experts' opinion. We included 153 scientific papers published 
between 1940 and 2021. This review highlights: (i) the co-circulation of 
WNV-lineages 1, 2, and 8 in the African continent; (ii) the presence of diverse 
WNV competent vectors in Africa, mainly belonging to the Culex genus; (iii) the 
lack of vector competence studies for several other mosquito species found 
naturally infected with WNV in Africa; (iv) the need of more competence studies 
to be addressed on ticks; (iv) evidence of circulation of WNV among humans, 
animals and vectors in at least 28 Countries; (v) the lack of knowledge on the 
epidemiological situation of WNV for 19 Countries and (vii) the importance of 
carrying out specific serological surveys in order to avoid possible bias on WNV 
circulation in Africa.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides the state of art on WNV investigation carried 
out in Africa, highlighting several knowledge gaps regarding i) the current WNV 
distribution and genetic diversity, ii) its ecology and transmission chains 
including the role of different arthropods and vertebrate species as competent 
reservoirs, and iii) the real disease burden for humans and animals. This review 
highlights the needs for further research and coordinated surveillance efforts 
on WNV in Africa.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0010075
PMCID: PMC8789169
PMID: 35007285 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.