1. Microbiol Spectr. 2022 Feb 23;10(1):e0238021. doi: 10.1128/spectrum.02380-21. 
Epub 2022 Jan 12.

Distribution and Evolutionary History of Sialic Acid Catabolism in the Phylum 
Actinobacteria.

Li Y(1)(2)(3), Huang Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Microbial Resources, Institute of Microbiology, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(2)College of Life Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 
China.
(3)Microbial Technology Institute and State Key Laboratory of Microbial 
Technology, Shandong University, Qingdao, China.

Sialic acids are present in humans and other metazoans, playing essential roles 
in physiological and pathological processes. Commensal and pathogenic bacteria 
have evolved the capacity to utilize sialic acids as nutrient and energy 
sources. However, in some actinobacteria, sialic acid catabolism (SAC) is 
associated with free-living populations. To unravel the distribution and 
evolutionary history of SAC in the phylum Actinobacteria, we analyzed the 
presence and diversity of the putative SAC gene cluster (nan) in 7,180 
high-quality, nonredundant actinobacterial genomes that covered 1,969 species. 
The results showed that ∼13% of actinobacterial species had the potential to 
utilize sialic acids, with 45 species capable of anhydro-SAC, all except two of 
them through the canonical pathway. These species belonged to 20 orders and 81 
genera, with ∼36% of them from four genera, Actinomyces, Bifidobacterium, 
Corynebacterium, and Streptomyces. Moreover, ∼40% of the nan-positive species 
are free living. Phylogenetic analysis of the key nan genes, nanA, nanK, and 
nanE, revealed a strong signal of horizontal gene transfer (HGT), accompanied 
with vertical inheritance and gene loss. This evolutionary pattern led to high 
diversity and differential distribution of nan among actinobacterial taxa and 
might cause the cluster to spread to some free-living species while losing in 
some host-associated species. The evolution of SAC in actinobacteria probably 
represents the evolution of certain kinds of noncore bacterial functions for 
environmental adaptation and lifestyle switch, in which HGT plays a dominant 
role. IMPORTANCE Sialic acids play essential roles in the physiology of humans 
and other metazoan animals, and microbial sialic acid catabolism (SAC) is one of 
the processes critical for pathogenesis. To date, microbial SAC is studied 
mainly in commensals and pathogens, while its distribution in free-living 
microbes and evolutionary pathway remain largely unexplored. Here, by examining 
all actinobacterial genomes available, we demonstrate that putative SAC is 
present in a small proportion of actinobacterial species, of which, however, 
∼40% are free-living species. We also reveal remarkable difference in the 
distribution of SAC among actinobacterial taxa and high diversity of the 
putative SAC gene clusters. HGT plays a significant role in the evolution of 
SAC, accompanied with vertical inheritance and gene loss. Our results provide a 
comprehensive and systematic picture of the distribution and evolutionary 
history of SAC in actinobacteria, expanding the current knowledge on bacterial 
adaptation and diversification.

DOI: 10.1128/spectrum.02380-21
PMCID: PMC8754123
PMID: 35019771 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.