1. Cell Death Differ. 2022 Aug;29(8):1450-1465. doi: 10.1038/s41418-022-00932-1. 
Epub 2022 Jan 14.

Heme-stress activated NRF2 skews fate trajectories of bone marrow cells from 
dendritic cells towards red pulp-like macrophages in hemolytic anemia.

Vallelian F(1), Buzzi RM(#)(2), Pfefferlé M(#)(2), Yalamanoglu A(2), Dubach 
IL(2), Wassmer A(3), Gentinetta T(3), Hansen K(2), Humar R(2), Schulthess N(2), 
Schaer CA(4), Schaer DJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Internal Medicine, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. 
florence.vallelian@usz.ch.
(2)Division of Internal Medicine, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(3)CSL Behring AG, Research and Development, Bern, Switzerland.
(4)Division of Anesthesiology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(#)Contributed equally

Heme is an erythrocyte-derived toxin that drives disease progression in 
hemolytic anemias, such as sickle cell disease. During hemolysis, specialized 
bone marrow-derived macrophages with a high heme-metabolism capacity orchestrate 
disease adaptation by removing damaged erythrocytes and heme-protein complexes 
from the blood and supporting iron recycling for erythropoiesis. Since chronic 
heme-stress is noxious for macrophages, erythrophagocytes in the spleen are 
continuously replenished from bone marrow-derived progenitors. Here, we 
hypothesized that adaptation to heme stress progressively shifts differentiation 
trajectories of bone marrow progenitors to expand the capacity of heme-handling 
monocyte-derived macrophages at the expense of the homeostatic generation of 
dendritic cells, which emerge from shared myeloid precursors. This heme-induced 
redirection of differentiation trajectories may contribute to hemolysis-induced 
secondary immunodeficiency. We performed single-cell RNA-sequencing with 
directional RNA velocity analysis of GM-CSF-supplemented mouse bone marrow 
cultures to assess myeloid differentiation under heme stress. We found that 
heme-activated NRF2 signaling shifted the differentiation of bone marrow cells 
towards antioxidant, iron-recycling macrophages, suppressing the generation of 
dendritic cells in heme-exposed bone marrow cultures. Heme eliminated the 
capacity of GM-CSF-supplemented bone marrow cultures to activate 
antigen-specific CD4 T cells. The generation of functionally competent dendritic 
cells was restored by NRF2 loss. The heme-induced phenotype of macrophage 
expansion with concurrent dendritic cell depletion was reproduced in hemolytic 
mice with sickle cell disease and spherocytosis and associated with reduced 
dendritic cell functions in the spleen. Our data provide a novel mechanistic 
underpinning of hemolytic stress as a driver of hyposplenism-related secondary 
immunodeficiency.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41418-022-00932-1
PMCID: PMC9345992
PMID: 35031770 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.