1. Res Pract Thromb Haemost. 2022 Jan 12;6(1):e12646. doi: 10.1002/rth2.12646. 
eCollection 2022 Jan.

Reliable measurement of plasma kinin peptides: Importance of preanalytical 
variables.

Gangnus T(1), Burckhardt BB(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Clinical Pharmacy and Pharmacotherapy Heinrich-Heine University 
Dusseldorf Germany.

BACKGROUND: The kallikrein-kinin system is involved in many (patho)physiological 
processes and kinin peptides are considered potential clinical biomarkers. 
Variance in blood specimen collection and processing, artificial ex vivo 
bradykinin formation, and rapid degradation of kinins have contributed to 
divergence in published plasma levels, therefore limiting their significance. 
Thus, reliable preanalytical settings are highly required.
OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to develop and evaluate a standardized 
preanalytical procedure for reliable kinin quantification. The procedure was 
based on identification of the most impactful variables on ex vivo plasma level 
alterations.
METHODS: Suitable protease inhibitors and blood specimen collection and handling 
conditions were systematically investigated. Their influence on plasma levels of 
seven kinins was monitored using an established in-house liquid 
chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry platform.
RESULTS: In nonstandardized settings, ex vivo rise of bradykinin was found to 
already occur 30 seconds after blood sampling with high interindividual 
variation. The screening of 17 protease inhibitors resulted in a customized 
seven-component protease inhibitor, which efficiently stabilized ex vivo kinin 
levels. The reliability of kinin levels was substantially jeopardized by 
prolonged rest time until centrifugation, phlebotomy methodology (eg, straight 
needles, catheters), vacuum sampling technique, or any time delays during 
venipuncture. The subsequently developed standardized procedure was applied to 
healthy volunteers and proved it significantly limited interday and 
interindividual kinin level variability.
CONCLUSION: The developed procedure for blood specimen collection and handling 
is feasible in clinical settings and allows for determination of reliable kinin 
levels. It may contribute to further elucidating the role of the 
kallikrein-kinin system in diseases like angioedema, sepsis, or coronavirus 
disease 2019.

© 2022 The Authors. Research and Practice in Thrombosis and Haemostasis 
published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of International Society on 
Thrombosis and Haemostasis (ISTH).

DOI: 10.1002/rth2.12646
PMCID: PMC8753134
PMID: 35036825