1. Curr Protoc. 2022 Jan;2(1):e330. doi: 10.1002/cpz1.330.

Triple-Decker Sandwich Cultures of Intestinal Organoids for Long-Term Live 
Imaging, Uniform Perturbation, and Statistical Sampling.

Cambra HM(1), Tallapragada NP(1), Mannam P(2), Breault DT(2)(3)(4), Klein AM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Systems Biology, Blavatnik Institute, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, Massachusetts.
(2)Division of Endocrinology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(4)Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Harvard University, Boston, Massachusetts.

Three-dimensional organoid cultures enable the study of stem cell and tissue 
biology ex vivo, providing improved access to cells for perturbation and live 
imaging. Typically, organoids are grown in hydrogel domes that are simple to 
prepare but that lead to non-uniform tissue growth and viability. We recently 
developed a simple alternative culture method to embed intestinal organoids in 
multilayered hydrogels, called "triple-decker sandwiches," that align organoids 
in a common z-plane with uniform access to medium. This culture configuration 
improves the growth and survival of organoids over a wide working area and 
facilitates long-term confocal imaging and molecular perturbation. Here, we 
present protocols for preparing organoids in triple-decker sandwich cultures and 
using them for live imaging, immunostaining, and single-cell RNA sequencing. We 
have tested our methods on mouse and human intestinal organoids and expect them 
to be useful for other highly proliferative three-dimensional cell cultures. © 
2022 Wiley Periodicals LLC. Basic Protocol 1: Pre-coating plates with PolyHEMA 
to prepare them for triple-decker sandwich culture Support Protocol 1: Preparing 
PolyHEMA solution to coat glass-bottom dishes Basic Protocol 2: Embedding 
intestinal organoids in triple-decker sandwiches Alternate Protocol 1: Seeding 
single cells or organoids at low density in triple-decker sandwiches Support 
Protocol 2: Embedding intestinal organoids in hydrogel domes Support Protocol 3: 
Production of Wnt3a-conditioned medium Support Protocol 4: Production of 
Rspo1-conditioned medium Basic Protocol 3: Live imaging of mouse intestinal 
organoids in triple-decker sandwich cultures Alternate Protocol 2: Live imaging 
of vital dye-treated mouse intestinal organoids in triple-decker sandwich 
cultures Basic Protocol 4: Immunofluorescence imaging of mouse organoids 
liberated from triple-decker sandwich cultures Alternate Protocol 3: Liberating 
and fixing mouse intestinal organoids from dome cultures Support Protocol 5: 
Measuring cell proliferation by EdU staining of mouse intestinal organoids Basic 
Protocol 5: Single-cell RNA sequencing and analysis of mouse intestinal 
organoids.

© 2022 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/cpz1.330
PMCID: PMC9006308
PMID: 35030297 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT: AMK is a founder 
of 1CellBio, Inc.