1. Part Fibre Toxicol. 2022 Jan 14;19(1):6. doi: 10.1186/s12989-022-00447-0.

Use of an in silico knowledge discovery approach to determine mechanistic 
studies of silver nanoparticles-induced toxicity from in vitro to in vivo.

Mao BH(#)(1), Luo YK(1), Wang BJ(2)(3), Chen CW(4), Cheng FY(5), Lee YH(#)(6), 
Yan SJ(7), Wang YJ(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental and Occupational Health, College of Medicine, 
National Cheng Kung University, No. 1, University Road, Tainan City, 701, 
Taiwan.
(2)Department of Cosmetic Science and Institute of Cosmetic Science, Chia Nan 
University of Pharmacy and Science, Tainan City, 71710, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Occupational and Environmental Medicine, National Cheng Kung 
University Hospital, Tainan City, 70403, Taiwan.
(4)Institute of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health, Ministry of Labor, No. 
99, Lane 407, Hengke Road, Sijhih District, New Taipei City, 22143, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Chemistry, Chinese Culture University, No. 55, Hwa-Kang Road, 
Yang-Ming-Shan, Taipei City, 11114, Taiwan.
(6)Department of Cosmeceutics, China Medical University, No. 91, Hsueh-Shih 
Road, Taichung City, 40402, Taiwan.
(7)Department of Physiology, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung 
University, No. 1, University Road, Tainan City, 701, Taiwan. 
johnyan@mail.ncku.edu.tw.
(8)Department of Environmental and Occupational Health, College of Medicine, 
National Cheng Kung University, No. 1, University Road, Tainan City, 701, 
Taiwan. yjwang@mail.ncku.edu.tw.
(9)Department of Medical Research, China Medical University Hospital, China 
Medical University, No. 91, Hsueh-Shih Road, Taichung City, 40402, Taiwan. 
yjwang@mail.ncku.edu.tw.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) are considered a double-edged sword 
that demonstrates beneficial and harmful effects depending on their dimensions 
and surface coating types. However, mechanistic understanding of the size- and 
coating-dependent effects of AgNPs in vitro and in vivo remains elusive. We 
adopted an in silico decision tree-based knowledge-discovery-in-databases 
process to prioritize the factors affecting the toxic potential of AgNPs, which 
included exposure dose, cell type and AgNP type (i.e., size and surface 
coating), and exposure time. This approach also contributed to effective 
knowledge integration between cell-based phenomenological observations and in 
vitro/in vivo mechanistic explorations.
RESULTS: The consolidated cell viability assessment results were used to create 
a tree model for generalizing cytotoxic behavior of the four AgNP types: SCS, 
LCS, SAS, and LAS. The model ranked the toxicity-related parameters in the 
following order of importance: exposure dose > cell type > particle 
size > exposure time ≥ surface coating. Mechanistically, larger AgNPs appeared 
to provoke greater levels of autophagy in vitro, which occurred during the 
earlier phase of both subcytotoxic and cytotoxic exposures. Furthermore, 
apoptosis rather than necrosis majorly accounted for compromised cell survival 
over the above dosage range. Intriguingly, exposure to non-cytotoxic doses of 
AgNPs induced G2/M cell cycle arrest and senescence instead. At the organismal 
level, SCS following a single intraperitoneal injection was found more toxic to 
BALB/c mice as compared to SAS. Both particles could be deposited in various 
target organs (e.g., spleen, liver, and kidneys). Morphological observation, 
along with serum biochemical and histological analyses, indicated that AgNPs 
could produce pancreatic toxicity, apart from leading to hepatic inflammation.
CONCLUSIONS: Our integrated in vitro, in silico, and in vivo study revealed that 
AgNPs exerted toxicity in dose-, cell/organ type- and particle type-dependent 
manners. More importantly, a single injection of lethal-dose AgNPs (i.e., SCS 
and SAS) could incur severe damage to pancreas and raise blood glucose levels at 
the early phase of exposure.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12989-022-00447-0
PMCID: PMC8759195
PMID: 35031062 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
financial interests.