1. NPJ Breast Cancer. 2022 Jan 18;8(1):12. doi: 10.1038/s41523-021-00379-6.

Comparative transcriptional analyses of preclinical models and patient samples 
reveal MYC and RELA driven expression patterns that define the molecular 
landscape of IBC.

Rypens C(1)(2), Bertucci F(3)(4), Finetti P(3), Robertson F(5), Fernandez SV(6), 
Ueno N(7), Woodward WA(8), Van Golen K(9), Vermeulen P(10)(11), Dirix L(10)(11), 
Viens P(4), Birnbaum D(3), Devi GR(12)(13), Cristofanilli M(14), Van Laere 
S(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Translational Cancer Research Unit, GZA Hospitals Sint-Augustinus, Antwerp, 
Belgium. rypens.charlotte@hotmail.com.
(2)Center for Oncological Research (CORE), Integrated Personalized and Precision 
Oncology Network (IPPON), University of Antwerp, Marseille, France. 
rypens.charlotte@hotmail.com.
(3)Predictive Oncology laboratory, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de 
Marseille (CRCM), Institut Paoli-Calmettes, INSERM UMR1068, CNRS UMR725, 
Aix-Marseille Université, Marseille, France.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology, CRCM, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Marseille, 
France.
(5)University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(6)Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(7)MD Anderson Morgan Welch Inflammatory Breast Cancer Research Program and 
Clinic, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(8)Department of Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(9)Biological Sciences, University of Delaware, Newark, DE, USA.
(10)Translational Cancer Research Unit, GZA Hospitals Sint-Augustinus, Antwerp, 
Belgium.
(11)Center for Oncological Research (CORE), Integrated Personalized and 
Precision Oncology Network (IPPON), University of Antwerp, Marseille, France.
(12)Department of Surgery, Division of Surgical Sciences, Duke University School 
of Medicine, Durham, NC, USA.
(13)Duke Consortium for Inflammatory Breast Cancer, Duke Cancer Institute, 
Durham, NC, UK.
(14)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology and Oncology, Robert H Lurie 
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA.

Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) is an aggressive disease for which the spectrum 
of preclinical models was rather limited in the past. More recently, novel cell 
lines and xenografts have been developed. This study evaluates the transcriptome 
of an extended series of IBC preclinical models and performed a comparative 
analysis with patient samples to determine the extent to which the current 
models recapitulate the molecular characteristics of IBC observed clinically. We 
demonstrate that the IBC preclinical models are exclusively estrogen receptor 
(ER)-negative and of the basal-like subtype, which reflects to some extent the 
predominance of these subtypes in patient samples. The IBC-specific 79-signature 
we previously reported was retrained and discriminated between IBC and non-IBC 
preclinical models, but with a relatively high rate of false positive 
predictions. Further analyses of gene expression profiles revealed important 
roles for cell proliferation, MYC transcriptional activity, and TNFɑ/NFκB in the 
biology of IBC. Patterns of MYC expression and transcriptional activity were 
further explored in patient samples, which revealed interactions with ESR1 
expression that are contrasting in IBC and nIBC and notable given the 
comparatively poor outcomes of ER+ IBC. Our analyses also suggest important 
roles for NMYC, MXD3, MAX, and MLX in shaping MYC signaling in IBC. Overall, we 
demonstrate that the IBC preclinical models can be used to unravel cancer cell 
intrinsic molecular features, and thus constitute valuable research tools. 
Nevertheless, the current lack of ER-positive IBC models remains a major hurdle, 
particularly since interactions with the ER pathway appear to be relevant for 
IBC.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41523-021-00379-6
PMCID: PMC8766434
PMID: 35042871

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.