1. Front Immunol. 2022 Jan 3;12:628741. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.628741.
eCollection  2021.

The Gut Microbiome in Myalgic Encephalomyelitis (ME)/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome 
(CFS).

König RS(1), Albrich WC(2), Kahlert CR(2)(3), Bahr LS(4)(5), Löber U(4)(5)(6), 
Vernazza P(2), Scheibenbogen C(7), Forslund SK(4)(5)(6)(8).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases and Hospital Epidemiology, Cantonal Hospital 
St. Gallen, St. Gallen, Switzerland.
(3)Division of Infectious Diseases and Hospital Epidemiology, Children's 
Hospital of Eastern Switzerland, St. Gallen, Switzerland.
(4)Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Freie Universität Berlin and 
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(5)Experimental and Clinical Research Center, A Joint Cooperation of 
Max-Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine and Charité-Universitätsmedizin 
Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(6)Host-Microbiome Factors in Cardiovascular Disease, Max Delbruck Center for 
Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association (MDC), Berlin, Germany.
(7)Institute for Medical Immunology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, 
Germany.
(8)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Structural and Computational Biology 
Unit, Heidelberg, Germany.

Erratum in
    Front Immunol. 2022 Mar 30;13:878196. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.878196.

Myalgic encephalomyelitis (ME) or Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (CFS) is a neglected, 
debilitating multi-systemic disease without diagnostic marker or therapy. 
Despite evidence for neurological, immunological, infectious, muscular and 
endocrine pathophysiological abnormalities, the etiology and a clear 
pathophysiology remains unclear. The gut microbiome gained much attention in the 
last decade with manifold implications in health and disease. Here we review the 
current state of knowledge on the interplay between ME/CFS and the microbiome, 
to identify potential diagnostic or interventional approaches, and propose areas 
where further research is needed. We iteratively selected and elaborated on key 
theories about a correlation between microbiome state and ME/CFS pathology, 
developing further hypotheses. Based on the literature we hypothesize that 
antibiotic use throughout life favours an intestinal microbiota composition 
which might be a risk factor for ME/CFS. Main proposed pathomechanisms include 
gut dysbiosis, altered gut-brain axis activity, increased gut permeability with 
concomitant bacterial translocation and reduced levels of short-chain-fatty 
acids, D-lactic acidosis, an abnormal tryptophan metabolism and low activity of 
the kynurenine pathway. We review options for microbiome manipulation in ME/CFS 
patients including probiotic and dietary interventions as well as fecal 
microbiota transplantations. Beyond increasing gut permeability and bacterial 
translocation, specific dysbiosis may modify fermentation products, affecting 
peripheral mitochondria. Considering the gut-brain axis we strongly suspect that 
the microbiome may contribute to neurocognitive impairments of ME/CFS patients. 
Further larger studies are needed, above all to clarify whether D-lactic 
acidosis and early-life antibiotic use may be part of ME/CFS etiology and what 
role changes in the tryptophan metabolism might play. An association between the 
gut microbiome and the disease ME/CFS is plausible. As causality remains 
unclear, we recommend longitudinal studies. Activity levels, bedridden hours and 
disease progression should be compared to antibiotic exposure, drug intakes and 
alterations in the composition of the microbiota. The therapeutic potential of 
fecal microbiota transfer and of targeted dietary interventions should be 
systematically evaluated.

Copyright © 2022 König, Albrich, Kahlert, Bahr, Löber, Vernazza, Scheibenbogen 
and Forslund.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.628741
PMCID: PMC8761622
PMID: 35046929 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. CS received clinical study 
grant and speaker honoraria from Baxalta and Fresenius and is consultant for 
Celltrend.