1. JCO Precis Oncol. 2020 Nov;4:426-436. doi: 10.1200/PO.19.00330.

CES2 Expression in Pancreatic Adenocarcinoma Is Predictive of Response to 
Irinotecan and Is Associated With Type 2 Diabetes.

Capello M(1), Fahrmann JF(1), Rios Perez MV(2), Vykoukal JV(1), Irajizad 
E(1)(3), Tripathi SC(1), Roife D(2), Bantis LE(3)(4), Kang Y(2), Kundnani DL(1), 
Xu H(1), Prakash LR(2), Long JP(3), Katayama H(1), Fleury A(1), Ferri-Borgogno 
S(5), Baluya DL(6), Dennison JB(1), Aguilar-Bonavides C(1), Casabar JP(1), 
Celiktas M(1), Do KA(3), Fiehn O(7), Maitra A(4)(8), Wang H(8), Feng Z(3), Chiao 
PJ(9), Katz MH(2), Fleming JB(10), Hanash SM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Cancer Prevention, The University of Texas MD Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston, TX.
(2)Department of Surgical Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, TX.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, TX.
(4)Department of Biostatistics and Data Science, University of Kansas Medical 
Center, Kansas City, KS.
(5)Department of Translational Molecular Pathology, The University of Texas MD 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX.
(6)Center for Radiation Oncology Research, The University of Texas MD Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston, TX.
(7)University of California Davis Genome Center-Metabolomics, University of 
California, Davis, CA.
(8)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, TX.
(9)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas MD 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX.
(10)Department of Gastrointestinal Oncology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center, 
Tampa, FL.

PURPOSE: The combination chemotherapy of fluorouracil, leucovorin, irinotecan, 
and oxaliplatin (FOLFIRINOX) has provided clinically meaningful improvement for 
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). We previously uncovered a role for the 
serine hydrolase carboxylesterase 2 (CES2) in mediating intratumoral activation 
of the prodrug irinotecan, a constituent of FOLFIRINOX. We aimed to further test 
the predictive value of CES2 for response to irinotecan using patient-derived 
xenograft (PDX) models and to elucidate the determinants of CES2 expression and 
response to FOLFIRINOX treatment among patients with PDAC.
METHODS: PDXs were engrafted subcutaneously into nude mice and treated for 4 
weeks with either saline control or irinotecan. CES2 and hepatocyte nuclear 
factor 4 alpha (HNF4A) expression in PDAC tissues was evaluated by 
immunohistochemical and Western blot analysis. Kaplan-Meier and Cox regression 
analyses were applied to assess the association between overall survival and 
hemoglobin A1C (HbA1C) levels in patients who underwent neoadjuvant FOLFIRINOX 
treatment.
RESULTS: High CES2 activity in PDAC PDXs was associated with increased 
sensitivity to irinotecan. Integrated gene expression, proteomic analyses, and 
in vitro genetic experiments revealed that nuclear receptor HNF4A, which is 
upregulated in diabetes, is the upstream transcriptional regulator of CES2 
expression. Elevated CES2 protein expression in PDAC tissues was positively 
associated with a history of type 2 diabetes (odds ratio, 4.84; P = .02). High 
HbA1C levels were associated with longer overall survival in patients who 
received neoadjuvant FOLFIRINOX treatment (P = .04).
CONCLUSION: To our knowledge, we provide, for the first time, evidence that CES2 
expression is associated with a history of type 2 diabetes in PDAC and that 
elevated HbA1C, by predicting tumor CES2 expression, may represent a novel 
marker for stratifying patients most likely to respond to FOLFIRINOX therapy.

DOI: 10.1200/PO.19.00330
PMCID: PMC10860959
PMID: 35050739

Conflict of interest statement: The following represents disclosure information 
provided by authors of this manuscript. All relationships are considered 
compensated unless otherwise noted. Relationships are self-held unless noted. I 
= Immediate Family Member, Inst = My Institution. Relationships may not relate 
to the subject matter of this manuscript. For more information about ASCO's 
conflict of interest policy, please refer to www.asco.org/rwc or 
ascopubs.org/po/author-center. Open Payments is a public database containing 
information reported by companies about payments made to US-licensed physicians 
(Open Payments). MICHELA CAPELLO: Employment: Janssen Research & Development 
Patents, Royalties, Other Intellectual Property: There is an intellectual 
property related to biomarkers for early detection of pancreatic cancer JOHANNES 
F. FAHRMANN: Patents, Royalties, Other Intellectual Property: There is an 
intellectual property related to biomarkers for early detection of pancreatic 
cancer LEONIDAS E. BANTIS: Patents, Royalties, Other Intellectual Property: 
Royalty distribution related to the license and collaboration agreement with 
Hangzhou Cosmos Wisdom Biotechnology. These refer to 2 blood-based biomarker 
panels for the detection of lung and pancreatic cancer DEEPALI L. KUNDNANI: 
Patents, Royalties, Other Intellectual Property: An intellectual property 
related to biomarkers for early detection of pancreatic cancer JENNIFER B. 
DENNISON: Research Funding: Cosmos Wisdom (Inst), Dynex (Inst) Patents, 
Royalties, Other Intellectual Property: Intellectual property on pancreas cancer 
early detection biomarkers CLEMENTE AGUILAR-BONAVIDES: Employment: Janssen 
Oncology Research Funding: Janssen Oncology Patents, Royalties, Other 
Intellectual Property: Patent pending with Janssen Oncology MUGE CELIKTAS: 
Employment: Bristol-Myers Squibb Stock and Other Ownership Interests: 
Bristol-Myers Squibb ANIRBAN MAITRA: Honoraria: Celgene Patents, Royalties, 
Other Intellectual Property: Royalties from Hangzhou Guangkeande (Cosmos) 
Biotechnology Company for blood-based biomarkers of early pancreatic cancer. I 
do not own stocks in the company nor do I have any research or grant funding 
from them. Johns Hopkins University has licensed a patent related to pancreatic 
cancer to Thrive Earlier Detection. I have 1.8% contribution on that patent. No 
royalties have been received by me ZIDING FENG: Patents, Royalties, Other 
Intellectual Property: I am one of the co-inventors for a biomarker panel for 
pancreatic cancer. The patent was filed by The University of Texas MD Anderson 
Cancer Center and was licensed to a company by the UT MD Anderson Cancer Center 
MATTHEW H. KATZ: Consulting or Advisory Role: Alcresta Therapeutics, AbbVie 
JASON B. FLEMING: Leadership: Biopath Holdings Consulting or Advisory Role: 
Johnson and Johnson, Glycobio, Moleculin Biotech, Perthera Patents, Royalties, 
Other Intellectual Property: US Application No. 15/780,799, based on 
International Application No. PCT/US2016/065763, entitled “Polymeric Drug 
Delivery Systems for Treatment of Disease,” by Chun Li et al; In the Name of 
Board of Regents, The University of Texas System SAMIR M. HANASH: Patents, 
Royalties, Other Intellectual Property: Patents submitted for lung and 
pancreatic cancer diagnostic markers No other potential conflicts of interest 
were reported.