1. Materials (Basel). 2022 Jan 14;15(2):611. doi: 10.3390/ma15020611.

Evaluation of Collaborative Robot Sustainable Integration in Manufacturing 
Assembly by Using Process Time Savings.

Calvo R(1), Gil P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mechanical, Chemical and Industrial Design Engineering, Escuela 
Técnica Superior de Ingeniería y Diseño Industrial, Universidad Politécnica de 
Madrid, Ronda de Valencia 3, 28012 Madrid, Spain.

Collaborative robots are enablers of flexibility in the current dynamic and 
uncertain manufacturing environment. Decision making on its implementation 
requires technical feasibility, involving productivity and workforce 
implications that should be faced in an integrated perspective in processes 
where many components of different materials are assembled in products of 
increasing diversity and complexity. This study introduces two new parametric 
models for collaborative robotics, formulated in order to evaluate the 
differential cost of assembly (economic dimension) and the differential income 
from taxes that supports short-term workforce displacement (social dimension) in 
cobot implementation. Updated techno-economical parameters are selected for 
assessing feasibility ranges of application in different production scenarios. 
Next, the influence curves of productivity gain for a feasible implementation of 
cobot establish thresholds for decision making under both criteria. The results 
show the need for productivity gains that are significantly lower in high-wage 
scenarios than in low-wage scenarios; however, in a joint approach, breakeven 
productivity gain is always higher for the social dimension threshold than for 
the economic requirement of cost-effective manufacturing, with a higher gap in 
low-wage cases. The detailed analysis of a real case study of cobot 
implementation for assembly demonstrates the practical application of models and 
potential for future research.

DOI: 10.3390/ma15020611
PMCID: PMC8781979
PMID: 35057338

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.