1. Sensors (Basel). 2022 Jan 13;22(2):607. doi: 10.3390/s22020607.

Hash-Chain Fog/Edge: A Mode-Based Hash-Chain for Secured Mutual Authentication 
Protocol Using Zero-Knowledge Proofs in Fog/Edge.

Pardeshi MS(1)(2), Sheu RK(3), Yuan SM(4).

Author information:
(1)Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Department (EECS), National Chiao 
Tung University, Hsinchu 30010, Taiwan.
(2)AI Center, Tunghai University, Taichung 407224, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Computer Science, Tunghai University, Taichung 407224, Taiwan.
(4)Computer Science Department, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, 
Hsinchu 30010, Taiwan.

Authentication is essential for the prevention of various types of attacks in 
fog/edge computing. Therefore, a novel mode-based hash chain for secure mutual 
authentication is necessary to address the Internet of Things (IoT) devices' 
vulnerability, as there have been several years of growing concerns regarding 
their security. Therefore, a novel model is designed that is stronger and 
effective against any kind of unauthorized attack, as IoT devices' vulnerability 
is on the rise due to the mass production of IoT devices (embedded processors, 
camera, sensors, etc.), which ignore the basic security requirements (passwords, 
secure communication), making them vulnerable and easily accessible. 
Furthermore, crackable passwords indicate that the security measures taken are 
insufficient. As per the recent studies, several applications regarding its 
requirements are the IoT distributed denial of service attack (IDDOS), 
micro-cloud, secure university, Secure Industry 4.0, secure government, secure 
country, etc. The problem statement is formulated as the "design and 
implementation of dynamically interconnecting fog servers and edge devices using 
the mode-based hash chain for secure mutual authentication protocol", which is 
stated to be an NP-complete problem. The hash-chain fog/edge implementation 
using timestamps, mode-based hash chaining, the zero-knowledge proof property, a 
distributed database/blockchain, and cryptography techniques can be utilized to 
establish the connection of smart devices in large numbers securely. The 
hash-chain fog/edge uses blockchain for identity management only, which is used 
to store the public keys in distributed ledger form, and all these keys are 
immutable. In addition, it has no overhead and is highly secure as it performs 
fewer calculations and requires minimum infrastructure. Therefore, we designed 
the hash-chain fog/edge (HCFE) protocol, which provides a novel mutual 
authentication scheme for effective session key agreement (using ZKP properties) 
with secure protocol communications. The experiment outcomes proved that the 
hash-chain fog/edge is more efficient at interconnecting various devices and 
competed favorably in the benchmark comparison.

DOI: 10.3390/s22020607
PMCID: PMC8777787
PMID: 35062563

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.