1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2022 May;45(3):541-556. doi: 10.1002/jimd.12480. Epub
2022  Feb 2.

Medium branched chain fatty acids improve the profile of tricarboxylic acid 
cycle intermediates in mitochondrial fatty acid β-oxidation deficient cells: A 
comparative study.

Karunanidhi A(1), Van't Land C(1), Rajasundaram D(1), Grings M(1)(2), Vockley 
J(1)(3), Mohsen AW(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, UPMC Children's Hospital of 
Pittsburgh, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)PPG Ciências Biológicas: Bioquímica, Departamento de Bioquímica, Universidade 
Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil.
(3)Department of Human Genetics, Graduate School of Public Health, University of 
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.

Inherited errors of mitochondrial fatty acid β-oxidation (FAO) are life 
threatening, even with optimum care. FAO is the major source of energy for heart 
and is critical for skeletal muscles especially during physiologic stress. 
Clinical trials revealed that triheptanoin (commercially known as Dojolvi; C7G), 
improved heart function and decreased hypoglycemia in long chain FAO disorders, 
but other symptoms including rhabdomyolysis persisted, suggesting suboptimal 
tissue distribution/utilization of heptanoic acid (C7) conjugates and/or rapid 
liver breakdown. In this study, medium branched chain fatty acids were tested as 
potential anaplerotic treatments in fibroblasts from patients deficient in very 
long chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (VLCAD), long chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA 
dehydrogenase (LCHAD), trifunctional protein (TFP), and carnitine 
palmitoyltransferase II (CPT II). Cells were cultured to near confluency and 
treated with C7, 2,6-dimethylheptanoic acid (dMC7), 
6-amino-2,4-dimethylheptanoic acid (AdMC7), or 4,8-dimethylnonanoic acid (dMC9) 
for 72 h and targeted metabolomics performed. The profile of TCA cycle 
intermediates was improved in cells treated with these branched chain fatty 
acids compared with C7. Intracellular propionate was higher in AdMC7 treated 
cells compared with C7 in VLCAD, LCHAD, and TFP deficient cell lines. With AdMC7 
treatment, succinate was higher in CPT II and VLCAD deficient cells, compared 
with C7. Malate and glutamate were consistently higher in AdMC7 treated VLCAD, 
LCHAD, TFP, and CPT II deficient cells compared with the C7 treatment. The 
results provide the impetus to further evaluate and consider branched chain 
fatty acids as viable anaplerotic therapy for fatty acid oxidation disorders and 
other diseases.

© 2022 SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jimd.12480
PMCID: PMC9090965
PMID: 35076099 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST Al-Walid Mohsen, the 
corresponding author, has a patent application submitted to the US patent office 
pertaining compounds mentioned in this manuscript. Anuradha Karunanidhi, Clinton 
Van’t Land, Dhivyaa Rajasundaram, Mateus Grings, and Jerry Vockley, all have no 
conflict of interest.