1. Lupus Sci Med. 2022 Jan;9(1):e000615. doi: 10.1136/lupus-2021-000615.

Immune gene expression and functional networks in distinct lupus nephritis 
classes.

Gilmore AC(1), Wilson HR(1), Cairns TD(2), Botto M(1)(2), Lightstone L(1)(2), 
Bruce IN(3), Terence Cook H(1), Pickering MC(4)(2); MASTERPLANS Consortium.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology and Inflammation, Imperial College London, London, 
UK.
(2)Imperial Lupus Centre, Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust, London, UK.
(3)Centre for Epidemiology Versus Arthritis, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and 
Health, The University of Manchester and NIHR Manchester Biomedical Research 
Centre, Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester 
Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester, United Kingdom, The University of 
Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(4)Department of Immunology and Inflammation, Imperial College London, London, 
UK matthew.pickering@imperial.ac.uk.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the utility of the NanoString platform in elucidating 
kidney immune transcripts for class III, IV and V lupus nephritis (LN) using a 
retrospective cohort of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) kidney biopsy 
tissue.
METHODS: Immune gene transcript analysis was performed using the NanoString 
nCounter platform on RNA from LN (n=55), thin basement membrane (TBM) disease 
(n=14) and membranous nephropathy (MN) (n=9) FFPE kidney biopsy tissue. LN 
samples consisted of single class III (n=11), IV (n=23) and V (n=21) biopsies 
with no mixed lesions. Differential gene expression was performed with 
NanoString nSolver, with visualisations of volcano plots and heatmaps generated 
in R. Significant transcripts were interrogated to identify functional networks 
using STRING and Gene ontogeny terms.
RESULTS: In comparison to TBM, we identified 52 significantly differentially 
expressed genes common to all three LN classes. Pathway analysis showed 
enrichment for type I interferon (IFN) signalling, complement and MHC II 
pathways, with most showing the highest expression in class IV LN. Our class IV 
LN biopsies also showed significant upregulation of NF-κB signalling and 
immunological enrichment in comparison to class V LN biopsies. Transcripts from 
the type I IFN pathway distinguished class V LN from MN.
CONCLUSION: Our whole kidney section transcriptomic analysis provided insights 
into the molecular profile of class III, IV and V LN. The data highlighted 
important pathways common to all three classes and pathways enriched in our 
class IV LN biopsies. The ability to reveal molecular pathways in LN using FFPE 
whole biopsy sections could have clinical utility in treatment selection for LN.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2022. Re-use permitted under CC BY. Published 
by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/lupus-2021-000615
PMCID: PMC8788334
PMID: 35074933 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.