1. Blood Adv. 2022 May 24;6(10):3142-3154. doi: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2021005976.

Model for surface-dependent factor XII activation: the roles of factor XII heavy 
chain domains.

Shamanaev A(1), Ivanov I(1), Sun MF(1), Litvak M(1), Srivastava P(1), Mohammed 
BM(2), Shaban R(1), Maddur A(1), Verhamme IM(1), McCarty OJT(3)(4), Law RHP(5), 
Gailani D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University 
Medical Center, Nashville, TN.
(2)Edward A. Doisy Research Center, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular 
Biology, St. Louis University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO.
(3)Department of Biomedical Engineering, and.
(4)Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Department of Medicine, Oregon 
Health and Science University, Portland, OR; and.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University, Clayton, 
VIC, Australia.

Factor XII (FXII) is the zymogen of a plasma protease (FXIIa) that contributes 
to bradykinin generation by converting prekallikrein to the protease plasma 
kallikrein (PKa). FXII conversion to FXIIa by autocatalysis or PKa-mediated 
cleavage is enhanced when the protein binds to negatively charged surfaces such 
as polymeric orthophosphate. FXII is composed of noncatalytic (heavy chain) and 
catalytic (light chain) regions. The heavy chain promotes FXII surface-binding 
and surface-dependent activation but restricts activation when FXII is not 
surface bound. From the N terminus, the heavy chain contains fibronectin type 2 
(FN2), epidermal growth factor-1 (EGF1), fibronectin type 1 (FN1), EGF2, and 
kringle (KNG) domains and a proline-rich region. It shares this organization 
with its homolog, pro-hepatocyte growth factor activator (Pro-HGFA). To study 
the importance of heavy chain domains in FXII function, we prepared FXII with 
replacements of each domain with corresponding Pro-HGFA domains and tested them 
in activation and activity assays. EGF1 is required for surface-dependent FXII 
autoactivation and surface-dependent prekallikrein activation by FXIIa. KNG and 
FN2 are important for limiting FXII activation in the absence of a surface by a 
process that may require interactions between a lysine/arginine binding site on 
KNG and basic residues elsewhere on FXII. This interaction is disrupted by the 
lysine analog ε-aminocaproic acid. A model is proposed in which an 
ε-aminocaproic acid-sensitive interaction between the KNG and FN2 domains 
maintains FXII in a conformation that restricts activation. Upon binding to a 
surface through EGF1, the KNG/FN2-dependent mechanism is inactivated, exposing 
the FXII activation cleavage site.

© 2022 by The American Society of Hematology. Licensed under Creative Commons 
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0), 
permitting only noncommercial, nonderivative use with attribution. All other 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2021005976
PMCID: PMC9131904
PMID: 35086137 [Indexed for MEDLINE]