1. BMC Genomics. 2022 Feb 1;23(1):93. doi: 10.1186/s12864-021-08222-9.

Amphioxus muscle transcriptomes reveal vertebrate-like myoblast fusion genes and 
a highly conserved role of insulin signalling in the metabolism of muscle.

Aase-Remedios ME(#)(1), Coll-Lladó C(#)(1), Ferrier DEK(2).

Author information:
(1)The Scottish Oceans Institute, Gatty Marine Laboratory, School of Biology, 
University of St Andrews, St Andrews, Fife, KY16 8LB, UK.
(2)The Scottish Oceans Institute, Gatty Marine Laboratory, School of Biology, 
University of St Andrews, St Andrews, Fife, KY16 8LB, UK. dekf@st-andrews.ac.uk.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: The formation and functioning of muscles are fundamental aspects of 
animal biology, and the evolution of 'muscle genes' is central to our 
understanding of this tissue. Feeding-fasting-refeeding experiments have been 
widely used to assess muscle cellular and metabolic responses to nutrition. 
Though these studies have focused on vertebrate models and only a few 
invertebrate systems, they have found similar processes are involved in muscle 
degradation and maintenance. Motivation for these studies stems from interest in 
diseases whose pathologies involve muscle atrophy, a symptom also triggered by 
fasting, as well as commercial interest in the muscle mass of animals kept for 
consumption. Experimentally modelling atrophy by manipulating nutritional state 
causes muscle mass to be depleted during starvation and replenished with 
refeeding so that the genetic mechanisms controlling muscle growth and 
degradation can be understood.
RESULTS: Using amphioxus, the earliest branching chordate lineage, we address 
the gap in previous work stemming from comparisons between distantly related 
vertebrate and invertebrate models. Our amphioxus feeding-fasting-refeeding 
muscle transcriptomes reveal a highly conserved myogenic program and that the 
pro-orthologues of many vertebrate myoblast fusion genes were present in the 
ancestral chordate, despite these invertebrate chordates having unfused 
mononucleate myocytes. We found that genes differentially expressed between fed 
and fasted amphioxus were orthologous to the genes that respond to nutritional 
state in vertebrates. This response is driven in a large part by the highly 
conserved IGF/Akt/FOXO pathway, where depleted nutrient levels result in 
activation of FOXO, a transcription factor with many autophagy-related gene 
targets.
CONCLUSION: Reconstruction of these gene networks and pathways in amphioxus 
muscle provides a key point of comparison between the distantly related groups 
assessed thus far, significantly refining the reconstruction of the ancestral 
state for chordate myoblast fusion genes and identifying the extensive role of 
duplicated genes in the IGF/Akt/FOXO pathway across animals. Our study 
elucidates the evolutionary trajectory of muscle genes as they relate to the 
increased complexity of vertebrate muscles and muscle development.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-021-08222-9
PMCID: PMC8805411
PMID: 35105312 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.