1. Clin Cancer Res. 2022 Apr 14;28(8):1701-1711. doi: 
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-21-4239.

Neoadjuvant Therapy Induces a Potent Immune Response to Sarcoma, Dominated by 
Myeloid and B Cells.

Goff PH(#)(1), Riolobos L(#)(2)(3), LaFleur BJ(4), Spraker MB(5), Seo YD(6), 
Smythe KS(7), Campbell JS(8), Pierce RH(8), Zhang Y(9), He Q(9), Kim EY(1), 
Schaub SK(1), Kane GM(1), Mantilla JG(10), Chen EY(10), Ricciotti R(10), 
Thompson MJ(11)(12), Cranmer LD(7)(12)(13), Wagner MJ(7)(12)(13), Loggers 
ET(7)(12)(13), Jones RL(14), Murphy E(15), Blumenschein WM(15), McClanahan 
TK(15), Earls J(16), Flanagan KC(16), LaFranzo NA(16), Kim TS(#)(6), Pollack 
SM(#)(17).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Washington Medicine, Seattle, 
Washington.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Washington Medicine, Seattle, 
Washington.
(3)Department of Cancer Vaccine Institute, University of Washington Medicine, 
Seattle, Washington.
(4)University of Arizona BIO5 Institute, Tucson, Arizona.
(5)Department of Radiation Oncology, Washington University School of Medicine in 
St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri.
(6)Department of Surgery, University of Washington Medicine, Seattle, 
Washington.
(7)Division of Clinical Research, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, 
Seattle, Washington.
(8)Sensei Biotherapeutics, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts.
(9)Division of Public Health Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, 
Seattle, Washington.
(10)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Washington, 
Seattle, Washington.
(11)Department of Orthopedics and Sports Medicine, University of Washington, 
Seattle, Washington.
(12)Seattle Cancer Care Alliance, Seattle, Washington.
(13)Department of Medical Oncology, University of Washington Medicine, Seattle, 
Washington.
(14)Sarcoma, Royal Marsden Hospital NHS Trust/Institute of Cancer Research, 
London, United Kingdom.
(15)Merck & Co., Inc., Kenilworth, New Jersey.
(16)Cofactor Genomics, Inc., San Francisco, California.
(17)Department of Medicine, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern 
University, Chicago, Illinois.
(#)Contributed equally

PURPOSE: To characterize changes in the soft-tissue sarcoma (STS) tumor immune 
microenvironment induced by standard neoadjuvant therapy with the goal of 
informing neoadjuvant immunotherapy trial design.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Paired pre- and postneoadjuvant therapy specimens were 
retrospectively identified for 32 patients with STSs and analyzed by three 
modalities: multiplexed IHC, NanoString, and RNA sequencing with ImmunoPrism 
analysis.
RESULTS: All 32 patients, representing a variety of STS histologic subtypes, 
received neoadjuvant radiotherapy and 21 (66%) received chemotherapy prior to 
radiotherapy. The most prevalent immune cells in the tumor before neoadjuvant 
therapy were myeloid cells (45% of all immune cells) and B cells (37%), with T 
(13%) and natural killer (NK) cells (5%) also present. Neoadjuvant therapy 
significantly increased the total immune cells infiltrating the tumors across 
all histologic subtypes for patients receiving neoadjuvant radiotherapy with or 
without chemotherapy. An increase in the percentage of monocytes and 
macrophages, particularly M2 macrophages, B cells, and CD4+ T cells was observed 
postneoadjuvant therapy. Upregulation of genes and cytokines associated with 
antigen presentation was also observed, and a favorable pathologic response 
(≥90% necrosis postneoadjuvant therapy) was associated with an increase in 
monocytic infiltrate. Upregulation of the T-cell checkpoint TIM3 and 
downregulation of OX40 were observed posttreatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Standard neoadjuvant therapy induces both immunostimulatory and 
immunosuppressive effects within a complex sarcoma microenvironment dominated by 
myeloid and B cells. This work informs ongoing efforts to incorporate immune 
checkpoint inhibitors and novel immunotherapies into the neoadjuvant setting for 
STSs.

©2022 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-21-4239
PMCID: PMC9953754
PMID: 35115306 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: The authors have 
disclosed they have significant relationships with, or financial interest in, 
the following commercial companies pertaining to this article: PHG received 
research funding from Gilead Sciences, Inc. outside the submitted work. BL is a 
paid consultant from Cofactor Genomics, Inc., the company that developed and 
produces the ImmunoPrism® reagent kit and informatics tools used in this 
article. JE, KF, and NL are employed by Cofactor Genomics, Inc., which funded 
and performed the RNA sequencing and ImmunoPrism analysis herein but did not 
otherwise play a role in the conceptualization, analysis, or presentation of the 
work herein. LDC received research funding paid to the institution from Eli 
Lilly, AADi, BluePrint Medicine, Iterion, Gradalis, Philogen, Advenchen 
Laboratories, and CBA Pharma; LDC has received honoraria or has served on 
advisory boards for Daichi Sankyo, BluePrint Medicines and Regeneron. JC and RHP 
are employed by Sensei Biotherapeutics, Inc., which did not play any role in the 
conceptualization, analysis, or presentation of the work herein. EM, WMB, and TM 
are employed by Merck Sharp & Dohme Corp., a subsidiary of Merck & Co., Inc., 
Kenilworth, NJ, USA which funded and performed NanoString nCounter gene 
expression analysis herein but did not otherwise play a role in the 
conceptualization, analysis, or presentation of the work herein. SMP reported 
research funding from Merck during the conduct of the study; research funding 
from EMD Serono, Incyte, Presage, Janssen, OncoSec, and Juno and consulting, 
honoraria, and advisory activity with Deciphera, Aadi, Epizyme, Springworks, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Obsidian, T-knife, Daiichi Sankyo, and Blueprint Medicine, 
outside the submitted work. MJW reports consulting, honoraria, and advisory 
activity from Epizyme, Adaptimmune, and Deciphera. The remaining authors declare 
no potential conflicts of interest.