1. Transl Cancer Res. 2021 May;10(5):2537-2570. doi: 10.21037/tcr-20-1933.

Immunotherapy and radiation for high-grade glioma: a narrative review.

Fakhoury KR(1), Ney DE(2)(3), Ormond DR(3), Rusthoven CG(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Anschutz Medical Center, University of 
Colorado, Aurora, CO, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, Anschutz Medical Center, University of Colorado, 
Aurora, CO, USA.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, Anschutz Medical Center, University of Colorado, 
Aurora, CO, USA.

Glioblastoma and other high-grade gliomas (HGGs) are the most common and deadly 
primary brain tumors. Due to recent advances in immunotherapy and improved 
clinical outcomes in other disease sites, the study of immunotherapy in HGG has 
increased significantly. Herein, we summarize and evaluate existing evidence and 
ongoing clinical trials investigating the use of immunotherapy in the treatment 
of HGG, including therapeutic vaccination, immune checkpoint inhibition, 
adoptive lymphocyte transfer, and combinatorial approaches utilizing radiation 
and multiple modalities of immunotherapy. Special attention is given to the 
mechanisms by which radiation may improve immunogenicity in HGG, why this 
motivates the study of radiation in combination with immunotherapy, and how to 
determine optimal dosing and scheduling of radiation. Though larger randomized 
controlled trials have not consistently shown improvements in clinical outcomes, 
this area of research is still in its early stages and a number of important 
lessons can be taken away from the studies that have been completed to date. 
Many studies found a subset of patients who experienced durable responses, and 
analysis of their immune cells and tumor cells can be used to identify 
biomarkers that predict therapeutic response, as well as additional 
glioma-specific targets that can enhance therapeutic efficacy in a challenging 
tumor type.

2021 Translational Cancer Research. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/tcr-20-1933
PMCID: PMC8797698
PMID: 35116570

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: All authors have 
completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at 
http://dx.doi.org/10.21037/tcr-20-1933). The series “Synergy in Action: Novel 
Approaches to Combining Radiation Therapy and Immunotherapy” was commissioned by 
the editorial office without any funding or sponsorship. DEN reports personal 
fees from DNAtrix, outside the submitted work. DRO reports grants from American 
Heart Association, grants from American Cancer Society, grants from Medtronic, 
grants from Agios, outside the submitted work. CGR reports grants from Takeda, 
personal fees from Genentech, and personal fees from AstraZeneca, outside the 
submitted work. The authors have no other conflicts of interest to declare.