1. Infect Drug Resist. 2022 Feb 5;15:399-412. doi: 10.2147/IDR.S346869.
eCollection  2022.

The Regulation of ManLAM-Related Gene Expression in Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
with Different Drug Resistance Profiles Following Isoniazid Treatment.

Yimcharoen M(1), Saikaew S(1), Wattananandkul U(1), Phunpae P(1), Intorasoot 
S(1), Kasinrerk W(2)(3), Tayapiwatana C(2)(3)(4), Butr-Indr B(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical Microbiology, Department of Medical Technology, Faculty 
of Associated Medical Sciences, Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai, 50200, 
Thailand.
(2)Division of Clinical Immunology, Department of Medical Technology, Faculty of 
Associated Medical Sciences, Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai, 50200, Thailand.
(3)Biomedical Technology Research Center, National Center for Genetic 
Engineering and Biotechnology, National Science and Technology Development 
Agency at The Faculty of Associated Medical Sciences, Chiang Mai University, 
Chiang Mai, 50200, Thailand.
(4)Center of Biomolecular Therapy and Diagnostic, Faculty of Associated Medical 
Sciences, Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai, 50200, Thailand.

INTRODUCTION: Tuberculosis (TB) caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) 
remains a global health concern because of the development of drug resistance. 
The adaptability of MTB in response to a variety of environmental stresses is a 
crucial strategy that supports their survival and evades host defense 
mechanisms. Stress regulates gene expression, particularly virulence genes, 
leading to the development of drug tolerance. Mannose-capped lipoarabinomannan 
(ManLAM) is a critical component of the cell wall, functions as a virulence 
factor and influences host defense mechanisms.
PURPOSE: This study focuses on the effect of isoniazid (INH) stress on the 
regulation of ManLAM-related genes, to improve our understanding of virulence 
and drug resistance development in MTB.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: MTB with distinct drug resistance profiles were used for 
gene expression analysis. Multiplex-real time PCR assay was performed to monitor 
stress-related genes (hspX, tgs1, and sigE). The expression levels of 
ManLAM-related genes (pimB, mptA, mptC, dprE1, dprE2, and embC) were quantified 
by qRT-PCR. Sequence analysis of drug resistance-associated genes (inhA, katG, 
and rpoB) and ManLAM-related genes were performed to establish a correlation 
between genetic variation and gene expression.
RESULTS: INH treatment activates the stress response mechanism in MTB, resulting 
in a distinct gene expression pattern between drug resistance and drug-sensitive 
TB. In response to INH, hspX was up-regulated in RIF-R and MDR. tgs1 was 
strongly up-regulated in MDR, whereas sigE was dramatically up-regulated in the 
drug-sensitive TB. Interestingly, ManLAM-related genes were most up-regulated in 
drug resistance, notably MDR (pimB, mptA, dprE1, and embC), implying a role for 
drug resistance and adaptability of MTB via ManLAM modulation.
CONCLUSION: This study establishes a relationship between the antibiotic stress 
response mechanism and the expression of ManLAM-related genes in MTB samples 
with diverse drug resistance profiles. The novel gene expression pattern in this 
work is valuable knowledge that can be applied for TB monitoring and treatment 
in the future.

© 2022 Yimcharoen et al.

DOI: 10.2147/IDR.S346869
PMCID: PMC8828085
PMID: 35153492

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.