1. ESMO Open. 2022 Feb;7(1):100396. doi: 10.1016/j.esmoop.2022.100396. Epub 2022 
Feb 12.

Association of differential expression of immunoregulatory molecules and 
presence of targetable mutations may inform rational design of clinical trials.

Szeto CW(1), Kurzrock R(2), Kato S(3), Goloubev A(4), Veerapaneni S(1), Preble 
A(1), Reddy SK(1), Adashek JJ(5).

Author information:
(1)NantHealth Inc, Santa Cruz, USA.
(2)WIN Consortium for Precision Medicine, San Diego. Electronic address: 
teoam2011@gmail.com.
(3)Center for Personalized Cancer Therapy and Division of Hematology and 
Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of California San Diego Moores 
Cancer Center, La Jolla, USA.
(4)Morsani College of Medicine, University of South Florida, Tampa, USA.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, University of South Florida, Tampa, USA. 
Electronic address: jadashek@westernu.edu.

BACKGROUND: Immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) and genomic biomarker-driven 
targeted therapies have revolutionized the modern oncologic treatment arsenal. 
The next step has been to combine targeted agents and ICIs. In doing so, some 
combination regimens may be more logical than others.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Whole-exome and whole-transcriptome sequencing were 
performed on 2739 unselected later-stage clinical cases from 24 solid tumor 
subtypes in the NantHealth database, and data were also curated from 5746 
similarly sequenced patients across 28 solid tumor subtypes in The Cancer Genome 
Atlas (TCGA). Significant differential expression of 10 immunoregulatory 
molecules [IRMs (genes)] was analyzed for association with mutant versus 
wild-type genes.
RESULTS: Twenty-three significant associations between currently actionable 
variants and RNA-expressed checkpoint genes were identified in the TCGA cases; 
10 were validated in the external cohort of 2739 clinical cases from NantHealth 
(P values were adjusted using Benjamini-Hochberg multiple hypothesis correction 
to reduce false-discovery rate). Within the same 5746 TCGA profiles, 2740 TCGA 
patients were identified as having one or more potentially oncogenic 
single-nucleotide variant (SNV) mutation within an established 50-gene hotspot 
panel. Of the 50 genes, SNVs within 15 were found to be significantly associated 
with differential expression of at least one IRM after adjusting for tissue 
enrichment; six were confirmed significant associations in an independent set of 
2739 clinical cases from NantHealth.
CONCLUSIONS: Logically combining ICIs with targeted therapies may offer unique 
treatment strategies for patients with cancer. The presence of specific 
mutations impacts the expression of IRMs, an observation of potential importance 
for selecting combinations of gene- and immune-targeted therapeutics.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.esmoop.2022.100396
PMCID: PMC8850727
PMID: 35158206 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure JJA and AG have no disclosures. CWS, 
SV, AP, and SKR are employees of NantHealth. SK consults for Foundation 
Medicine; reports speaker’s fee from Roche, and research grant from ACT 
Genomics, Sysmex, Konica Minolta, and OmniSeq. RK has research funding from 
Incyte, Genentech, Merck Serono, Pfizer, Sequenom, Foundation Medicine, Guardant 
Health, Grifols, Boehringer Ingelheim, and Konica Minolta, as well as receiving 
consultant and/or speaker fees from LOXO, X-Biotech, Actuate Therapeutics, 
Genentech, Pfizer, Roche, and NeoMed. RK has an equity interest in IDbyDNA and 
CureMatch, Inc and is a board member of CureMatch and CureMetrix and a 
co-founder of CureMatch.