1. Proteins. 2022 Jul;90(7):1390-1412. doi: 10.1002/prot.26321. Epub 2022 Feb 26.

Can the jigsaw puzzle model of protein folding re-assemble a hydrophobic core?

Biswas G(1)(2), Ghosh S(1), Basu S(1), Bhattacharyya D(1)(2), Datta AK(3), 
Banerjee R(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics, Kolkata, India.
(2)Homi Bhabha National Institute, Mumbai, India.
(3)Indian Institute of Chemical Biology, Kolkata, India.

According to the "jigsaw puzzle" model of protein folding, the isomorphism 
between sequence and structure is substantially determined by the specific 
geometry of side-chain interactions, within the protein interior. In this work, 
we have attempted to predict the hydrophobic core of cyclophilin (LdCyp) from 
Leishmania donovani, utilizing a surface complementarity function, which selects 
for high goodness of fit between hydrophobic side-chain surfaces, rather in the 
manner of assembling a three-dimensional jigsaw puzzle. The computational core 
prediction method implemented here has been tried on two distinct scenarios, on 
the LdCyp polypeptide chain with native non-core residues and all core residues 
initially set to alanine, on a poly-glycine polypeptide chain. Molecular 
dynamics simulations appeared to indicate partial destabilization of the two 
designed sequences. However, experimental characterization of the designed 
sequences by circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy and denaturant (GdmCl) induced 
unfolding, demonstrated disordered proteins. Stepwise reconstruction of the 
designed cores by cumulative sequential mutations identified the specific 
mutation (M122L) as primarily responsible for fold collapse and all design 
objectives were achieved upon rectifying this mutation. In summary, the study 
demonstrates regions of the core to contain highly specific (jigsaw puzzle-like) 
interactions sensitive to any perturbations and a predictive algorithm to 
identify such regions. A mutation within the core has been identified which 
exercises an inordinate influence on the global fold, reminiscent of metamorphic 
proteins. In addition, the computational procedure could predict substantial 
regions of the core (given main-chain coordinates) without any reference to 
non-core residues.

© 2022 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/prot.26321
PMID: 35157344 [Indexed for MEDLINE]