1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Jan 25;23(3):1330. doi: 10.3390/ijms23031330.

A Systematic Review of Expression and Immunogenicity of Human Endogenous 
Retroviral Proteins in Cancer and Discussion of Therapeutic Approaches.

Müller MD(1), Holst PJ(2), Nielsen KN(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Immunology and Microbiology, University of Copenhagen, 
Blegdamsvej 3, 2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark.
(2)InProTher ApS, Ole Maaløes Vej 3, 2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark.

Human endogenous retroviruses (HERVs) are remnants of ancient retroviral 
infections that have become fixed in the human genome. While HERV genes are 
typically silenced in healthy somatic cells, there are numerous reports of HERV 
transcription and translation across a wide spectrum of cancers, while T and B 
cell responses against HERV proteins have been detected in cancer patients. This 
review systematically categorizes the published evidence on the expression of 
and adaptive immune response against specific HERVs in distinct cancer types. A 
systematic literature search was performed using Medical Search Headings (MeSH) 
in the PubMed/Medline database. Papers were included if they described the 
translational activity of HERVs. We present multiple tables that pair the 
protein expression of specific HERVs and cancer types with information on the 
quality of the evidence. We find that HERV-K is the most investigated HERV. 
HERV-W (syncytin-1) is the second-most investigated, while other HERVs have 
received less attention. From a therapeutic perspective, HERV-K and HERV-E are 
the only HERVs with experimental demonstration of effective targeted therapies, 
but unspecific approaches using antiviral and demethylating agents in 
combination with chemo- and immunotherapies have also been investigated.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms23031330
PMCID: PMC8836156
PMID: 35163254 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: P.J.H. is the inventor of a patent detailing the 
use of virus-like-vaccines against HERVs in cancer. The right to use the patent 
is licensed to InProTher ApS, of which author P.J.H. is the founder, major 
shareholder, board member and employee. The authors M.D.M. and K.N.N. are 
currently or previously employed by the company InProTher ApS. The authors 
declare no other conflicts of interest.