1. PLoS One. 2022 Feb 18;17(2):e0258054. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258054. 
eCollection 2022.

SGLT2 inhibitors therapy protects glucotoxicity-induced β-cell failure in a 
mouse model of human KATP-induced diabetes through mitigation of oxidative and 
ER stress.

Shyr ZA(1)(2), Yan Z(1)(2), Ustione A(3), Egan EM(1), Remedi MS(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Lipid Research, Department of 
Medicine, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri, United States 
of America.
(2)Center for the Investigation of Membrane Excitability Diseases, Washington 
University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri, United States of America.
(3)Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, Washington University in St. 
Louis, St. Louis, Missouri, United States of America.

Progressive loss of pancreatic β-cell functional mass and anti-diabetic drug 
responsivity are classic findings in diabetes, frequently attributed to 
compensatory insulin hypersecretion and β-cell exhaustion. However, loss of 
β-cell mass and identity still occurs in mouse models of human 
KATP-gain-of-function induced Neonatal Diabetes Mellitus (NDM), in the absence 
of insulin secretion. Here we studied the temporal progression and mechanisms 
underlying glucotoxicity-induced loss of functional β-cell mass in NDM mice, and 
the effects of sodium-glucose transporter 2 inhibitors (SGLT2i) therapy. Upon 
tamoxifen induction of transgene expression, NDM mice rapidly developed severe 
diabetes followed by an unexpected loss of insulin content, decreased proinsulin 
processing and increased proinsulin at 2-weeks of diabetes. These early events 
were accompanied by a marked increase in β-cell oxidative and ER stress, without 
changes in islet cell identity. Strikingly, treatment with the SGLT2 inhibitor 
dapagliflozin restored insulin content, decreased proinsulin:insulin ratio and 
reduced oxidative and ER stress. However, despite reduction of blood glucose, 
dapagliflozin therapy was ineffective in restoring β-cell function in NDM mice 
when it was initiated at >40 days of diabetes, when loss of β-cell mass and 
identity had already occurred. Our data from mouse models demonstrate that: i) 
hyperglycemia per se, and not insulin hypersecretion, drives β-cell failure in 
diabetes, ii) recovery of β-cell function by SGLT2 inhibitors is potentially 
through reduction of oxidative and ER stress, iii) SGLT2 inhibitors 
revert/prevent β-cell failure when used in early stages of diabetes, but not 
when loss of β-cell mass/identity already occurred, iv) common execution 
pathways may underlie loss and recovery of β-cell function in different forms of 
diabetes. These results may have important clinical implications for optimal 
therapeutic interventions in individuals with diabetes, particularly for those 
with long-standing diabetes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258054
PMCID: PMC8856523
PMID: 35180212 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.