1. Cancer Metab. 2022 Feb 21;10(1):5. doi: 10.1186/s40170-022-00282-z.

Effects of hyperinsulinemia on pancreatic cancer development and the immune 
microenvironment revealed through single-cell transcriptomics.

Zhang AMY(1), Chu KH(1), Daly BF(1), Ruiter T(1), Dou Y(1), Yang JCC(1), de 
Winter TJJ(1), Chhuor J(1), Wang S(1), Flibotte S(2), Zhao YB(3), Hu X(1), Li 
H(1), Rideout EJ(1), Schaeffer DF(4), Johnson JD(5), Kopp JL(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular and Physiological Sciences, Life Sciences Institute, 
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.
(2)Life Sciences Institute Bioinformatics Core Facility, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.
(3)Biomedical Research Centre, School of Biomedical Engineering, University of 
British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.
(4)Department of Pathology and Laboratory and Medicine, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(5)Department of Cellular and Physiological Sciences, Life Sciences Institute, 
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada. james.d.johnson@ubc.ca.
(6)Department of Cellular and Physiological Sciences, Life Sciences Institute, 
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada. janel.kopp@ubc.ca.

BACKGROUND: Hyperinsulinemia is independently associated with increased risk and 
mortality of pancreatic cancer. We recently reported that genetically reduced 
insulin production resulted in ~ 50% suppression of pancreatic intraepithelial 
neoplasia (PanIN) precancerous lesions in mice. However, only female mice 
remained normoglycemic, and only the gene dosage of the rodent-specific Ins1 
alleles was tested in our previous model. Moreover, we did not delve into the 
molecular and cellular mechanisms associated with modulating hyperinsulinemia.
METHODS: We studied how reduced Ins2 gene dosage affects PanIN lesion 
development in both male and female Ptf1aCreER;KrasLSL-G12D mice lacking the 
rodent-specific Ins1 gene (Ins1-/-). We generated control mice having two 
alleles of the wild-type Ins2 gene (Ptf1aCreER;KrasLSL-G12D;Ins1-/-;Ins2+/+) and 
experimental mice having one allele of Ins2 gene 
(Ptf1aCreER;KrasLSL-G12D;Ins1-/-;Ins2+/-). We then performed thorough 
histopathological analyses and single-cell transcriptomics for both genotypes 
and sexes.
RESULTS: High-fat diet-induced hyperinsulinemia was transiently or modestly 
reduced in female and male mice, respectively, with only one allele of Ins2. 
This occurred without dramatically affecting glucose tolerance. Genetic 
reduction of insulin production resulted in mice with a tendency for less PanIN 
and acinar-to-ductal metaplasia (ADM) lesions. Using single-cell 
transcriptomics, we found hyperinsulinemia affected multiple cell types in the 
pancreas, with the most statistically significant effects on local immune cell 
types that were highly represented in our sampled cell population. Specifically, 
hyperinsulinemia modulated pathways associated with protein translation, 
MAPK-ERK signaling, and PI3K-AKT signaling, which were changed in epithelial 
cells and subsets of immune cells.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest a potential role for the immune microenvironment 
in hyperinsulinemia-driven PanIN development. Together with our previous work, 
we propose that mild suppression of insulin levels may be useful in preventing 
pancreatic cancer by acting on multiple cell types.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40170-022-00282-z
PMCID: PMC8862319
PMID: 35189981

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.