1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2022 Feb 3;12:798866. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2021.798866. eCollection 2021.

Follicle-Stimulating Hormone Induces Lipid Droplets via Gαi/o and β-Arrestin in 
an Endometrial Cancer Cell Line.

Sayers NS(1), Anujan P(1), Yu HN(2), Palmer SS(3), Nautiyal J(4), Franks S(1), 
Hanyaloglu AC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Metabolism, Digestion and Reproduction, Institute of 
Reproductive and Developmental Biology, Imperial College London, London, United 
Kingdom.
(2)CanWell Pharma Inc., Wellesley, MA, United States.
(3)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, 
TX, United States.
(4)Department of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College London, London, United 
Kingdom.

Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and its G protein-coupled receptor, FSHR, 
represents a paradigm for receptor signaling systems that activate multiple and 
complex pathways. Classically, FSHR activates Gαs to increase intracellular 
levels of cAMP, but its ability to activate other G proteins, and 
β-arrestin-mediated signaling is well documented in many different cell systems. 
The pleiotropic signal capacity of FSHR offers a mechanism for how FSH drives 
multiple and dynamic downstream functions in both gonadal and non-gonadal cell 
types, including distinct diseases, and how signal bias may be achieved at a 
pharmacological and cell system-specific manner. In this study, we identify an 
additional mechanism of FSH-mediated signaling and downstream function in the 
endometrial adenocarcinoma Ishikawa cell line. While FSH did not induce 
increases in cAMP levels, this hormone potently activated pertussis toxin 
sensitive Gαi/o signaling. A selective allosteric FSHR ligand, B3, also 
activated Gαi/o signaling in these cells, supporting a role for 
receptor-mediated activation despite the low levels of FSHR mRNA. The low 
expression levels may attribute to the lack of Gαs/cAMP signaling as increasing 
FSHR expression resulted in FSH-mediated activation of the Gαs pathway. Unlike 
prior reports for FSH-mediated Gαs/cAMP signaling, FSH-mediated Gαi/o signaling 
was not affected by inhibition of dynamin-dependent receptor internalization. 
While chronic FSH did not alter cell viability, FSH was able to increase lipid 
droplet size. The β-arrestins are key adaptor proteins known to regulate FSHR 
signaling. Indeed, a rapid, FSH-dependent increase in interactions between 
β-arrestin1 and Gαi1 was observed via NanoBiT complementation in Ishikawa cells. 
Furthermore, both inhibition of Gαi/o signaling and siRNA knockdown of 
β-arrestin 1/2 significantly reduced FSH-induced lipid droplet accumulation, 
implying a role for a Gαi/o/β-arrestin complex in FSH functions in this cell 
type. As FSH/FSHR has been implicated in distinct hormone-dependent cancers, 
including endometrial cancer, analysis of the cancer genome database from 575 
human endometrial adenocarcinoma tumors revealed that a subpopulation of samples 
expressed FSHR. Overall, this study highlights a novel mechanism for FSHR signal 
pleiotropy that may be exploited for future personalized therapeutic approaches.

Copyright © 2022 Sayers, Anujan, Yu, Palmer, Nautiyal, Franks and Hanyaloglu.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2021.798866
PMCID: PMC8850301
PMID: 35185785 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: HY and SP were employees of TocopheRx when 
sharing the compound. HY is employed by the company CanWell Pharma Inc. The 
remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any 
commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential 
conflict of interest.