1. Transl Psychiatry. 2022 Feb 23;12(1):77. doi: 10.1038/s41398-022-01846-9.

Psilocin acutely alters sleep-wake architecture and cortical brain activity in 
laboratory mice.

Thomas CW(1), Blanco-Duque C(1), Bréant BJ(1), Goodwin GM(2), Sharp T(3), 
Bannerman DM(4), Vyazovskiy VV(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
UK.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(4)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(5)Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
UK. vladyslav.vyazovskiy@dpag.ox.ac.uk.

Serotonergic psychedelic drugs, such as psilocin 
(4-hydroxy-N,N-dimethyltryptamine), profoundly alter the quality of 
consciousness through mechanisms which are incompletely understood. Growing 
evidence suggests that a single psychedelic experience can positively impact 
long-term psychological well-being, with relevance for the treatment of 
psychiatric disorders, including depression. A prominent factor associated with 
psychiatric disorders is disturbed sleep, and the sleep-wake cycle is implicated 
in the homeostatic regulation of neuronal activity and synaptic plasticity. 
However, it remains largely unknown to what extent psychedelic agents directly 
affect sleep, in terms of both acute arousal and homeostatic sleep regulation. 
Here, chronic electrophysiological recordings were obtained in mice to track 
sleep-wake architecture and cortical activity after psilocin injection. 
Administration of psilocin led to delayed REM sleep onset and reduced NREM sleep 
maintenance for up to approximately 3 h after dosing, and the acute EEG response 
was associated primarily with an enhanced oscillation around 4 Hz. No long-term 
changes in sleep-wake quantity were found. When combined with sleep deprivation, 
psilocin did not alter the dynamics of homeostatic sleep rebound during the 
subsequent recovery period, as reflected in both sleep amount and EEG slow-wave 
activity. However, psilocin decreased the recovery rate of sleep slow-wave 
activity following sleep deprivation in the local field potentials of electrodes 
targeting the medial prefrontal and surrounding cortex. It is concluded that 
psilocin affects both global vigilance state control and local sleep 
homeostasis, an effect which may be relevant for its antidepressant efficacy.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41398-022-01846-9
PMCID: PMC8866416
PMID: 35197453 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.