1. Biomedicines. 2022 Feb 17;10(2):468. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines10020468.

The Autoantibodies against Tumor-Associated Antigens as Potential Blood-Based 
Biomarkers in Thyroid Neoplasia: Rationales, Opportunities and Challenges.

Belousov PV(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)National Center for Personalized Medicine of Endocrine Diseases, National 
Medical Research Center for Endocrinology, Ministry of Health of the Russian 
Federation, 117036 Moscow, Russia.
(2)Center for Precision Genome Editing and Genetic Technologies for Biomedicine, 
Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences, 119991 
Moscow, Russia.

The Autoantibodies targeting Tumor-Associated Antigens (TAA-AAbs) emerge as a 
result of a variety of tumor-related immunogenic stimuli and may be regarded as 
the eyewitnesses to the anti-tumor immune response. TAA-AAbs may be readily 
detected in peripheral blood to unveil the presence of a particular 
TAA-expressing tumor, and a fair number of TAAs eliciting the tumor-associated 
autoantibody response have been identified. The potential of TAA-AAbs as tumor 
biomarkers has been extensively studied in many human malignancies with a major 
influence on public health; however, tumors of the endocrine system, and, in 
particular, the well-differentiated follicular cell-derived thyroid neoplasms, 
remain understudied in this context. This review provides a detailed perspective 
on and legitimate rationales for the potential use of TAA-AAbs in thyroid 
neoplasia, with particular reference to the already established diagnostic 
implications of the TAA-AAbs in human cancer, to the windows for improvement and 
diagnostic niches in the current workup strategies in nodular thyroid disease 
and differentiated thyroid cancer that TAA-AAbs may successfully occupy, as well 
as to the proof-of-concept studies demonstrating the usefulness of TAA-AAbs in 
thyroid oncology, particularly for the pre-surgical discrimination between 
tumors of different malignant potential in the context of the indeterminate 
results of the fine-needle aspiration cytology.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines10020468
PMCID: PMC8962333
PMID: 35203677

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares no conflict of interest.