1. Am J Cardiol. 2022 May 1;170:118-127. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2022.01.030. Epub
 2022 Feb 24.

Serial Assessment of Myocardial Injury Markers in Mechanically Ventilated 
Patients With SARS-CoV-2 (from the Prospective MaastrICCht Cohort).

Ghossein MA(1), Driessen RGH(2), van Rosmalen F(3), Sels JEM(4), Delnoij T(5), 
Geyik Z(5), Mingels AMA(6), van Stipdonk AMW(7), Prinzen FW(1), Ghossein-Doha 
C(8), van Kuijk SMJ(9), van der Horst ICC(10), Vernooy K(11), van Bussel 
BCT(12).

Author information:
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute Maastricht (CARIM), Maastricht University, 
Maastricht, the Netherlands.
(2)Cardiovascular Research Institute Maastricht (CARIM), Maastricht University, 
Maastricht, the Netherlands; Department of Cardiology, Maastricht University 
Medical Centre+, Maastricht, the Netherlands; Department of Intensive Care 
Medicine, Maastricht University Medical Centre+, Maastricht, the Netherlands. 
Electronic address: rob.driessen@mumc.nl.
(3)Department of Intensive Care Medicine, Maastricht University Medical Centre+, 
Maastricht, the Netherlands.
(4)Cardiovascular Research Institute Maastricht (CARIM), Maastricht University, 
Maastricht, the Netherlands; Department of Cardiology, Maastricht University 
Medical Centre+, Maastricht, the Netherlands; Department of Intensive Care 
Medicine, Maastricht University Medical Centre+, Maastricht, the Netherlands.
(5)Department of Cardiology, Maastricht University Medical Centre+, Maastricht, 
the Netherlands; Department of Intensive Care Medicine, Maastricht University 
Medical Centre+, Maastricht, the Netherlands.
(6)Cardiovascular Research Institute Maastricht (CARIM), Maastricht University, 
Maastricht, the Netherlands; Department of Clinical Chemistry, Central 
Diagnostic Laboratory, Maastricht University Medical Centre+, Maastricht, the 
Netherlands.
(7)Cardiovascular Research Institute Maastricht (CARIM), Maastricht University, 
Maastricht, the Netherlands; Department of Cardiology, Maastricht University 
Medical Centre+, Maastricht, the Netherlands.
(8)Cardiovascular Research Institute Maastricht (CARIM), Maastricht University, 
Maastricht, the Netherlands; Department of Cardiology, Maastricht University 
Medical Centre+, Maastricht, the Netherlands; Department of Intensive Care 
Medicine, Maastricht University Medical Centre+, Maastricht, the Netherlands; 
School for Oncology & Developmental Biology (GROW), Maastricht University, 
Maastricht, the Netherlands.
(9)Department of Clinical Epidemiology and Medical Technology Assessment, 
Maastricht University Medical Centre+, Maastricht, the Netherlands.
(10)Cardiovascular Research Institute Maastricht (CARIM), Maastricht University, 
Maastricht, the Netherlands; Department of Intensive Care Medicine, Maastricht 
University Medical Centre+, Maastricht, the Netherlands.
(11)Cardiovascular Research Institute Maastricht (CARIM), Maastricht University, 
Maastricht, the Netherlands; Department of Cardiology, Maastricht University 
Medical Centre+, Maastricht, the Netherlands; Department of Cardiology, Radboud 
University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(12)Department of Intensive Care Medicine, Maastricht University Medical 
Centre+, Maastricht, the Netherlands; Care and Public Health Research Institute 
(CAPHRI), Maastricht University, Maastricht, the Netherlands.

Myocardial injury in COVID-19 is associated with in-hospital mortality. However, 
the development of myocardial injury over time and whether myocardial injury in 
patients with COVID-19 at the intensive care unit is associated with outcome is 
unclear. This study prospectively investigates myocardial injury with serial 
measurements over the full course of intensive care unit admission in 
mechanically ventilated patients with COVID-19. As part of the prospective 
Maastricht Intensive Care COVID cohort, predefined myocardial injury markers, 
including high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T (hs-cTnT), N-terminal pro-B-type 
natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP), and electrocardiographic characteristics were 
serially collected in mechanically ventilated patients with COVID-19. Linear 
mixed-effects regression was used to compare survivors with nonsurvivors, 
adjusting for gender, age, APACHE-II score, daily creatinine concentration, 
hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and obesity. In 90 patients, 57 (63%) were 
survivors and 33 (37%) nonsurvivors, and a total of 628 serial 
electrocardiograms, 1,565 hs-cTnT, and 1,559 NT-proBNP concentrations were 
assessed. Log-hs-cTnT was lower in survivors compared with nonsurvivors at day 1 
(β -0.93 [-1.37; -0.49], p <0.001) and did not change over time. Log-NT-proBNP 
did not differ at day 1 between both groups but decreased over time in the 
survivor group (β -0.08 [-0.11; -0.04] p <0.001) compared with nonsurvivors. 
Many electrocardiographic abnormalities were present in the whole population, 
without significant differences between both groups. In conclusion, baseline 
hs-cTnT and change in NT-proBNP were strongly associated with mortality. 
Two-thirds of patients with COVID-19 showed electrocardiographic abnormalities. 
Our serial assessment suggests that myocardial injury is common in mechanically 
ventilated patients with COVID-19 and is associated with outcome.

Copyright © 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2022.01.030
PMCID: PMC8867902
PMID: 35221103 [Indexed for MEDLINE]