1. Front Mol Biosci. 2022 Feb 14;9:830006. doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2022.830006. 
eCollection 2022.

Amyloid Formation by Globular Proteins: The Need to Narrow the Gap Between in 
Vitro and in Vivo Mechanisms.

Faravelli G(1), Mondani V(1), Mangione PP(1)(2), Raimondi S(1), Marchese L(1), 
Lavatelli F(1), Stoppini M(1), Corazza A(3)(4), Canetti D(2), Verona G(2), Obici 
L(5), Taylor GW(2), Gillmore JD(6), Giorgetti S(1)(4), Bellotti V(1)(2)(4)(7).

Author information:
(1)Unit of Biochemistry, Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, 
Pavia, Italy.
(2)Wolfson Drug Discovery Unit, Division of Medicine, Centre for Amyloidosis and 
Acute Phase Proteins, University College London, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Medicine (DAME), University of Udine, Udine, Italy.
(4)Istituto Nazionale Biostrutture e Biosistemi, Rome, Italy.
(5)Amyloidosis Research and Treatment Centre, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San 
Matteo, Pavia, Italy.
(6)National Amyloidosis Centre, University College London and Royal Free 
Hospital, London, United Kingdom.
(7)Scientific Direction, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy.

The globular to fibrillar transition of proteins represents a key pathogenic 
event in the development of amyloid diseases. Although systemic amyloidoses 
share the common characteristic of amyloid deposition in the extracellular 
matrix, they are clinically heterogeneous as the affected organs may vary. The 
observation that precursors of amyloid fibrils derived from circulating globular 
plasma proteins led to huge efforts in trying to elucidate the structural events 
determining the protein metamorphosis from their globular to fibrillar state. 
Whereas the process of metamorphosis has inspired poets and writers from Ovid to 
Kafka, protein metamorphism is a more recent concept. It is an ideal metaphor in 
biochemistry for studying the protein folding paradigm and investigating 
determinants of folding dynamics. Although we have learned how to transform both 
normal and pathogenic globular proteins into fibrillar polymers in vitro, the 
events occurring in vivo, are far more complex and yet to be explained. A major 
gap still exists between in vivo and in vitro models of fibrillogenesis as the 
biological complexity of the disease in living organisms cannot be reproduced at 
the same extent in the test tube. Reviewing the major scientific attempts to 
monitor the amyloidogenic metamorphosis of globular proteins in systems of 
increasing complexity, from cell culture to human tissues, may help to bridge 
the gap between the experimental models and the actual pathological events in 
patients.

Copyright © 2022 Faravelli, Mondani, Mangione, Raimondi, Marchese, Lavatelli, 
Stoppini, Corazza, Canetti, Verona, Obici, Taylor, Gillmore, Giorgetti and 
Bellotti.

DOI: 10.3389/fmolb.2022.830006
PMCID: PMC8883118
PMID: 35237660

Conflict of interest statement: For sake of clarity, we would like to disclose 
the following: research grant (2021–2023) from Pfizer (DC and VB); speaker and 
consulting honoraria from Alnylam, Pfizer, Akcea and SOBI (LO); participation to 
advisory boards for Pfizer, Alnylam Pharmaceuticals Inc. (VB and JG) and Eidos, 
Ionis, Intellia (JG). VB, GT, and PM are authors of a patent for ATTR 
amyloidosis agents. The remaining authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.