1. Cell Mol Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2022;13(6):1785-1804. doi: 
10.1016/j.jcmgh.2022.02.018. Epub 2022 Mar 5.

Coordinated Cross-Talk Between the Myc and Mlx Networks in Liver Regeneration 
and Neoplasia.

Wang H(1), Lu J(1), Alencastro F(2), Roberts A(1), Fiedor J(1), Carroll P(3), 
Eisenman RN(3), Ranganathan S(4), Torbenson M(5), Duncan AW(6), Prochownik 
EV(7).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, 
University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania; McGowan Institute for Regenerative Medicine, University of 
Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(3)Basic Sciences Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, 
Washington.
(4)Department of Pathology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital, Cincinnati, Ohio.
(5)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, The Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
Minnesota.
(6)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania; McGowan Institute for Regenerative Medicine, University of 
Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; Pittsburgh Liver Research 
Center, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(7)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, 
University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; Pittsburgh 
Liver Research Center, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; 
Hillman Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, 
University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Electronic 
address: procev@chp.edu.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The c-Myc (Myc) Basic helix-loop-helix leucine zipper 
(bHLH-ZIP) transcription factor is deregulated in most cancers. In association 
with Max, Myc controls target genes that supervise metabolism, ribosome 
biogenesis, translation, and proliferation. This Myc network crosstalks with the 
Mlx network, which consists of the Myc-like proteins MondoA and ChREBP, and 
Max-like Mlx. Together, this extended Myc network regulates both common and 
distinct gene targets. Here, we studied the consequence of Myc and/or Mlx 
ablation in the liver, particularly those pertaining to hepatocyte 
proliferation, metabolism, and spontaneous tumorigenesis.
METHODS: We examined the ability of hepatocytes lacking Mlx (MlxKO) or Myc+Mlx 
(double KO [DKO]) to repopulate the liver over an extended period of time in a 
murine model of type I tyrosinemia. We also compared this and other relevant 
behaviors, phenotypes, and transcriptomes of the livers with those from 
previously characterized MycKO, ChrebpKO, and MycKO × ChrebpKO mice.
RESULTS: Hepatocyte regenerative potential deteriorated as the Extended Myc 
Network was progressively dismantled. Genes and pathways dysregulated in MlxKO 
and DKO hepatocytes included those pertaining to translation, mitochondrial 
function, and hepatic steatosis resembling nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. The 
Myc and Mlx Networks were shown to crosstalk, with the latter playing a 
disproportionate role in target gene regulation. All cohorts also developed 
steatosis and molecular evidence of early steatohepatitis. Finally, MlxKO and 
DKO mice showed extensive hepatic adenomatosis.
CONCLUSIONS: In addition to showing cooperation between the Myc and Mlx 
Networks, this study showed the latter to be more important in maintaining 
proliferative, metabolic, and translational homeostasis, while concurrently 
serving as a suppressor of benign tumorigenesis. GEO accession numbers: 
GSE181371, GSE130178, and GSE114634.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcmgh.2022.02.018
PMCID: PMC9046243
PMID: 35259493 [Indexed for MEDLINE]