1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2022 Feb 16;10:812728. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2022.812728. 
eCollection 2022.

Autophagy in the Neuronal Ceroid Lipofuscinoses (Batten Disease).

Kim WD(1), Wilson-Smillie MLDM(1), Thanabalasingam A(1), Lefrancois S(2)(3)(4), 
Cotman SL(5), Huber RJ(6).

Author information:
(1)Environmental and Life Sciences Graduate Program, Trent University, 
Peterborough, ON, Canada.
(2)Centre Armand-Frappier Santé Biotechnologie, Institut National de La 
Recherche Scientifique, Laval, QC, Canada.
(3)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, McGill University, Montreal, QC, 
Canada.
(4)Centre D'Excellence en Recherche sur Les Maladies Orphelines-Fondation 
Courtois (CERMO-FC), Université Du Québec à Montréal (UQAM), Montréal, QC, 
Canada.
(5)Department of Neurology, Center for Genomic Medicine, Massachusetts General 
Hospital Research Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States.
(6)Department of Biology, Trent University, Peterborough, ON, Canada.

The neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCLs), also referred to as Batten disease, 
are a family of neurodegenerative diseases that affect all age groups and 
ethnicities around the globe. At least a dozen NCL subtypes have been identified 
that are each linked to a mutation in a distinct ceroid lipofuscinosis neuronal 
(CLN) gene. Mutations in CLN genes cause the accumulation of autofluorescent 
lipoprotein aggregates, called ceroid lipofuscin, in neurons and other cell 
types outside the central nervous system. The mechanisms regulating the 
accumulation of this material are not entirely known. The CLN genes encode 
cytosolic, lysosomal, and integral membrane proteins that are associated with a 
variety of cellular processes, and accumulated evidence suggests they 
participate in shared or convergent biological pathways. Research across a 
variety of non-mammalian and mammalian model systems clearly supports an effect 
of CLN gene mutations on autophagy, suggesting that autophagy plays an essential 
role in the development and progression of the NCLs. In this review, we 
summarize research linking the autophagy pathway to the NCLs to guide future 
work that further elucidates the contribution of altered autophagy to NCL 
pathology.

Copyright © 2022 Kim, Wilson-Smillie, Thanabalasingam, Lefrancois, Cotman and 
Huber.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2022.812728
PMCID: PMC8888908
PMID: 35252181

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.