1. Cancer Lett. 2022 May 28;534:215612. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2022.215612. Epub 
2022 Mar 5.

ETS-related gene (ERG) undermines genome stability in mouse prostate progenitors 
via Gsk3β dependent Nkx3.1 degradation.

Lorenzoni M(1), De Felice D(1), Beccaceci G(1), Di Donato G(1), Foletto V(1), 
Genovesi S(1), Bertossi A(1), Cambuli F(1), Lorenzin F(1), Savino A(2), Avalle 
L(2), Cimadamore A(3), Montironi R(4), Weber V(5), Carbone FG(5), Barbareschi 
M(5), Demichelis F(1), Romanel A(1), Poli V(2), Del Sal G(6), Julio MK(7), 
Gaspari M(8), Alaimo A(9), Lunardi A(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular, Computational and Integrative Biology-CIBIO, 
University of Trento, Trento, Italy.
(2)Department of Molecular Biotechnology and Health Sciences, University of 
Torino, Torino, Italy.
(3)Pathological Anatomy, School of Medicine, United Hospitals, Polytechnic 
University of the Marche Region, Ancona, Italy.
(4)Molecular Medicine and Cell Therapy Foundation, Polytechnic University of the 
Marche Region, Via Tronto, 10, Ancona, Italy.
(5)Unit of Surgical Pathology, Santa Chiara Hospital, Trento, Italy.
(6)University of Trieste Department Life Sciences, ICGEB-Area Science Park 
Trieste, IFOM, Milan, Italy.
(7)Urology Research Laboratory, Department for BioMedical Research DBMR, 
University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland; Translational Organoid Resource CORE, 
Department for BioMedical Research, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland; Bern 
Center for Precision Medicine, Inselspital, University Hospital of Bern, Bern, 
Switzerland; Department of Urology, Inselspital, University Hospital of Bern, 
Bern, Switzerland.
(8)Research Centre for Advanced Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Department 
of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, Magna Graecia University of Catanzaro, 
Catanzaro, Italy. Electronic address: gaspari@unicz.it.
(9)Department of Cellular, Computational and Integrative Biology-CIBIO, 
University of Trento, Trento, Italy. Electronic address: 
alessandro.alaimo@unitn.it.
(10)Department of Cellular, Computational and Integrative Biology-CIBIO, 
University of Trento, Trento, Italy. Electronic address: 
andrea.lunardi@unitn.it.

21q22.2-3 deletion is the most common copy number alteration in prostate cancer 
(PCa). The genomic rearrangement results in the androgen-dependent de novo 
expression of ETS-related gene (ERG) in prostate cancer cells, a condition 
promoting tumor progression to advanced stages of the disease. Interestingly, 
ERG expression characterizes 5-30% of tumor precursor lesions - High Grade 
Prostatic Intraepithelial Neoplasia (HGPIN) - where its role remains unclear. 
Here, by combining organoids technology with Click-chemistry coupled Mass 
Spectrometry, we demonstrate a prominent role of ERG in remodeling the protein 
secretome of prostate progenitors. Functionally, by lowering autocrine Wnt-4 
signaling, ERG represses canonical Wnt pathway in prostate progenitors, and, in 
turn, promotes the accumulation of DNA double strand breaks via Gsk3β-dependent 
degradation of the tumor suppressor Nkx3.1. On the other hand, by shaping 
extracellular paracrine signals, ERG strengthens the pro-oxidative 
transcriptional signature of inflammatory macrophages, which we demonstrate to 
infiltrate pre-malignant ERG positive prostate lesions. These findings highlight 
previously unrecognized functions of ERG in undermining adult prostate 
progenitor niche through cell autonomous and non-autonomous mechanisms. Overall, 
by supporting the survival and proliferation of prostate progenitors in the 
absence of growth stimuli and promoting the accumulation of DNA damage through 
destabilization of Nkx3.1, ERG could orchestrate the prelude to neoplastic 
transformation.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.canlet.2022.215612
PMCID: PMC8968219
PMID: 35259458 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.