1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2022 Feb 18;10:793566. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2022.793566. 
eCollection 2022.

Bioimpedance Phase Angle as a Prognostic Tool in Late-Onset Pompe Disease: A 
Single-Centre Prospective Study With a 15-year Follow-Up.

Ravaglia S(1), de Giuseppe R(2), Carlucci A(3)(4), Jehne S(5), Crescimanno G(6), 
Ahmad L(1), Paoletti M(1), Clemente G(1), Pichiecchio A(1), Bazzano R(2), Cirio 
S(3)(4), Valente EM(1), Danesino C(7), De Filippi P(1), Tartara A(2), Cena 
H(2)(8).

Author information:
(1)IRCCS Mondino Foundation, Pavia, Italy.
(2)Laboratory of Dietetics and Clinical Nutrition, Department of Public Health, 
Experimental and Forensic Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
(3)Pneumologia Riabilitativa, IRCCS Istituti Clinici Scientifici Maugeri, Pavia, 
Italy.
(4)Dipartimento di Medicina e Chirurgia, Università dell'Insubria, Varese, 
Italy.
(5)Oberhavel Kliniken-Marwitzer Hennigsdorf, Hennigsdorf, Germany.
(6)Italian National Research Council, Institute for Biomedical Research and 
Innovation, Palermo, Italy Regional Center for Prevention and Treatment of 
Respiratory Complications of Rare Genetic Neuromuscular Diseases, Villa 
Sofia-Cervello Hospital, Palermo, Italy.
(7)Department of Molecular Medicine, IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, University of 
Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
(8)Clinical Nutrition and Dietetics Service, Unit of Internal Medicine and 
Endocrinology, ICS Maugeri IRCCS, Pavia, Italy.

Background: Late-onset Pompe disease (LOPD) is an autosomal-recessive metabolic 
myopathy caused by deficiency of the lysosomal enzyme Acid Alpha-Glucosidase 
(GAA), leading to glycogen accumulation in proximal and axial muscles, and in 
the diaphragm. Enzyme Replacement Therapy (ERT) with recombinant GAA became 
available in 2006. Since then, several outcome measures have been investigated 
for the adequate follow-up of disease progression and treatment response, 
usually focusing on respiratory and motor function. Prognostic factors 
predicting outcome have not been identified till now. Methods: In this single 
Centre, prospective study, we evaluate the response to enzyme replacement 
therapy in 15 patients (7 males) with LOPD in different stages of disease, aged 
49.4 ± 16.1, followed-up for 15 years. Treatment response was measured by the 
6-min walking test, vital capacity in supine and upright position, respiratory 
muscle strength, muscle MRI, manual muscle testing. We investigated the 
usefulness of Body Impedance Vectorial Analysis for serial body composition 
assessment. Results: Although most patients with LOPD benefit from long-term 
treatment, some secondary decline may occur after the first 3-5 years. Some 
nutritional (lower body mass index, higher fat free mass, higher phase angle) 
and disease parameters (higher creatinine and shorter disease duration at the 
beginning of treatment) seem to predict a better motor outcome. Lower Phase 
Angle, possibly reflecting loss of integrity of skeletal muscle membranes and 
thus treatment mis-targeting, seems to correlate with worse treatment response 
on long-term follow-up. Conclusion: Body Impedance Vectorial Analysis is a fast, 
easily performed and cheap tool that may be able to predict long-term treatment 
response in patients with LOPD. Low Phase angle may serve as a marker of muscle 
quality and may be used to predict the response to a muscle-targeted 
intervention such as ERT, thus improving the identification of patients needing 
a closer follow-up due to higher fragility and risk of deterioration.

Copyright © 2022 Ravaglia, de Giuseppe, Carlucci, Jehne, Crescimanno, Ahmad, 
Paoletti, Clemente, Pichiecchio, Bazzano, Cirio, Valente, Danesino, De Filippi, 
Tartara and Cena.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2022.793566
PMCID: PMC8896115
PMID: 35252175

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.