1. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2022 May;35(3):342-355. doi: 10.1111/pcmr.13036.
Epub  2022 Mar 20.

Interferon-gamma induces melanogenesis via post-translational regulation of 
tyrosinase.

Mo X(1), Kazmi HR(1), Preston-Alp S(1), Zhou B(1), Zaidi MR(1).

Author information:
(1)Fels Cancer Institute for Personalized Medicine, Lewis Katz School of 
Medicine, Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Melanogenesis (melanin pigment production) in melanocytes is canonically 
stimulated by the alpha melanocyte stimulating hormone (αMSH), which activates 
the cyclic-AMP-mediated expression of the melanocyte inducing transcription 
factor (MITF) and its downstream melanogenic genes, including the principal 
rate-limiting melanogenic enzyme tyrosinase (TYR). Here, we report that 
interferon-gamma (IFNG; type II interferon), but not interferon-alpha (a type I 
interferon), induces a noncanonical melanogenic pathway in mouse and human 
melanocytic cells. Inhibition of IFNG pathway by the JAK1/2 inhibitor 
ruxolitinib or knocking out Stat1 gene abrogated the IFNG-induced melanogenesis. 
Interestingly, IFNG-induced melanogenesis was independent of MITF. IFNG markedly 
increased the TYR protein expression but did not affect the mRNA expression, 
suggesting a post-translational regulatory mechanism. In contrast, IFNG had no 
effect on the expression of other melanogenesis-related proteins, for example, 
tyrosinase-related protein 1 (TYRP1) and dopachrome tautomerase (DCT). 
Glycosidase digestion assays revealed that IFNG treatment increased the mature 
glycosylated form of TYR, but not its de novo synthesis. Moreover, cycloheximide 
chase assay showed that degradation of TYR was decreased in IFNG-treated cells. 
These results suggest that the IFNG-STAT1 pathway regulates melanogenesis via 
regulation of the post-translational processing and protein stability of TYR.

© 2022 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/pcmr.13036
PMCID: PMC9050958
PMID: 35266648 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: The authors have no 
conflicts of interest.