1. Acc Chem Res. 2022 Apr 5;55(7):1059-1073. doi: 10.1021/acs.accounts.2c00041. 
Epub 2022 Mar 10.

Participation of Histones in DNA Damage and Repair within Nucleosome Core 
Particles: Mechanism and Applications.

Ren M(1), Greenberg MM(2), Zhou C(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Elemento-Organic Chemistry and Department of Chemical 
Biology, College of Chemistry, Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Johns Hopkins University, 3400 North Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218, United States.

DNA is damaged by various endogenous and exogenous sources, leading to a diverse 
group of reactive intermediates that yield a complex mixture of products. The 
initially formed products are often metastable and can react to yield lesions 
that are more biologically deleterious. Mechanistic studies are frequently 
carried out on free DNA as the substrate. The observations do not necessarily 
reflect the reaction environment inside human cells where genomic DNA is 
condensed as chromatin in the nucleus. Chromatin is made up of monomeric 
structural units called nucleosomes, which are comprised of DNA wrapped around 
an octameric core of histone proteins (two copies each of histones H2A, H2B, H3, 
and H4).This account presents a summary of our work in the past decade on the 
mechanistic studies of DNA damage and repair in reconstituted nucleosome core 
particles (NCPs). A series of metastable lesions and reactive intermediates, 
such as abasic sites (AP), N7-methyl-2'-deoxyguanosine (MdG), and 
2'-deoxyadenosin-N6-yl radical (dA•), have been independently generated in a 
site-specific manner in bottom-up-synthesized NCPs. Detailed mechanistic studies 
on these NCPs revealed that histones actively participate in DNA damage and 
repair processes in diverse ways. For instance, nucleophilic residues in the 
flexible histone N-terminal tails, such as Lys and N-terminal α-amine, react 
with electrophilic DNA damage and reactive intermediates. In some cases, 
transient intermediates are produced, leading to the promotion or suppression of 
damage and repair processes. In other examples, reactions with histones yield 
reversible or stable DNA-protein cross-links (DPCs). Histones also utilize 
acidic and basic residues, such as histidine and aspartic acid, to catalyze DNA 
strand cleavage through general acid/base catalysis. Alternatively, a Tyr in 
histone plays a vital role in nucleosomal DNA damage and repair via radical 
transfer. Finally, the reactivity discovered during the mechanistic studies has 
facilitated the development of new reagents and methods with applications in 
biotechnology.This research has enriched our knowledge of the roles of histone 
proteins in DNA damage and repair and their contributions to epigenetics and may 
have significant biological implications. The residues in histone N-terminal 
tails that react with DNA lesions also play pivotal roles in regulating the 
structure and function of chromatin, indicating that there may be cross-talk 
between DNA damage and repair in eukaryotic cells and epigenetic regulation. 
Also, in view of the biased amino acid composition of histones, these results 
provide hints about how the proteins have evolved to minimize their deleterious 
effects but maximize beneficial ones for maintaining genome integrity. Finally, 
previously unreported DPCs and histone post-translational modifications have 
been discovered through this research. The effects of these newly identified 
lesions on the structure and function of chromatin and their fates inside cells 
remain to be elucidated.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.accounts.2c00041
PMCID: PMC8983524
PMID: 35271268 [Indexed for MEDLINE]