1. Front Pharmacol. 2022 Mar 1;13:825741. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2022.825741. 
eCollection 2022.

Combined Machine Learning and GRID-Independent Molecular Descriptor (GRIND) 
Models to Probe the Activity Profiles of 5-Lipoxygenase Activating Protein 
Inhibitors.

Khan HA(1), Jabeen I(1).

Author information:
(1)Research Centre for Modelling and Simulation (RCMS), NUST Interdisciplinary 
Cluster for Higher Education (NICHE), National University of Sciences and 
Technology (NUST), Islamabad, Pakistan.

Leukotrienes (LTs) are pro-inflammatory lipid mediators derived from arachidonic 
acid (AA), and their high production has been reported in multiple allergic, 
autoimmune, and cardiovascular disorders. The biological synthesis of 
leukotrienes is instigated by transfer of AA to 5-lipoxygenase (5-LO) via the 
5-lipoxygenase-activating protein (FLAP). Suppression of FLAP can inhibit LT 
production at the earliest level, providing relief to patients requiring 
anti-leukotriene therapy. Over the last 3 decades, several FLAP modulators have 
been synthesized and pharmacologically tested, but none of them could be able to 
reach the market. Therefore, it is highly desirable to unveil the structural 
requirement of FLAP modulators. Here, in this study, supervised machine learning 
techniques and molecular modeling strategies are adapted to vaticinate the 
important 2D and 3D anti-inflammatory properties of structurally diverse FLAP 
inhibitors, respectively. For this purpose, multiple machine learning 
classification models have been developed to reveal the most relevant 2D 
features. Furthermore, to probe the 3D molecular basis of interaction of diverse 
anti-inflammatory compounds with FLAP, molecular docking studies were executed. 
By using the most probable binding poses from docking studies, the GRIND model 
was developed, which indicated the positive contribution of four hydrophobic, 
two hydrogen bond acceptor, and two shape-based features at certain distances 
from each other towards the inhibitory potency of FLAP modulators. Collectively, 
this study sheds light on important two-dimensional and three-dimensional 
structural requirements of FLAP modulators that can potentially guide the 
development of more potent chemotypes for the treatment of inflammatory 
disorders.

Copyright © 2022 Khan and Jabeen.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2022.825741
PMCID: PMC8921698
PMID: 35300294

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.