1. Front Nutr. 2022 Mar 3;9:847635. doi: 10.3389/fnut.2022.847635. eCollection 
2022.

Targeting Induced Local Lesions in the Wheat DEMETER and DRE2 Genes, Responsible 
for Transcriptional Derepression of Wheat Gluten Proteins in the Developing 
Endosperm.

Wen N(1), Osorio CE(1)(2), Brew-Appiah RAT(1), Mejías JH(1)(2), Alam T(3), 
Kashyap S(3), Reinbothe S(4), Reinbothe C(4), Moehs CP(5), von Wettstein D(1), 
Rustgi S(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Crop and Soil Sciences, Washington State University, Pullman, 
WA, United States.
(2)Instituto de Investigaciones Agropecuarias, INIA Carillanca, Temuco, Chile.
(3)Department of Plant and Environmental Sciences, School of Health Research, 
Clemson University Pee Dee Research and Education Centre, Florence, SC, United 
States.
(4)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire des Plantes, Université Grenoble-Alpes, 
BP53F, Grenoble, France.
(5)Arcadia Biosciences, Davis, CA, United States.

Wheat is a major source of energy and nutrition worldwide, but it is also a 
primary cause of frequent diet-induced health issues, specifically celiac 
disease, for which the only effective therapy so far is strict dietary 
abstinence from gluten-containing grains. Wheat gluten proteins are grouped into 
two major categories: high-molecular-weight glutenin subunits (HMWgs), vital for 
mixing and baking properties, and gliadins plus low-molecular-weight glutenin 
subunits (LMWgs) that contain the overwhelming majority of celiac-causing 
epitopes. We put forth a hypothesis that eliminating gliadins and LMWgs while 
retaining HMWgs might allow the development of reduced-immunogenicity wheat 
genotypes relevant to most gluten-sensitive individuals. This hypothesis stems 
from the knowledge that the molecular structures and regulatory mechanisms of 
the genes encoding the two groups of gluten proteins are quite different, and 
blocking one group's transcription, without affecting the other's, is possible. 
The genes for gliadins and LMWgs have to be de-methylated by 5-methylcytosine 
DNA glycosylase/lyase (DEMETER) and an iron-sulfur (Fe-S) cluster biogenesis 
enzyme (DRE2) early during endosperm development to permit their transcription. 
In this study, a TILLING (Targeting Induced Local Lesions IN Genomes) approach 
was undertaken to identify mutations in the homoeologous DEMETER (DME) and DRE2 
genes in common and durum wheat. Lines with mutations in these genes were 
obtained that displayed reduced content of immunogenic gluten proteins while 
retaining essential baking properties. Although our data at first glance suggest 
new possibilities for treating celiac disease and are therefore of medical and 
agronomical interest, it also shows that inducing mutations in the DME and DRE2 
genes analyzed here affected pollen viability and germination. Hence there is a 
need to develop other approaches in the future to overcome this undesired 
effect.

Copyright © 2022 Wen, Osorio, Brew-Appiah, Mejías, Alam, Kashyap, Reinbothe, 
Reinbothe, Moehs, von Wettstein and Rustgi.

DOI: 10.3389/fnut.2022.847635
PMCID: PMC8928260
PMID: 35308262

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.