1. Curr Oncol Rep. 2022 Jul;24(7):843-860. doi: 10.1007/s11912-022-01213-3. Epub 
2022 Mar 23.

Cancer Predisposition Genes in Adolescents and Young Adults (AYAs): a Review 
Paper from the Italian AYA Working Group.

Toss A(#)(1)(2), Quarello P(#)(3)(4), Mascarin M(5), Banna GL(6), Zecca M(7), 
Cinieri S(8), Peccatori FA(#)(9), Ferrari A(#)(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology and Hematology, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di 
Modena, Modena, Italy.
(2)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences for Children and Adults, 
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy.
(3)Paediatric Onco-Haematology, Stem Cell Transplantation and Cellular Therapy 
Division, Regina Margherita Children's Hospital, Turin, Italy.
(4)Department of Public Health and Paediatric Sciences, University of Torino, 
Turin, Italy.
(5)AYA Oncology and Pediatric Radiotherapy Unit, Centro di Riferimento 
Oncologico IRCCS, Aviano, Italy.
(6)Candiolo Cancer Institute, FPO-IRCCS, SP142, km 3.95, 10060, Candiolo, Turin, 
Italy. giuseppe.banna@ircc.it.
(7)Department of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San 
Matteo, Pavia, Italy.
(8)Medical Oncology Unit and Breast Unit Ospedale Perrino ASL, Brindisi, Italy.
(9)Fertility and Procreation Unit, Gynecologic Oncology Program, European 
Institute of Oncology IRCCS, Milan, Italy.
(10)Pediatric Oncology Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Via 
Venezian 1, 20133, Milan, Italy.
(#)Contributed equally

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The present narrative systematic review summarizes current 
knowledge on germline gene mutations predisposing to solid tumors in adolescents 
and young adults (AYAs).
RECENT FINDINGS: AYAs with cancer represent a particular group of patients with 
specific challenging characteristics and yet unmet needs. A significant 
percentage of AYA patients carry pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants 
(PV/LPVs) in cancer predisposition genes. Nevertheless, knowledge on spectrum, 
frequency, and clinical implications of germline variants in AYAs with solid 
tumors is limited. The identification of PV/LPV in AYA is especially critical 
given the need for appropriate communicative strategies, risk of second primary 
cancers, need for personalized long-term surveillance, potential reproductive 
implications, and cascade testing of at-risk family members. Moreover, these 
gene alterations may potentially provide novel biomarkers and therapeutic 
targets that are lacking in AYA patients. Among young adults with early-onset 
phenotypes of malignancies typically presenting at later ages, the increased 
prevalence of germline PV/LPVs supports a role for genetic counseling and 
testing irrespective of tumor type.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s11912-022-01213-3
PMCID: PMC9170630
PMID: 35320498 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Angela Toss declares that she has no conflict of 
interest. Paola Quarello declares that she has no conflict of interest. Maurizio 
Mascarin has received compensation for advisory role from Merck Sharp & Dohme. 
Giuseppe Luigi Banna has received compensation for service as a consultant from 
AstraZeneca and Astellas, has received speaker’s honoraria from AstraZeneca and 
Astellas, and has received reimbursement for travel/accommodations from 
AstraZeneca. Marco Zecca declares that he has no conflict of interest. Saverio 
Cinieri declares that she has no conflict of interest. Fedro Alessandro 
Peccatori declares that he has no conflict of interest. Andrea Ferrari declares 
that he has no conflict of interest.