1. BMC Vet Res. 2022 Apr 1;18(1):124. doi: 10.1186/s12917-022-03217-4.

Molecular phylogeny of coronaviruses and host receptors among domestic and 
close-contact animals reveals subgenome-level conservation, crossover, and 
divergence.

Bentum K(1), Shaddox S(1), Ware C(1), Reddy G(1), Abebe W(1), Folitse R(2), 
Martin P(1), Samuel T(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Patterson Hall, 
Tuskegee University, Patterson Hall, 1200 W. Montgomery Road, Tuskegee, AL, 
36088, USA.
(2)School of Veterinary Medicine, Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and 
Technology, University Post Office, Kumasi, Ghana.
(3)Department of Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Patterson Hall, 
Tuskegee University, Patterson Hall, 1200 W. Montgomery Road, Tuskegee, AL, 
36088, USA. tsamuel@tuskegee.edu.

BACKGROUND: Coronaviruses have the potential to cross species barriers. To learn 
the molecular intersections among the most common coronaviruses of domestic and 
close-contact animals, we analyzed representative coronavirus genera infecting 
mouse, rat, rabbit, dog, cat, cattle, white-tailed deer, swine, ferret, mink, 
alpaca, Rhinolophus bat, dolphin, whale, chicken, duck and turkey hosts; 
reference or complete genome sequences were available for most of these 
coronavirus genera. Protein sequence alignments and phylogenetic trees were 
built for the spike (S), envelope (E), membrane (M) and nucleocapsid (N) 
proteins. The host receptors and enzymes aminopeptidase N (APN), angiotensin 
converting enzyme 2 (ACE2), sialic acid synthase (SAS), transmembrane serine 
protease 2 (TMPRSS2), dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP4), cathepsin L (and its 
analogs) and furin were also compared.
RESULTS: Overall, the S, E, M, and N proteins segregated according to their 
viral genera (α, β, or γ), but the S proteins of alphacoronaviruses lacked 
conservation of phylogeny. Interestingly, the unique polybasic furin cleavage 
motif found in severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) but 
not in severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) or Middle East 
respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) exists in several β-coronaviruses 
and a few α- or γ-coronaviruses. Receptors and enzymes retained host 
species-dependent relationships with one another. Among the hosts, critical ACE2 
residues essential for SARS-CoV-2 spike protein binding were most conserved in 
white-tailed deer and cattle.
CONCLUSION: The polybasic furin cleavage motif found in several β- and other 
coronaviruses of animals points to the existence of an intermediate host for 
SARS-CoV-2, and it also offers a counternarrative to the theory of a 
laboratory-engineered virus. Generally, the S proteins of coronaviruses show 
crossovers of phylogenies indicative of recombination events. Additionally, the 
consistency in the segregation of viral proteins of the MERS-like coronavirus 
(NC_034440.1) from pipistrelle bat supports its classification as a 
β-coronavirus. Finally, similarities in host enzymes and receptors did not 
always explain natural cross-infections. More studies are therefore needed to 
identify factors that determine the cross-species infectivity of coronaviruses.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12917-022-03217-4
PMCID: PMC8972689
PMID: 35365153 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors declare no competing personal 
relationships or financial interests that could have appeared to influence the 
findings reported in this paper.