1. J Cell Mol Med. 2022 May;26(9):2594-2606. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.17261. Epub 2022
Apr  2.

Dexmedetomidine reduces enteric glial cell injury induced by intestinal 
ischaemia-reperfusion injury through mitochondrial localization of TERT.

Hu Q(1), Liu XM(2), Liu ZR(3), Liu ZY(1), Zhang HG(1), Zhang Q(1), Huang YL(1), 
Chen QH(1), Wang WX(1), Zhang X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang 
University, Nanchang, China.
(2)Department of Thoracic Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang 
University, Nanchang, China.
(3)Department of General Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang 
University, Nanchang, China.

This study was performed to uncover the effects of dexmedetomidine on oxidative 
stress injury induced by mitochondrial localization of telomerase reverse 
transcriptase (TERT) in enteric glial cells (EGCs) following intestinal 
ischaemia-reperfusion injury (IRI) in rat models. Following establishment of 
intestinal IRI models by superior mesenteric artery occlusion in Wistar rats, 
the expression and distribution patterns of TERT were detected. The IRI rats 
were subsequently treated with low or high doses of dexmedetomidine, followed by 
detection of ROS, MDA and GSH levels. Calcein cobalt and rhodamine 123 staining 
were also carried out to detect mitochondrial permeability transition pore 
(MPTP) and the mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP), respectively. Moreover, 
oxidative injury of mtDNA was determined, in addition to analyses of EGC 
viability and apoptosis. Intestinal tissues and mitochondria of EGCs were badly 
damaged in the intestinal IRI group. In addition, there was a reduction in 
mitochondrial localization of TERT, oxidative stress, whilst apoptosis of EGCs 
was increased and proliferation was decreased. On the other hand, administration 
of dexmedetomidine was associated with promotion of mitochondrial localization 
of TERT, whilst oxidative stress, MPTP and mtDNA in EGCs, and EGC apoptosis were 
all inhibited, and the MMP and EGC viability were both increased. A positive 
correlation was observed between different doses of dexmedetomidine and 
protective effects. Collectively, our findings highlighted the antioxidative 
effects of dexmedetomidine on EGCs following intestinal IRI, as dexmedetomidine 
alleviated mitochondrial damage by enhancing the mitochondrial localization of 
TERT.

© 2022 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by 
Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jcmm.17261
PMCID: PMC9077307
PMID: 35366055 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.