1. Brain Circ. 2022 Mar 21;8(1):57-60. doi: 10.4103/bc.bc_66_21. eCollection 2022
 Jan-Mar.

Ischemic stroke due to sporadic and genetic pulmonary arteriovenous 
malformations: Case report.

Tagliapietra M(1), Turri G(1), Bortolotti F(2), Mansueto G(3), Monaco S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, Biomedicine and Movement Sciences, University of 
Verona, Verona, Italy.
(2)Department of Diagnostics and Public Health, Forensic Pathology Unit, 
University of Verona, Verona, Italy.
(3)Department of Radiology, University of Verona, Verona, Italy.

Pulmonary arteriovenous malformations (PAVMs) encompass congenital and genetic 
vascular anomalies characterized by complex interlacing of arteries and veins 
connected by fistulas, which allow rapid and continuous extracardiac 
right-to-left shunting (RLS). Presenting neurologic manifestations of PAVM 
include brain abscess and stroke, as the consequence of paradoxical embolism. 
Although rare, PAVM represents an overlooked cause of cryptogenic ischemic 
stroke in young adults, being misdiagnosed as patent foramen ovale and a 
preventable trigger of silent cerebral ischemic changes. In the emergency 
clinical setting, the recommended ischemic stroke workup in patients with RLS 
should include the influence of postural changes and the effect of Valsalva 
maneuver on the entity of the RLS on contrast-enhanced transcranial color 
Doppler ultrasound and the delay in the right inferior pulmonary vein and left 
heart opacification on contrast-enhanced transthoracic echocardiography. This is 
in addition to the evaluation of chest X-rays or thoracic computed tomography. 
We here describe two patients with ischemic stroke due to sporadic and genetic 
PAVM-associated paradoxical embolism.

Copyright: © 2022 Brain Circulation.

DOI: 10.4103/bc.bc_66_21
PMCID: PMC8973452
PMID: 35372731

Conflict of interest statement: M. Tagliapietra reports a training grant from 
Pfizer and received support for attending scientific meetings from Alnylam.