1. Front Oncol. 2022 Mar 15;12:790713. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2022.790713. eCollection
 2022.

Exploration of the Potential Mechanism of Qi Yin San Liang San Decoction in the 
Treatment of EGFRI-Related Adverse Skin Reactions Using Network Pharmacology and 
In Vitro Experiments.

Wang Y(1), Zhang Y(1), Ding C(2), Jia C(1), Zhang H(1), Peng T(3), Cheng S(1), 
Chen W(3), Tan Y(2), Wang X(1), Liu Z(2), Wei P(1), Wang X(4), Jiang M(2), Hua 
Q(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Tradition Chinese Medicine, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine, 
Beijing, China.
(2)School of Life Scienses, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine, Beijing, 
China.
(3)School of Acupuncture-moxibustion and Tuina, Beijing University of Chinese 
Medicine, Beijing, China.
(4)Department of Pharmacy, Beijing Tsinghua Changgung Hospital, School of 
Clinical Medicine, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Adverse skin reactions are the most common side effects of epidermal 
growth factor receptor inhibitors (EGFRIs) in the treatment of cancer, 
significantly affecting the survival rate and quality of life of patients. Qi 
Yin San Liang San Decoction (QYSLS) comes from folk prescription and is 
currently used in the clinical treatment of adverse skin reactions caused by 
EGFRIs. However, its therapeutic mechanism remains unclear.
OBJECTIVES: To explore the potential mechanism of QYSLS in the treatment of 
adverse skin reactions caused by EGFR inhibition using network pharmacology and 
experimental research.
METHODS: First, we verified the effectiveness of QYSLS in vivo using model mice. 
Second, the related targets of adverse skin reactions associated with EGFR 
inhibition were predicted by the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database, and 
effective components and predictive targets of QYSLS were analyzed by 
Traditional Chinese Medicine Systems Pharmacology (TCMSP) and Batman-TCM 
databases. Gene ontology and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathway 
analyses were performed via the Bioconductor (R) V3.8 bioinformatics software. 
Molecular docking studies verified the selected key ingredients and targets. 
Finally, the results of network pharmacology were verified by in vitro 
experiments.
RESULTS: In the in vivo mouse model, QYSLS effectively reduced the occurrence of 
skin side effects. Network pharmacological results showed that the active 
ingredient luteolin, quercetin, licochalcone a, and kaempferol and the effective 
targets prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2 (PTGS2), matrix metallopeptidase 9 
(MMP9), and C-C motif chemokine ligand 2 (CCL2) were related to the 
interleukin-17 (IL-17) and tumor necrosis factor (TNF) pathway. Subsequently, 
the related active compounds and targets were verified using HaCaT cells as an 
in vitro adverse reaction model. The results showed that luteolin and quercetin 
increased the expression of PTGS2 and MMP9 and reduced the expression of CCL2 in 
HaCaT cells treated with gefitinib.
CONCLUSIONS: The results revealed that QYSLS effectively treats EGFRI-related 
adverse skin reactions through multi-target and multi-pathway mechanisms. 
Luteolin and quercetin may be the core active ingredients of QYSLS in the 
treatment of EGFRI-related adverse skin reactions, and their therapeutic effects 
are potentially mediated through PTGS2, CCL2, and MMP9 in the IL-17 and TNF 
signaling pathway.

Copyright © 2022 Wang, Zhang, Ding, Jia, Zhang, Peng, Cheng, Chen, Tan, Wang, 
Liu, Wei, Wang, Jiang and Hua.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2022.790713
PMCID: PMC8964498
PMID: 35372072

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.