1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2022 Jun;149(6):1866-1874. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaci.2022.04.003. Epub 2022 Apr 12.

Drug-induced mast cell eradication: A novel approach to treat mast cell 
activation disorders?

Valent P(1), Akin C(2), Hartmann K(3), Reiter A(4), Gotlib J(5), Sotlar K(6), 
Sperr WR(7), Degenfeld-Schonburg L(7), Smiljkovic D(7), Triggiani M(8), Horny 
HP(9), Arock M(10), Galli SJ(11), Metcalfe DD(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine I, Division of Hematology and Hemostaseology, 
Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria; Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for 
Hematology and Oncology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. 
Electronic address: peter.valent@meduniwien.ac.at.
(2)Division of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, Mich.
(3)Division of Allergy, Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Basel and 
University of Basel, Switzerland; Department of Biomedicine, University Hospital 
Basel and University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Hematology and Oncology, University Hospital Mannheim, 
Mannheim, Germany.
(5)Stanford Cancer Institute/Stanford University School of Medicine/Stanford 
Cancer Institute, Stanford, Calif.
(6)Institute of Pathology, Paracelsus Medical University Salzburg, Salzburg, 
Austria.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine I, Division of Hematology and Hemostaseology, 
Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria; Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for 
Hematology and Oncology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(8)Division of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, University of Salerno, Salerno, 
Italy.
(9)Institute of Pathology, Ludwig-Maximilian-University, Munich, Germany.
(10)Department of Hematological Biology, Pitié-Salpêtrière Charles-Foix 
Hospital, AP-HP Sorbonne University, Paris.
(11)Department of Pathology, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, and the 
Sean N. Parker Center for Allergy and Asthma Research, Stanford University 
School of Medicine, Stanford, Calif.
(12)Mast Cell Biology Section, Laboratory of Allergic Diseases, National 
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Md.

Mast cell (MC) activation is a key event in allergic reactions, other 
inflammatory states, and MC activation syndromes. MC-stabilizing agents, 
mediator-targeting drugs, and drugs interfering with mediator effects are often 
prescribed for these patients. However, the clinical efficacy of these drugs 
varies depending on the numbers of involved MCs and the underlying pathology. 
One straightforward approach would be to eradicate the primary target cell. To 
date however, no MC-eradicating treatment approach has been developed for 
patients with MC activation disorders. Nevertheless, recent data suggest that 
long-term treatment with agents effectively inhibiting KIT function results in 
the virtual eradication of tissue MCs and a sustained decrease in serum tryptase 
levels. In many of these patients, MC depletion is associated with a substantial 
improvement in mediator-induced symptoms. In patients with an underlying KIT 
D816V-positive mastocytosis, such MC eradication requires an effective inhibitor 
of KIT D816V, such as avapritinib. However, the use of KIT inhibitors must be 
balanced against their potential side effects. Here we discuss MC-eradicating 
strategies in various disease models, the feasibility of this approach, 
available clinical data, and future prospects for the use of KIT-targeting drugs 
in MC activation disorders.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2022.04.003
PMID: 35421448 [Indexed for MEDLINE]