1. Front Vet Sci. 2022 Mar 31;9:826991. doi: 10.3389/fvets.2022.826991.
eCollection  2022.

The Finding of the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) in 
a Wild Eurasian River Otter (Lutra lutra) Highlights the Need for Viral 
Surveillance in Wild Mustelids.

Padilla-Blanco M(1), Aguiló-Gisbert J(2), Rubio V(3), Lizana V(2)(4), 
Chillida-Martínez E(2), Cardells J(2)(4), Maiques E(5), Rubio-Guerri C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Facultad de Ciencias de la Salud, Universidad 
Cardenal Herrera-CEU, Valencia, Spain.
(2)Servicio de Análisis, Investigación, Gestión de Animales Silvestres (SAIGAS), 
Facultad de Veterinaria, Universidad Cardenal Herrera-CEU, Valencia, Spain.
(3)Instituto de Biomedicina de Valencia del Consejo Superior de Investigaciones 
Científicas, Centro de Investigació Biomédica en la Red sobre Enfermedades 
Raras, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Valencia, Spain.
(4)Wildlife Ecology & Health Group (WE&H), Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona 
(UAB), Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Facultad de Ciencias de la Salud, 
Universidad Cardenal Herrera-CEU, Valencia, Spain.

Animals have been involved in the three known outbreaks of severe respiratory 
syndromes due to coronaviruses (years 2005, 2012, and 2019). The pandemic nature 
of the SARS-CoV-2 outbreak increases the likelihood of infection from humans of 
susceptible animal species that, thus, could become secondary viral hosts and 
even disease reservoirs. We present evidence of spillover infection of wild 
mustelids by reporting the presence of SARS-CoV-2 in a Eurasian river otter 
found near a water reservoir in the Valencian Community (Spain). We detected the 
virus using two different commercial RTqPCR assays on RNA extracted from the 
nasopharynx (swabbing) and from lung tissue and mediastinal lymph node 
homogenates. The corresponding samples from two additional otters from distant 
sites tested negative in identical assays. The diagnosis in the positive otter 
was confirmed by two-tube RT-PCR assay in which RNA was first retrotranscribed, 
and then specific regions of the spike (S), nucleocapsid (N), and ORF10 genes 
were separately amplified from the produced cDNA, followed by electrophoretic 
visualization and Sanger sequencing. The sequences of the amplified products 
revealed some non-synonymous changes in the N and ORF10 partial sequences, 
relative to the consensus sequence. These changes, identified already in human 
patient samples, point to human origin of the virus, although their specific 
combination was unique. These findings, together with our previous report of 
SARS-CoV-2 infection of feral American mink, highlight the need for SARS-CoV-2 
surveillance of wild or feral mustelids to evaluate the risk that these animals 
could become SARS-CoV-2 reservoirs.

Copyright © 2022 Padilla-Blanco, Aguiló-Gisbert, Rubio, Lizana, 
Chillida-Martínez, Cardells, Maiques and Rubio-Guerri.

DOI: 10.3389/fvets.2022.826991
PMCID: PMC9010019
PMID: 35433914

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.