1. Microbiol Spectr. 2022 Jun 29;10(3):e0199521. doi: 10.1128/spectrum.01995-21. 
Epub 2022 Apr 19.

SGK1, a Serine/Threonine Kinase, Inhibits Prototype Foamy Virus Replication.

Zhang J(1), Han C(1), Xiong Z(1), Qiu M(1), Tuo X(1), Wang C(1), Qiao W(1), Tan 
J(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology and Technology, Ministry of 
Education, College of Life Sciences, Nankai Universitygrid.216938.7, Tianjin, 
China.

Foamy viruses (FVs) are complex retroviruses belonging to the Spumaretrovirinae 
subfamily of the Retroviridae family. In contrast to human immunodeficiency 
virus (HIV), another member of the Retroviridae family, FVs are nonpathogenic in 
their natural hosts or in experimentally infected animals. Prototype foamy virus 
(PFV) is the only foamy virus that can infect humans through cross-species 
transmission and does not show any pathogenicity after infection. Consequently, 
PFV is considered a safe and efficient gene transfer vector. Understanding the 
host proteins involved in the replication of PFV and the mechanism of 
interaction between the host and the virus might lead to studies to improve the 
efficiency of gene transfer. To date, only a few host factors have been 
identified that affect PFV replication. In the present study, we report that PFV 
infection enhances the promoter activity of SGK1 (encoding serum/glucocorticoid 
regulated kinase 1) via the Tas protein signaling pathway, and then upregulates 
the mRNA and protein levels of SGK1. Overexpression of SGK1 reduced PFV 
replication, whereas its depletion using small interfering RNA increased PFV 
replication. SGK1 inhibits PFV replication by impairing the function of the PFV 
Tas activation domain in a kinase-independent manner and reducing the stability 
of the Gag protein in a kinase-dependent manner. In addition, both human and 
bovine SGK1 proteins inhibit the replication of bovine foamy virus (BFV) and 
PFV. These findings not only improved our understanding of the function of SGK1 
and its relationship with foamy viruses, but also contributed to determining the 
antiviral mechanism of the host. IMPORTANCE Foamy viruses can integrate into the 
host chromosome and are nonpathogenic in natural hosts or in experimentally 
infected animals. Therefore, foamy viruses are considered to be safe and 
efficient gene transfer vectors. Persistent infection of foamy viruses is partly 
caused by the restrictive effect of host factors on the virus. However, only a 
few cellular proteins are known to influence the replication of foamy viruses. 
In this study, we report that SGK1 inhibits the replication of prototype foamy 
virus by affecting the function of the transcription activator, Tas, and 
reducing the stability of the structural protein, Gag. These results will 
increase our understanding of the interaction between the virus and host 
factors, deepening our perception of host antiviral defenses and the function of 
SGK1, and could improve the gene transfer efficiency of foamy viruses.

DOI: 10.1128/spectrum.01995-21
PMCID: PMC9241813
PMID: 35438526 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.