1. Allergy. 2022 Sep;77(9):2803-2817. doi: 10.1111/all.15315. Epub 2022 May 2.

Methylation risk scores for childhood aeroallergen sensitization: Results from 
the LISA birth cohort.

Kilanowski A(1)(2)(3)(4), Chen J(1), Everson T(1)(5), Thiering E(3)(4), Wilson 
R(6), Gladish N(7)(8), Waldenberger M(3)(6), Zhang H(9), Celedón JC(10), 
Burchard EG(11), Peters A(3)(12), Standl M(3)(13), Hüls A(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Rollins School of Public Health, Emory 
University, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(2)Institute for Medical Information Processing, Biometry, and Epidemiology; 
Pettenkofer School of Public Health, LMU Munich, Munich, Germany.
(3)Institute of Epidemiology, Helmholtz Zentrum München - German Research Center 
for Environmental Health, Neuherberg, Germany.
(4)Division of Metabolic and Nutritional Medicine, Dr. von Hauner Children's 
Hospital, University of Munich Medical Center, Munich, Germany.
(5)Gangarosa Department of Environmental Health, Rollins School of Public 
Health, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(6)Research Unit Molecular Epidemiology, Helmholtz Zentrum München - German 
Research Center for Environmental Health, Neuherberg, Germany.
(7)Centre for Molecular Medicine and Therapeutics, British Columbia Children's 
Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(8)Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, 
BC, Canada.
(9)Division of Epidemiology, Biostatistics, and Environmental Health Sciences, 
School of Public Health, University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee, USA.
(10)Division of Pediatric Pulmonary Medicine, UPMC Children's Hospital of 
Pittsburgh, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.
(11)UCSF Asthma Collaboratory, University of California, San Francisco, 
California, USA.
(12)Chair of Epidemiology, Ludwig-Maximilians University, Munich, Germany.
(13)German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Gießen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Epigenomic (e.g., DNA methylation [DNAm]) changes have been 
hypothesized as intermediate step linking environmental exposures with allergic 
disease. Associations between individual DNAm at CpGs and allergic diseases have 
been reported, but their joint predictive capability is unknown.
METHODS: Data were obtained from 240 children of the German LISA cohort. DNAm 
was measured in blood clots at 6 (N = 234) and 10 years (N = 227) using the 
Illumina EPIC chip. Presence of aeroallergen sensitization was measured in blood 
at 6, 10, and 15 years. We calculated six methylation risk scores (MRS) for 
allergy-related phenotypes, like total and specific IgE, asthma, or any 
allergies, based on available publications and assessed their performances both 
cross-sectionally (biomarker) and prospectively (predictor of the disease). 
Dose-response associations between aeroallergen sensitization and MRS were 
evaluated.
RESULTS: All six allergy-related MRS were highly correlated (r > .86), and seven 
CpGs were included in more than one MRS. Cross-sectionally, we observed an 81% 
increased risk for aeroallergen sensitization at 6 years with an increased MRS 
by one standard deviation (best-performing MRS, 95% confidence interval = [43%; 
227%]). Significant associations were also seen cross-sectionally at 10 years 
and prospectively, though the effect of the latter was attenuated when 
restricted to participants not sensitized at baseline. A clear dose-response 
relationship with levels of aeroallergen sensitization could be established 
cross-sectionally, but not prospectively.
CONCLUSION: We found good classification and prediction capabilities of 
calculated allergy-related MRS cross-sectionally, underlining the relevance of 
altered gene-regulation in allergic diseases and providing insights into 
potential DNAm biomarkers of aeroallergen sensitization.

© 2022 The Authors. Allergy published by European Academy of Allergy and 
Clinical Immunology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/all.15315
PMCID: PMC9437118
PMID: 35437756 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest Dr. Celedón has received 
research materials from Pharmavite, GSK, and Merck in order to provide 
medications free of cost to participants in NIH-funded studies, unrelated to the 
current work. All other authors have no further conflicts of interest to 
declare.