1. Biosensors (Basel). 2022 Apr 12;12(4):236. doi: 10.3390/bios12040236.

FPGA Correlator for Applications in Embedded Smart Devices.

Moore CH(1), Lin W(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 
11794, USA.

Correlation has a variety of applications that require signal processing. 
However, it is computationally intensive, and software correlators require 
high-performance processors for real-time data analysis. This is a challenge for 
embedded devices because of the limitation of computing resources. Hardware 
correlators that use Field Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) technology can 
significantly boost computational power and bridge the gap between the need for 
high-performance computing and the limited processing power available in 
embedded devices. This paper presents a detailed FPGA-based correlator design at 
the register level along with the open-source Very High-Speed Integrated Circuit 
Hardware Description Language (VHDL) code. It includes base modules for linear 
and multi-tau correlators of varying sizes. Every module implements a simple and 
unified data interface for easy integration with standard and publicly available 
FPGA modules. Eighty-lag linear and multi-tau correlators were built for 
validation of the design. Three input data sets-constant signal, pulse signal, 
and sine signal-were used to test the accuracy of the correlators. The results 
from the FPGA correlators were compared against the outputs of equivalent 
software correlators and validated with the corresponding theoretical values. 
The FPGA correlators returned results identical to those from the software 
references for all tested data sets and were proven to be equivalent to their 
software counterparts. Their computation speed is at least 85,000 times faster 
than the software correlators running on a Xilinx MicroBlaze processor. The FPGA 
correlator can be easily implemented, especially on System on a Chip (SoC) 
integrated circuits that have processor cores and FPGA fabric. It is the ideal 
component for device-on-chip solutions in biosensing.

DOI: 10.3390/bios12040236
PMCID: PMC9024689
PMID: 35448296 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.