1. Clin Transl Sci. 2022 Jul;15(7):1561-1580. doi: 10.1111/cts.13281. Epub 2022
May  9.

A literature review of liver function test elevations in rifampin drug-drug 
interaction studies.

Ibrahim SM(1), Pithavala YK(2), Vourvahis M(3), Chen J(4).

Author information:
(1)Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of 
California San Diego, San Diego, California, USA.
(2)Clinical Pharmacology, Global Product Development, Pfizer Inc., La Jolla, 
California, USA.
(3)Clinical Pharmacology, Global Product Development, Pfizer Inc., New York, New 
York, USA.
(4)Clinical Pharmacology, Global Product Development, Pfizer Inc., San 
Francisco, California, USA.

Although rifampin drug-drug interaction (DDI) studies are routinely conducted, 
there have been instances of liver function test (LFT) elevations, warranting 
further evaluation. A literature review was conducted to identify studies in 
which combination with rifampin resulted in hepatic events and evaluate any 
similarities. Over 600 abstracts and manuscripts describing rifampin DDI studies 
were first evaluated, of which 30 clinical studies reported LFT elevations. Out 
of these, 11 studies included ritonavir in combination with other drug(s) in the 
rifampin DDI study. The number of subjects that were discontinued from treatment 
on these studies ranged from 0 to 71 (0-100% of subjects in each study). The 
number of subjects hospitalized for adverse events in these studies ranged from 
0 to 41 (0-83.67% of subjects in each study). LFT elevations in greater than 50% 
of subjects were noted during the concomitant administration of rifampin with 
ritonavir-boosted protease inhibitors and with lorlatinib; with labeled 
contraindication due to observed hepatotoxicity related safety findings only for 
saquinavir/ritonavir and lorlatinib. In the lorlatinib and ritonavir DDI 
studies, considerable LFT elevations were observed rapidly, typically within 
24-72 h following co-administration. A possible sequence effect has been 
speculated, where rifampin induction prior to administration of the combination 
may be associated with increased severity of the LFT elevations. The potential 
role of rifampin in the metabolic activation of certain drugs into metabolites 
with hepatic effects needs to be taken into consideration when conducting 
rifampin DDI studies, particularly those for which the metabolic profiles are 
not fully elucidated.

© 2022 Pfizer Inc. Clinical and Translational Science published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC on behalf of American Society for Clinical Pharmacology and 
Therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1111/cts.13281
PMCID: PMC9283752
PMID: 35470578 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: J.C., Y.K.P., and M.V. are employees of Pfizer 
Inc. and may own Pfizer stock. S.I. was an unpaid intern to Pfizer; the 
internship program with University of California San Diego was supported by an 
educational grant from Pfizer. Editorial support was provided by Ravi 
Subramanian at ClinicalThinking and was funded by Pfizer.