1. Front Immunol. 2022 Apr 11;13:866097. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.866097. 
eCollection 2022.

Extracellular cAMP-Adenosine Pathway Signaling: A Potential Therapeutic Target 
in Chronic Inflammatory Airway Diseases.

Pacini ESA(1), Satori NA(1), Jackson EK(2), Godinho RO(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cellular Pharmacology, Department of Pharmacology, Universidade 
Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology, University of Pittsburgh 
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, United States.

Adenosine is a purine nucleoside that, via activation of distinct G 
protein-coupled receptors, modulates inflammation and immune responses. Under 
pathological conditions and in response to inflammatory stimuli, extracellular 
ATP is released from damaged cells and is metabolized to extracellular 
adenosine. However, studies over the past 30 years provide strong evidence for 
another source of extracellular adenosine, namely the "cAMP-adenosine pathway." 
The cAMP-adenosine pathway is a biochemical mechanism mediated by ATP-binding 
cassette transporters that facilitate cAMP efflux and by specific ectoenzymes 
that convert cAMP to AMP (ecto-PDEs) and AMP to adenosine (ecto-nucleotidases 
such as CD73). Importantly, the cAMP-adenosine pathway is operative in many cell 
types, including those of the airways. In airways, β2-adrenoceptor agonists, 
which are used as bronchodilators for treatment of asthma and chronic 
respiratory diseases, stimulate cAMP efflux and thus trigger the extracellular 
cAMP-adenosine pathway leading to increased concentrations of extracellular 
adenosine in airways. In the airways, extracellular adenosine exerts 
pro-inflammatory effects and induces bronchoconstriction in patients with asthma 
and chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases. These considerations lead to the 
hypothesis that the cAMP-adenosine pathway attenuates the efficacy of 
β2-adrenoceptor agonists. Indeed, our recent findings support this view. In this 
mini-review, we will highlight the potential role of the extracellular 
cAMP-adenosine pathway in chronic respiratory inflammatory disorders, and we 
will explore how extracellular cAMP could interfere with the regulatory effects 
of intracellular cAMP on airway smooth muscle and innate immune cell function. 
Finally, we will discuss therapeutic possibilities targeting the extracellular 
cAMP-adenosine pathway for treatment of these respiratory diseases.

Copyright © 2022 Pacini, Satori, Jackson and Godinho.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.866097
PMCID: PMC9038211
PMID: 35479074 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.