1. Blood Adv. 2022 Jun 28;6(12):3779-3791. doi: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2022007029.

Functional interaction between compound heterozygous TERT mutations causes 
severe telomere biology disorder.

Niaz A(1), Truong J(2), Manoleras A(3), Fox LC(4)(5)(6)(7), Blombery P(4)(7)(8), 
Vasireddy RS(9), Pickett HA(3), Curtin JA(9), Barbaro PM(10), Rodgers J(11), Roy 
J(10), Riley LG(1)(12), Holien JK(2), Cohen SB(3), Bryan TM(3).

Author information:
(1)Rare Diseases Functional Genomics, Kids Research, The Children's Hospital at 
Westmead and Children's Medical Research Institute, Westmead, NSW, Australia.
(2)School of Science, STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics) 
College, Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology (RMIT), Bundoora, VIC, 
Australia.
(3)Children's Medical Research Institute, Faculty of Medicine and Health, 
University of Sydney, Westmead, NSW, Australia.
(4)Department of Pathology, Peter MacCallum Cancer Center, Melbourne, VIC, 
Australia.
(5)Clinical Haematology, Austin Health, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(6)Transfusion Research Unit, School of Public Health and Preventive Medicine, 
Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(7)Department of Medicine, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(8)Clinical Haematology, Peter MacCallum Cancer Center/Royal Melbourne Hospital, 
Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(9)Haematology Department, Children's Hospital at Westmead, Westmead, NSW, 
Australia.
(10)Children's Health Queensland and University of Queensland, South Brisbane, 
QLD, Australia.
(11)Genetic Health Queensland, Royal Brisbane and Women's Hospital, Herston, 
QLD, Australia; and.
(12)Child and Adolescent Health, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.

Telomere biology disorders (TBDs) are a spectrum of multisystem inherited 
disorders characterized by bone marrow failure, resulting from mutations in the 
genes encoding telomerase or other proteins involved in maintaining telomere 
length and integrity. Pathogenicity of variants in these genes can be hard to 
evaluate, because TBD mutations show highly variable penetrance and genetic 
anticipation related to inheritance of shorter telomeres with each generation. 
Thus, detailed functional analysis of newly identified variants is often 
essential. Herein, we describe a patient with compound heterozygous variants in 
the TERT gene, which encodes the catalytic subunit of telomerase, hTERT. This 
patient had the extremely severe Hoyeraal-Hreidarsson form of TBD, although his 
heterozygous parents were clinically unaffected. Molecular dynamic modeling and 
detailed biochemical analyses demonstrate that one allele (L557P) affects 
association of hTERT with its cognate RNA component hTR, whereas the other 
(K1050E) affects the binding of telomerase to its DNA substrate and enzyme 
processivity. Unexpectedly, the data demonstrate a functional interaction 
between the proteins encoded by the two alleles, with wild-type hTERT rescuing 
the effect of K1050E on processivity, whereas L557P hTERT does not. These data 
contribute to the mechanistic understanding of telomerase, indicating that RNA 
binding in one hTERT molecule affects the processivity of telomere addition by 
the other molecule. This work emphasizes the importance of functional 
characterization of TERT variants to reach a definitive molecular diagnosis for 
patients with TBD, and, in particular, it illustrates the importance of 
analyzing the effects of compound heterozygous variants in combination, to 
reveal interallelic effects.

© 2022 by The American Society of Hematology. Licensed under Creative Commons 
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0), 
permitting only noncommercial, nonderivative use with attribution. All other 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2022007029
PMCID: PMC9631560
PMID: 35477117 [Indexed for MEDLINE]