1. Front Aging Neurosci. 2022 Apr 11;14:841711. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2022.841711. 
eCollection 2022.

Cognitive Dysfunction in Repeat Expansion Diseases: A Review.

Zhang S(1), Shen L(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Jiao B(1)(2)(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 
Changsha, China.
(2)National Clinical Research Center for Geriatric Disorders, Central South 
University, Changsha, China.
(3)Engineering Research Center of Hunan Province in Cognitive Impairment 
Disorders, Central South University, Changsha, China.
(4)Hunan International Scientific and Technological Cooperation Base of 
Neurodegenerative and Neurogenetic Diseases, Changsha, China.
(5)Key Laboratory of Hunan Province in Neurodegenerative Disorders, Central 
South University, Changsha, China.

With the development of the sequencing technique, more than 40 repeat expansion 
diseases (REDs) have been identified during the past two decades. Moreover, the 
clinical features of these diseases show some commonality, and the nervous 
system, especially the cognitive function was affected in part by these 
diseases. However, the specific cognitive domains impaired in different diseases 
were inconsistent. Here, we survey literature on the cognitive consequences of 
the following disorders presenting cognitive dysfunction and summarizing the 
pathogenic genes, epidemiology, and different domains affected by these 
diseases. We found that the cognitive domains affected in neuronal intranuclear 
inclusion disease (NIID) were widespread including the executive function, 
memory, information processing speed, attention, visuospatial function, and 
language. Patients with C9ORF72-frontotemporal dementia (FTD) showed impairment 
in executive function, memory, language, and visuospatial function. While in 
Huntington's disease (HD), the executive function, memory, and information 
processing speed were affected, in the fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia 
syndrome (FXTAS), executive function, memory, information processing speed, and 
attention were impaired. Moreover, the spinocerebellar ataxias showed broad 
damage in almost all the cognitive domains except for the relatively intact 
language ability. Some other diseases with relatively rare clinical data also 
indicated cognitive dysfunction, such as myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1), 
progressive myoclonus epilepsy (PME), Friedreich ataxia (FRDA), Huntington 
disease like-2 (HDL2), and cerebellar ataxia, neuropathy, vestibular areflexia 
syndrome (CANVAS). We drew a cognitive function landscape of the related REDs 
that might provide an aspect for differential diagnosis through cognitive 
domains and effective non-specific interventions for these diseases.

Copyright © 2022 Zhang, Shen and Jiao.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2022.841711
PMCID: PMC9036481
PMID: 35478698

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.