1. Protein Sci. 2022 May;31(5):e4305. doi: 10.1002/pro.4305.

Histidine methyltransferase SETD3 methylates structurally diverse histidine 
mimics in actin.

Hintzen JCJ(1), Ma H(2), Deng H(3), Witecka A(4), Andersen SB(1), Drozak J(4), 
Guo H(5)(6), Qian P(3), Li H(2), Mecinović J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physics, Chemistry and Pharmacy, University of Southern 
Denmark, Odense, Denmark.
(2)MOE Key Laboratory of Protein Sciences, Beijing Frontier Research Center for 
Biological Structure, School of Medicine, Tsinghua-Peking Center for Life 
Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.
(3)Chemistry and Materials Science Faculty, Shandong Agricultural University, 
Tai'an, Shandong, China.
(4)Department of Metabolic Regulation, Faculty of Biology, University of Warsaw, 
Warsaw, Poland.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of 
Tennessee, Knoxville, Tennessee, USA.
(6)UT/ORNL Center for Molecular Biophysics, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak 
Ridge, Tennessee, USA.

Actin histidine Nτ -methylation by histidine methyltransferase SETD3 plays an 
important role in human biology and diseases. Here, we report integrated 
synthetic, biocatalytic, biostructural, and computational analyses on human 
SETD3-catalyzed methylation of actin peptides possessing histidine and its 
structurally and chemically diverse mimics. Our enzyme assays supported by 
biostructural analyses demonstrate that SETD3 has a broader substrate scope 
beyond histidine, including N-nucleophiles on the aromatic and aliphatic side 
chains. Quantum mechanical/molecular mechanical molecular dynamics and 
free-energy simulations provide insight into binding geometries and the free 
energy barrier for the enzymatic methyl transfer to histidine mimics, further 
supporting experimental data that histidine is the superior SETD3 substrate over 
its analogs. This work demonstrates that human SETD3 has a potential to catalyze 
efficient methylation of several histidine mimics, overall providing 
mechanistic, biocatalytic, and functional insight into actin histidine 
methylation by SETD3.

© 2022 The Authors. Protein Science published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf 
of The Protein Society.

DOI: 10.1002/pro.4305
PMCID: PMC9004244
PMID: 35481649 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared no conflicts of 
interest for this article.