1. Elife. 2022 May 3;11:e76555. doi: 10.7554/eLife.76555.

Metabolic basis for the evolution of a common pathogenic Pseudomonas aeruginosa 
variant.

Mould DL(1), Stevanovic M(1), Ashare A(1)(2), Schultz D(1), Hogan DA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Geisel School of Medicine at 
Dartmouth, Hanover, United States.
(2)Department of Medicine, Dartmouth-Hitchock Medical Center, Lebanon, United 
States.

Microbes frequently evolve in reproducible ways. Here, we show that differences 
in specific metabolic regulation rather than inter-strain interactions explain 
the frequent presence of lasR loss-of-function (LOF) mutations in the bacterial 
pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa. While LasR contributes to virulence through its 
role in quorum sensing, lasR mutants have been associated with more severe 
disease. A model based on the intrinsic growth kinetics for a wild type strain 
and its LasR- derivative, in combination with an experimental evolution based 
genetic screen and further genetics analyses, indicated that differences in 
metabolism were sufficient to explain the rise of these common mutant types. The 
evolution of LasR- lineages in laboratory and clinical isolates depended on 
activity of the two-component system CbrAB, which modulates substrate 
prioritization through the catabolite repression control pathway. LasR- lineages 
frequently arise in cystic fibrosis lung infections and their detection 
correlates with disease severity. Our analysis of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid 
metabolomes identified compounds that negatively correlate with lung function, 
and we show that these compounds support enhanced growth of LasR- cells in a 
CbrB-controlled manner. We propose that in vivo metabolomes contribute to 
pathogen evolution, which may influence the progression of disease and its 
treatment.

Plain Language Summary: Bacteria can evolve quickly, a skill that proves useful 
in ever-changing environments. For example, individuals in many bacterial 
species can start to work together under certain circumstances; this ability is 
underpinned by a system called quorum sensing, which allows cells to detect 
nearby conspecifics. However, species of harmful bacteria often lose their 
quorum sensing abilities when they infect humans. This is the case for 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, which normally lives in the soil but can also cause 
deadly conditions, especially in hospital settings. Patients often carry P. 
aeruginosa with mutations that disable the quorum-sensing signal receptor LasR, 
a molecular actor that can switch on many other genes in a cell. People who are 
infected with P. aeruginosa strains carrying a damaged version of the lasR gene 
are typically more ill and less likely to recover. Why this is the case – and in 
fact, why genes associated with quorum sensing often lose function during 
infection – is still unclear. To investigate this question, Mould et al. used 
laboratory evolution experiments and computer models of P. aeruginosa growth to 
understand how lasR mutant cells evolve. Differences in growth rates and ways to 
use resources (rather than changes in cell-to-cell interactions) best explained 
why lasR mutants become more successful. Further experiments narrowed down the 
molecular cascade required for the rise of lasR mutants, identifying a pathway 
that regulates how P. aeruginosa switches between different nutrient sources. 
This work reveals a new connection between quorum sensing genes and nutrient 
regulation in bacterial cells. Loss of functional LasR changes the way that 
cells use nutrients, and thus will reshape how they interact with host cells and 
other bacteria. This insight could lead to better ways to predict the outcomes 
of bacterial infections and how to best treat them.

© 2022, Mould et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.76555
PMCID: PMC9224983
PMID: 35502894 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DM, MS, AA, DS, DH No competing interests 
declared