1. Acc Chem Res. 2022 May 17;55(10):1411-1422. doi: 10.1021/acs.accounts.2c00061.
 Epub 2022 May 5.

Molecular Spatiomics by Proximity Labeling.

Kang MG(1), Rhee HW(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Korea.

Proximity labeling can be defined as an enzymatic "in-cell" chemical reaction 
that catalyzes the proximity-dependent modification of biomolecules in live 
cells. Since the modified proteins can be isolated and identified via mass 
spectrometry, this method has been successfully utilized for the 
characterization of local proteomes such as the sub-mitochondrial proteome and 
the proteome at membrane contact sites, or spatiotemporal interactome 
information in live cells, which are not "accessible" via conventional methods. 
Currently, proximity labeling techniques can be applied not only for local 
proteome mapping but also for profiling local RNA and DNA, in addition to 
showing great potential for elucidating spatial cell-cell interaction networks 
in live animal models. We believe that proximity labeling has emerged as an 
essential tool in "spatiomics," that is, for the extraction of spatially 
distributed biological information in a cell or organism.Proximity labeling is a 
multidisciplinary chemical technique. For a decade, we and other groups have 
engineered it for multiple applications based on the modulation of enzyme 
chemistry, chemical probe design, and mass analysis techniques that enable 
superior mapping results. The technique has been adopted in biology and 
chemistry. This "in-cell" reaction has been widely adopted by biologists who 
modified it into an in vivo reaction in animal models. In our laboratory, we 
conducted in vivo proximity labeling reactions in mouse models and could 
successfully obtain the liver-specific secretome and muscle-specific 
mitochondrial matrix proteome. We expect that proximity reaction can further 
contribute to revealing tissue-specific localized molecular information in live 
animal models.Simultaneously, chemists have also adopted the concept and 
employed chemical "photocatalysts" as artificial enzymes to develop new 
proximity labeling reactions. Under light activation, photocatalysts can convert 
the precursor molecules to the reactive species via electron transfer or energy 
transfer and the reactive molecules can react with proximal biomolecules within 
a definite lifetime in an aqueous solution. To identify the modified 
biomolecules by proximity labeling, the modified biomolecules should be enriched 
after lysis and sequenced using sequencing tools. In this analysis step, the 
direct detection of modified residue(s) on the modified proteins or nucleic 
acids can be the proof of their labeling event by proximal enzymes or catalysts 
in the cell. In this Account, we introduce the basic concept of proximity 
labeling and the multidirectional advances in the development of this method. We 
believe that this Account may facilitate further utilization and modification of 
the method in both biological and chemical research communities, thereby 
revealing unknown spatially distributed molecular or cellular information or 
spatiome.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.accounts.2c00061
PMCID: PMC9118551
PMID: 35512328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.