1. Cell Mol Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2022;14(2):271-293. doi: 
10.1016/j.jcmgh.2022.04.011. Epub 2022 May 6.

Hepatic SIRT6 Modulates Transcriptional Activities of FXR to Alleviate 
Acetaminophen-induced Hepatotoxicity.

Liu C(1), Pan Z(2), Wu Z(3), Tang K(3), Zhong Y(3), Chen Y(3), Xiao X(3), Guo 
J(3), Duan S(3), Cui T(3), Zhong G(3), Yang Z(4), Zhong C(5), Lin S(6), Gao 
Y(7).

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine, 
Guangzhou, China.
(2)The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine, 
Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Science and Technology Innovation Center, Guangzhou University of Chinese 
Medicine, Guangzhou, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, National Clinical Research 
Center for Respiratory Disease, Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Health, The 
First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China. 
Electronic address: jeffyah@163.com.
(5)The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine, 
Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine, Guangzhou, China. Electronic address: 
zhongchong1732@gzucm.edu.cn.
(6)Key Laboratory of Chinese Internal Medicine of Ministry of Education and 
Beijing, Dongzhimen Hospital Affiliated to Beijing University of Chinese 
Medicine, Beijing, China. Electronic address: lsznn@126.com.
(7)Science and Technology Innovation Center, Guangzhou University of Chinese 
Medicine, Guangzhou, China. Electronic address: gaoyong@gzucm.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Excessive acetaminophen (APAP) intake causes oxidative stress 
and inflammation, leading to fatal hepatotoxicity; however, the mechanism 
remains unclear. This study aims to explore the protective effects and detailed 
mechanisms of sirtuin 6 (SIRT6) in the defense against APAP-induced 
hepatotoxicity.
METHODS: Hepatocyte-specific SIRT6 knockout mice, farnesoid X receptor (FXR) 
knockout mice, and mice with genetic or pharmacological activation of SIRT6 were 
subjected to APAP to evaluate the critical role of SIRT6 in the pathogenesis of 
acute liver injury. RNA sequences were used to investigate molecular mechanisms 
underlying this process.
RESULTS: Hepatic SIRT6 expression was substantially reduced in the patients and 
mice with acute liver injury. The deletion of SIRT6 in mice and mice primary 
hepatocytes led to high N-acetyl-p-benzo-quinoneimine and low glutathione levels 
in the liver, thereby enhancing APAP overdose-induced liver injury, manifested 
as increased hepatic centrilobular necrosis, oxidative stress, and inflammation. 
Conversely, overexpression or pharmacological activation of SIRT6 enhanced 
glutathione and decreased N-acetyl-p-benzo-quinoneimine, thus alleviating 
APAP-induced hepatotoxicity via normalization of liver damage, inflammatory 
infiltration, and oxidative stress. Our molecular analysis revealed that FXR is 
regulated by SIRT6, which is associated with the pathological progression of 
ALI. Mechanistically, SIRT6 deacetylates FXR and elevates FXR transcriptional 
activity. FXR ablation in mice and mice primary hepatocytes prominently blunted 
SIRT6 overexpression and activation-mediated ameliorative effects. Conversely, 
pharmacological activation of FXR mitigated APAP-induced hepatotoxicity in SIRT6 
knockout mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Our current study suggests that SIRT6 plays a crucial role in 
APAP-induced hepatotoxicity, and pharmacological activation of SIRT6 may 
represent a novel therapeutic strategy for APAP overdose-induced liver injury.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcmgh.2022.04.011
PMCID: PMC9218579
PMID: 35526796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]