1. PLoS One. 2022 May 11;17(5):e0265775. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0265775. 
eCollection 2022.

The spread of herds and horses into the Altai: How livestock and dairying drove 
social complexity in Mongolia.

Ventresca Miller AR(1)(2)(3), Wilkin S(3)(4), Hendy J(5)(6), Turbat T(7)(8), 
Batsukh D(9), Bayarkhuu N(10), Giscard PH(11), Bemmann J(12), Bayarsaikhan 
J(3)(13), Miller BK(2)(3)(14), Clark J(15)(16)(17), Roberts P(3)(18), Boivin 
N(3)(18)(19)(20).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anthropology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, 
United States of America.
(2)Museum of Anthropological Archaeology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan, United States of America.
(3)Department of Archaeology, Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human 
History, Jena, Germany.
(4)Institute of Evolutionary Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland.
(5)BioArCh, Department of Archaeology, University of York, York, United Kingdom.
(6)Department of Archaeogenetics, Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human 
History, Jena, Germany.
(7)Department of Anthropology and Archaeology, National University of Mongolia, 
Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia.
(8)Archaeological Research Center of the National University of Mongolia, 
Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia.
(9)Institute of Archaeology, Mongolian Academy of Sciences, Ulaanbaatar, 
Mongolia.
(10)Archaeometry Laboratory, University of Science and Technology of China, 
Hefei, Anhui, China.
(11)Institute of Deserts and Steppes, Paris, France.
(12)Prehistoric and Early Historic Archaeology, Rheinische 
Friedrich-Wilhelms-University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(13)National Museum of Mongolia, Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia.
(14)History of Art Department, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, 
United States of America.
(15)NOMAD Science, Glen, Montana, United States of America.
(16)Department of Archaeology, Flinders University, Adelaide, South Australia, 
Australia.
(17)Department of Sociology, Social Work and Anthropology, Utah State 
University, Logan, Utah, United States of America.
(18)School of Social Science, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia.
(19)Department of Archaeology, University of Calgary, Calgary, Canada.
(20)Smithsonian Institution, New York, New York, United States of America.

The initial movement of herders and livestock into the eastern steppe is of 
great interest, as this region has long been home to pastoralist groups. Due to 
a paucity of faunal remains, however, it has been difficult to discern the 
timing of the adoption of domesticated ruminants and horses into the region, 
though recent research on ancient dairying has started to shed new light on this 
history. Here we present proteomic evidence for shifts in dairy consumption in 
the Altai Mountains, drawing on evidence from sites dating from the Early Bronze 
to the Late Iron Age. We compare these finds with evidence for the rise of 
social complexity in western Mongolia, as reflected in material remains 
signaling population growth, the establishment of structured cemeteries, and the 
erection of large monuments. Our results suggest that the subsistence basis for 
the development of complex societies began at the dawn of the Bronze Age, with 
the adoption of ruminant livestock. Investments in pastoralism intensified over 
time, enabling a food production system that sustained growing populations. 
While pronounced social changes and monumental constructions occurred in tandem 
with the first evidence for horse dairying, ~1350 cal BCE, these shifts were 
fueled by a long-term economic dependence on ruminant livestock. Therefore, the 
spread into the Mongolian Altai of herds, and then horses, resulted in immediate 
dietary changes, with subsequent social and demographic transformations 
occurring later.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0265775
PMCID: PMC9094512
PMID: 35544454 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.