1. Circ Res. 2022 Jun 24;131(1):91-105. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.122.321050. Epub 
2022 May 16.

ATF4 Protects the Heart From Failure by Antagonizing Oxidative Stress.

Wang X(1), Zhang G(2), Dasgupta S(2), Niewold EL(2), Li C(2), Li Q(2), Luo X(2), 
Tan L(3), Ferdous A(2), Lorenzi PL(3), Rothermel BA(2)(4), Gillette TG(2), Adams 
CM(5), Scherer PE(6), Hill JA(2)(4), Wang ZV(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Hubei, China 
(X.W.).
(2)Division of Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine (X.W., G.Z., S.D., 
E.L.N., C.L., Q.L., X.L., A.F., B.A.R., T.G.G., J.A.H., Z.V.W.), University of 
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas.
(3)Metabolomics Core Facility, Department of Bioinformatics & Computational 
Biology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston (L.T., P.L.L.).
(4)Department of Molecular Biology (B.A.R., J.A.H.), University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas.
(5)Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Nutrition, Department of Medicine, 
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota (C.A.M.).
(6)Touchstone Diabetes Center, Department of Internal Medicine (P.E.S.), 
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas.

BACKGROUND: Cellular redox control is maintained by generation of reactive 
oxygen/nitrogen species balanced by activation of antioxidative pathways. 
Disruption of redox balance leads to oxidative stress, a central causative event 
in numerous diseases including heart failure. Redox control in the heart exposed 
to hemodynamic stress, however, remains to be fully elucidated.
METHODS: Pressure overload was triggered by transverse aortic constriction in 
mice. Transcriptomic and metabolomic regulations were evaluated by 
RNA-sequencing and metabolomics, respectively. Stable isotope tracer labeling 
experiments were conducted to determine metabolic flux in vitro. Neonatal rat 
ventricular myocytes and H9c2 cells were used to examine molecular mechanisms.
RESULTS: We show that production of cardiomyocyte NADPH, a key factor in redox 
regulation, is decreased in pressure overload-induced heart failure. As a 
consequence, the level of reduced glutathione is downregulated, a change 
associated with fibrosis and cardiomyopathy. We report that the pentose 
phosphate pathway and mitochondrial serine/glycine/folate metabolic signaling, 2 
NADPH-generating pathways in the cytosol and mitochondria, respectively, are 
induced by transverse aortic constriction. We identify ATF4 (activating 
transcription factor 4) as an upstream transcription factor controlling the 
expression of multiple enzymes in these 2 pathways. Consistently, joint pathway 
analysis of transcriptomic and metabolomic data reveal that ATF4 preferably 
controls oxidative stress and redox-related pathways. Overexpression of ATF4 in 
neonatal rat ventricular myocytes increases NADPH-producing enzymes' whereas 
silencing of ATF4 decreases their expression. Further, stable isotope tracer 
experiments reveal that ATF4 overexpression augments metabolic flux within these 
2 pathways. In vivo, cardiomyocyte-specific deletion of ATF4 exacerbates 
cardiomyopathy in the setting of transverse aortic constriction and accelerates 
heart failure development, attributable, at least in part, to an inability to 
increase the expression of NADPH-generating enzymes.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings reveal that ATF4 plays a critical role in the heart 
under conditions of hemodynamic stress by governing both cytosolic and 
mitochondrial production of NADPH.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.122.321050
PMCID: PMC9351829
PMID: 35574856 [Indexed for MEDLINE]