1. Front Oncol. 2022 Apr 28;12:871798. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2022.871798. eCollection
 2022.

Lactate Induces the Expressions of MCT1 and HCAR1 to Promote Tumor Growth and 
Progression in Glioblastoma.

Longhitano L(1), Vicario N(1), Tibullo D(1), Giallongo C(2), Broggi G(2), 
Caltabiano R(2), Barbagallo GMV(3)(4), Altieri R(3)(4), Baghini M(5), Di Rosa 
M(1), Parenti R(1), Giordano A(6), Mione MC(5), Li Volti G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical and Biotechnological Sciences, University of 
Catania, Catania, Italy.
(2)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences and Advanced Technologies "G.F. 
Ingrassia", Catania, Italy.
(3)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences and Advanced Technologies "G.F. 
Ingrassia" Neurological Surgery, Policlinico "G. Rodolico-San Marco" University 
Hospital, University of Catania, Catania, Italy.
(4)Interdisciplinary Research Center on Brain Tumors Diagnosis and Treatment, 
University of Catania, Catania, Italy.
(5)Department of Cellular, Computational and Integrative Biology (CIBIO), 
University of Trento, Trento, Italy.
(6)Sbarro Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine and Center of 
Biotechnology, College of Science and Technology, Temple University, 
Philadelphia, PA, United States.

The tumor microenvironment (TME) plays a pivotal role in establishing 
malignancy, and it is associated with high glycolytic metabolism and lactate 
release through monocarboxylate transporters (MCTs). Several lines of evidence 
suggest that lactate also serves as a signaling molecule through its receptor 
hydroxycarboxylic acid receptor 1 (HCAR1/GPR81), thus functioning as a paracrine 
and autocrine signaling molecule. The aim of the present study was to 
investigate the role of lactate in glioblastoma (GBM) progression and metabolic 
reprogramming in an in vitro and in vivo model. The cell proliferation, 
migration, and clonogenicity were tested in vitro in three different human GBM 
cell lines. The expressions of MCT1, MCT4, and HCAR1 were evaluated both in 
vitro and in a zebrafish GBM model. The results were further validated in 
patient-derived GBM biopsies. Our results showed that lactate significantly 
increased the cell proliferation, migration, and colony formation capacity of 
GBM cells, both in vitro and in vivo. We also showed that lactate increased the 
expressions of MCT1 and HCAR1. Moreover, lactate modulated the 
epithelial-mesenchymal transition protein markers E-cadherin and β-catenin. 
Interestingly, lactate induced mitochondrial mass and the OXPHOS gene, 
suggesting improved mitochondrial fitness. Similar effects were observed after 
treatment with 3,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid, a known agonist of HCAR1. 
Consistently, the GBM zebrafish model exhibited an altered metabolism and 
increased expressions of MCT1 and HCAR1, leading to high levels of extracellular 
lactate and, thus, supporting tumor cell proliferation. Our data from human GBM 
biopsies also showed that, in high proliferative GBM biopsies, Ki67-positive 
cells expressed significantly higher levels of MCT1 compared to low 
proliferative GBM cells. In conclusion, our data suggest that lactate and its 
transporter and receptor play a major role in GBM proliferation and migration, 
thus representing a potential target for new therapeutic strategies to 
counteract tumor progression and recurrence.

Copyright © 2022 Longhitano, Vicario, Tibullo, Giallongo, Broggi, Caltabiano, 
Barbagallo, Altieri, Baghini, Di Rosa, Parenti, Giordano, Mione and Li Volti.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2022.871798
PMCID: PMC9097945
PMID: 35574309

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The reviewer FM declared a 
past collaboration/co-authorship with the author AG to the handling editor.