1. Cancer Drug Resist. 2021 Jun 19;4(2):463-484. doi: 10.20517/cdr.2020.87. 
eCollection 2021.

Liposome co-encapsulation of anti-cancer agents for pharmacological optimization 
of nanomedicine-based combination chemotherapy.

Gabizon A(1)(2)(3), Ohana P(3), Amitay Y(3), Gorin J(1), Tzemach D(1), Mak L(1), 
Shmeeda H(1).

Author information:
(1)Nano-oncology Research Center, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem 
9103102, Israel.
(2)Hebrew University-School of Medicine, Jerusalem 9112102, Israel.
(3)Lipomedix Pharmaceuticals Ltd., Jerusalem 9139102, Israel.

Aim: Co-encapsulation of anti-cancer agents in pegylated liposomes may provide 
an effective tool to maximize efficacy of combined drug therapy by taking 
advantage of the long circulation time, passive targeting, and reduced toxicity 
of liposome formulations. Methods: We have developed several liposome 
formulations of co-encapsulated drugs using various permutations of three active 
agents: doxorubicin (Dox), mitomycin-C lipidic prodrug (MLP), and alendronate 
(Ald). Dox and MLP are available in single drug liposomal formulations: 
pegylated liposomal Dox (PLD, Doxil®), clinically approved, and pegylated 
liposomal MLP (PL-MLP, Promitil®), in phase 1-2 clinical testing. We have 
previously shown that co-encapsulation of Dox and Ald in pegylated liposomes 
(PLAD) results in a formulation with valuable immuno-pharmacologic properties 
and superior antitumor properties over PLD in immunocompetent animal models. 
Building on the PLAD and PL-MLP platforms, we developed a new pegylated 
liposomal formulation of co-entrapped Dox and MLP (PLAD-MLP), with the former 
localized in the liposome water phase via remote loading with an ammonium 
alendronate and the latter passively loaded into the liposome lipid bilayer. An 
alternative formulation of co-entrapped MLP and Dox in which ammonium Ald was 
replaced with ammonium sulfate (PLD-MLP) was also tested for comparative 
purposes. Results: PLAD-MLP displays high loading efficiency of Dox and MLP 
nearing 100%, and a mean vesicle diameter of 110 nm. Cryo-transmission electron 
microscopy (cryo-TEM) of PLAD-MLP reveals round vesicles with an intra-vesicle 
Dox-alendronate precipitate. PLAD-MLP was tested in an in vitro MLP activation 
assay with the reducing agent dithiothreitol and found to be significantly less 
susceptible to thiolytic activation than PL-MLP. Alongside thiolytic activation 
of MLP, a significant fraction of encapsulated Dox was released from liposomes. 
PLAD-MLP is stable upon in vitro incubation in human plasma with nearly 100% 
drug retention. In mouse pharmacokinetic studies, PLAD-MLP extended MLP 
half-life in circulation when compared to that of MLP delivered as PL-MLP. In 
addition, the MLP levels in tissues were greater than those obtained with 
PL-MLP, indicating that PLAD-MLP slows down the cleavage of the prodrug MLP to 
MMC, thus resulting in a more sustained and prolonged exposure. The circulation 
half-life of Dox in PLAD-MLP was similar to the PLD Dox half-life. The pattern 
of tissue distribution was similar for the co-encapsulated drugs, although Dox 
levels were generally higher than those of MLP, as expected from cleavage of MLP 
to its active metabolite MMC. In mouse tumor models, the therapeutic activity of 
PLAD-MLP was superior to PL-MLP and PLD with a convenient safety dose window. 
The Ald-free formulation, PLD-MLP, displayed similar pharmacokinetic properties 
to PLAD-MLP, but its therapeutic activity was lower. Conclusion: PLAD-MLP is a 
novel multi-drug liposome formulation with attractive pharmacological properties 
and powerful antitumor activity and is a promising therapeutic tool for 
combination cancer chemotherapy.

© The Author(s) 2021.

DOI: 10.20517/cdr.2020.87
PMCID: PMC9019273
PMID: 35582027

Conflict of interest statement: Gabizon A is founder and board director of 
Lipomedix; Amitay Y and Ohana P are employees of Lipomedix; all other authors 
declared that there are no conflicts of interest.