1. Front Genet. 2022 May 2;13:870976. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.870976. eCollection
 2022.

Regulation of Plant Tannin Synthesis in Crop Species.

Mora J(1), Pott DM(1), Osorio S(1), Vallarino JG(1).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Hortofruticultura Subtropical y Mediterránea "La Mayora"-Consejo 
Superior de Investigaciones Científicas-Universidad de Málaga- (IHSM-CSIC-UMA), 
Málaga, Spain.

Plant tannins belong to the antioxidant compound family, which includes 
chemicals responsible for protecting biological structures from the harmful 
effects of oxidative stress. A wide range of plants and crops are rich in 
antioxidant compounds, offering resistance to biotic, mainly against pathogens 
and herbivores, and abiotic stresses, such as light and wound stresses. These 
compounds are also related to human health benefits, offering protective effects 
against cardiovascular and neurodegenerative diseases in addition to providing 
anti-tumor, anti-inflammatory, and anti-bacterial characteristics. Most of these 
compounds are structurally and biosynthetically related, being synthesized 
through the shikimate-phenylpropanoid pathways, offering several classes of 
plant antioxidants: flavonoids, anthocyanins, and tannins. Tannins are divided 
into two major classes: condensed tannins or proanthocyanidins and hydrolysable 
tannins. Hydrolysable tannin synthesis branches directly from the shikimate 
pathway, while condensed tannins are derived from the flavonoid pathway, one of 
the branches of the phenylpropanoid pathway. Both types of tannins have been 
proposed as important molecules for taste perception of many fruits and 
beverages, especially wine, besides their well-known roles in plant defense and 
human health. Regulation at the gene level, biosynthesis and degradation have 
been extensively studied in condensed tannins in crops like grapevine (Vitis 
vinifera), persimmon (Diospyros kaki) and several berry species due to their 
high tannin content and their importance in the food and beverage industry. On 
the other hand, much less information is available regarding hydrolysable 
tannins, although some key aspects of their biosynthesis and regulation have 
been recently discovered. Here, we review recent findings about tannin 
metabolism, information that could be of high importance for crop breeding 
programs to obtain varieties with enhanced nutritional characteristics.

Copyright © 2022 Mora, Pott, Osorio and Vallarino.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2022.870976
PMCID: PMC9108539
PMID: 35586570

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.