1. Front Microbiol. 2022 May 6;13:893626. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.893626. 
eCollection 2022.

Inferring the Significance of the Polyamine Metabolism in the Phytopathogenic 
Bacteria Pseudomonas syringae: A Meta-Analysis Approach.

Solmi L(1), Rosli HG(2), Pombo MA(2), Stalder S(1), Rossi FR(1), Romero FM(1), 
Ruiz OA(1), Gárriz A(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratorio de Estrés Biótico y Abiótico en Plantas-Instituto Tecnológico de 
Chascomús (INTECh), Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y 
Técnicas-Universidad Nacional de General San Martín (CONICET-UNSAM), Chascomús, 
Argentina.
(2)Laboratorio de Interacciones Planta Patógeno-Instituto de Fisiología Vegetal 
(INFIVE), Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas-Universidad 
Nacional de La Plata (CONICET-UNLP), La Plata, Argentina.

To succeed in plant invasion, phytopathogenic bacteria rely on virulence 
mechanisms to subvert plant immunity and create favorable conditions for growth. 
This process requires a precise regulation in the production of important 
proteins and metabolites. Among them, the family of compounds known as 
polyamines have attracted considerable attention as they are involved in 
important cellular processes, but it is not known yet how phytopathogenic 
bacteria regulate polyamine homeostasis in the plant environment. In the present 
study, we performed a meta-analysis of publicly available transcriptomic data 
from experiments conducted on bacteria to begin delving into this topic and 
better understand the regulation of polyamine metabolism and its links to 
pathogenicity. We focused our research on Pseudomonas syringae, an important 
phytopathogen that causes disease in many economically valuable plant species. 
Our analysis discovered that polyamine synthesis, as well as general gene 
expression activation and energy production are induced in the early stages of 
the disease. On the contrary, synthesis of these compounds is inhibited whereas 
its transport is upregulated later in the process, which correlates with the 
induction of virulence genes and the metabolism of nitrogen and carboxylic 
acids. We also found that activation of plant defense mechanisms affects 
bacterial polyamine synthesis to some extent, which could reduce bacterial cell 
fitness in the plant environment. Furthermore, data suggest that a proper 
bacterial response to oxidative conditions requires a decrease in polyamine 
production. The implications of these findings are discussed.

Copyright © 2022 Solmi, Rosli, Pombo, Stalder, Rossi, Romero, Ruiz and Gárriz.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.893626
PMCID: PMC9120772
PMID: 35602047

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.