1. Dis Markers. 2022 May 11;2022:2744762. doi: 10.1155/2022/2744762. eCollection 
2022.

Association Study of Anticitrullinated Peptide Antibody Status with Clinical 
Manifestations and SNPs in Patients Affected with Rheumatoid Arthritis: A Pilot 
Study.

Issilbayeva A(1)(2), Ainabekova B(2), Zhetkenev S(1), Meiramova A(1)(2), 
Akhmetova Z(1)(2), Karina K(2), Kozhakhmetov S(1), Nurgaziyev M(1), Chulenbayeva 
L(1), Poddighe D(3)(4), Kunz J(3), Kushugulova A(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Human Microbiome and Longevity, Center for Life Sciences, 
National Laboratory Astana, Nazarbayev University, Nur-Sultan, Kazakhstan.
(2)NJSC Medical University Astana, Department of Internal Medicine with the 
Course of Gastroenterology, Endocrinology and Pulmonology, Nur-Sultan, 
Kazakhstan.
(3)Department of Medicine, Nazarbayev University School of Medicine (NUSOM), 
Nur-Sultan, Kazakhstan.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, National Research Center for Mother and Child 
Health, University Medical Center, Nur-Sultan, Kazakhstan.

INTRODUCTION: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an autoimmune disease of unknown 
etiology that leads to disability due to articular and extra-articular damage. 
RA prevalence is variable. The disease is most common among females with a 3 : 1 
ratio. The interaction of environmental and host factors contributes to RA 
development. Currently, the genome-wide association studies (GWAS) give the 
opportunity to uncover the RA genetic background. Anticitrullinated peptide 
antibody (ACPA) is a highly specific RA antibody, associated with poor prognosis 
and severe course of RA, and regulated by numerous genes. Our study is aimed at 
investigating whether there are any clinical and genetic aspects correlate with 
ACPA presence in Kazakhstani patients with RA. Indeed, the available studies on 
this subject are focused on Caucasian and East Asian populations (mainly 
Japanese and Chinese), and there are scarce data from Central Asia.
METHODS: Our study included 70 RA patients. Patients' blood samples were 
collected and genotyped for 14 SNPs by real-time polymerase chain reaction 
(RT-PCR). General examination, anamnestic, and clinical and laboratory data 
collection were carried out. Statistical analysis was performed using R 
statistics. Results and Conclusion. Our study revealed a significant association 
of ACPA positivity with Fc receptor-like 3 (FCRL3) and ACPA negativity with 
signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4) genes, but not with T 
cell activation Rho GTPase activating protein (TAGAP). In addition, ACPA 
positivity was associated with radiographic progression, rheumatoid factor (RF), 
erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), age of RA onset, the patient global 
assessment, body mass index (BMI), and Gamma globulin.
CONCLUSION: Remained 11 earlier identified significantly associated in Caucasian 
and Asian population SNPs were not replicated in our cohort. Further studies on 
larger cohorts are needed to confirm our findings with higher confidence levels 
and stronger statistical power.

Copyright © 2022 Argul Issilbayeva et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2022/2744762
PMCID: PMC9118096
PMID: 35601739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.