1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2022 May 5;10:890419. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2022.890419. 
eCollection 2022.

TEAD4 as an Oncogene and a Mitochondrial Modulator.

Hsu SC(1)(2), Lin CY(1), Lin YY(2), Collins CC(2), Chen CL(1)(2), Kung 
HJ(1)(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Program for Cancer Biology and Drug Discovery, College of Medical Science and 
Technology, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Vancouver Prostate Centre and Department of Urologic Sciences, University of 
British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(3)Research Center of Cancer Translational Medicine, Taipei Medical University, 
Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Institute of Molecular and Genomic Medicine, National Health Research 
Institutes, Zhunan, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, University of California, Davis, Sacramento, CA, United States.

TEAD4 (TEA Domain Transcription Factor 4) is well recognized as the DNA-anchor 
protein of YAP transcription complex, which is modulated by Hippo, a highly 
conserved pathway in Metazoa that controls organ size through regulating cell 
proliferation and apoptosis. To acquire full transcriptional activity, TEAD4 
requires co-activator, YAP (Yes-associated protein) or its homolog TAZ 
(transcriptional coactivator with PDZ-binding motif) the signaling hub that 
relays the extracellular stimuli to the transcription of target genes. Growing 
evidence suggests that TEAD4 also exerts its function in a YAP-independent 
manner through other signal pathways. Although TEAD4 plays an essential role in 
determining that differentiation fate of the blastocyst, it also promotes 
tumorigenesis by enhancing metastasis, cancer stemness, and drug resistance. 
Upregulation of TEAD4 has been reported in several cancers, including colon 
cancer, gastric cancer, breast cancer, and prostate cancer and serves as a 
valuable prognostic marker. Recent studies show that TEAD4, but not other 
members of the TEAD family, engages in regulating mitochondrial dynamics and 
cell metabolism by modulating the expression of mitochondrial- and 
nuclear-encoded electron transport chain genes. TEAD4's functions including 
oncogenic activities are tightly controlled by its subcellular localization. As 
a predominantly nuclear protein, its cytoplasmic translocation is triggered by 
several signals, such as osmotic stress, cell confluency, and arginine 
availability. Intriguingly, TEAD4 is also localized in mitochondria, although 
the translocation mechanism remains unclear. In this report, we describe the 
current understanding of TEAD4 as an oncogene, epigenetic regulator and 
mitochondrial modulator. The contributing mechanisms will be discussed.

Copyright © 2022 Hsu, Lin, Lin, Collins, Chen and Kung.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2022.890419
PMCID: PMC9117765
PMID: 35602596

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.