1. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 2022 May 25;23(1):493. doi: 
10.1186/s12891-022-05441-3.

A multimodality intervention to improve musculoskeletal health, function, 
metabolism, and well-being in spinal cord injury: study protocol for the FIT-SCI 
randomized controlled trial.

Reid KF(1), Storer TW(2), Pencina KM(2), Valderrabano R(2), Latham NK(2), Wilson 
L(2), Ghattas C(2), Dixon R(2), Nunes A(2), Bajdek N(2), Huang G(2), Skeels 
SE(2), Lin AP(3), Merugumala SM(3), Liao HJ(3), Bouxsein ML(4), Zafonte RD(5), 
Bhasin S(2).

Author information:
(1)Research Program in Men's Health: Aging and Metabolism, Boston Claude D. 
Pepper Older Americans Independence Center for Function Promoting Therapies, 
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. 
kfreid@bwh.harvard.edu.
(2)Research Program in Men's Health: Aging and Metabolism, Boston Claude D. 
Pepper Older Americans Independence Center for Function Promoting Therapies, 
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Center for Clinical Spectroscopy, Department of Radiology, Brigham and 
Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Center for Advanced Orthopaedic Studies, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical 
Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Department of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation, Spaulding Rehabilitation 
Hospital, Massachusetts General Hospital, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

BACKGROUND: A spinal cord injury (SCI) is a devastating, life-changing event 
that has profoundly deleterious effects on an individual's health and 
well-being. Dysregulation of neuromuscular, cardiometabolic, and endocrine organ 
systems following an SCI contribute to excess morbidity, mortality and a poor 
quality of life. As no effective treatments currently exist for SCI, the 
development of novel strategies to improve the functional and health status of 
individuals living with SCI are much needed. To address this knowledge gap, the 
current study will determine whether a Home-Based Multimodality Functional 
Recovery and Metabolic Health Enhancement Program that consists of functional 
electrical stimulation of the lower extremity during leg cycling (FES-LC) plus 
arm ergometry (AE) administered using behavioral motivational strategies, and 
testosterone therapy, is more efficacious than FES-LC plus AE and placebo in 
improving aerobic capacity, musculoskeletal health, function, metabolism, and 
wellbeing in SCI.
METHODS: This single-site, randomized, placebo-controlled, parallel group trial 
will enroll 88 community-dwelling men and women, 19 to 70 years of age, with 
cervical and thoracic level of SCI, ASIA Impairment Scale grade: A, B, C, or D, 
6 months or later after an SCI. Participants randomized to the multimodality 
intervention will undergo 16 weeks of home-based FES-LC and AE training plus 
testosterone undecanoate. Testosterone undecanoate injections will be 
administered by study staff in clinic or by a visiting nurse in the 
participant's home. The control group will receive 16 weeks of home-based FES-LC 
and AE exercise plus placebo injections. The primary outcome of this trial is 
peak aerobic capacity, measured during an incremental exercise testing protocol. 
Secondary outcomes include whole body and regional lean and adipose tissue mass; 
muscle strength and power; insulin sensitivity, lipids, and inflammatory 
markers; SCI functional index and wellbeing (mood, anxiety, pain, life 
satisfaction and depressive symptoms); and safety.
DISCUSSION: We anticipate that a multimodality intervention that simultaneously 
addresses multiple physiological impairments in SCI will result in increased 
aerobic capacity and greater improvements in other musculoskeletal, metabolic, 
functional and patient-reported outcomes compared to the control intervention. 
The findings of this study will have important implications for improving the 
care of people living with an SCI.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov :  ( NCT03576001 ). Prospectively 
registered: July 3, 2018.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12891-022-05441-3
PMCID: PMC9130453
PMID: 35614404 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: SB reports receiving research grant support from 
AbbVie, Transition Therapeutics, FPT, and Metro International Biotechnology, 
Inc. and has received consulting fees from OPKO Pharmaceuticals and POXEL, Inc., 
and has equity interest in FPT, LLC and Xyone Therapeutics. Other authors report 
no conflicts of interest.