1. J Clin Invest. 2022 Jul 1;132(13):e145660. doi: 10.1172/JCI145660.

RRM1 variants cause a mitochondrial DNA maintenance disorder via impaired de 
novo nucleotide synthesis.

Shintaku J(1), Pernice WM(1), Eyaid W(2), Gc JB(3), Brown ZP(3), 
Juanola-Falgarona M(1), Torres-Torronteras J(4)(5), Sommerville EW(6), 
Hellebrekers DM(7), Blakely EL(6)(8), Donaldson A(9), van de Laar I(10), Leu 
CS(11), Marti R(4)(5), Frank J(3)(12), Tanji K(1)(13), Koolen DA(14), Rodenburg 
RJ(15)(16), Chinnery PF(17)(18), Smeets HJM(19)(20), Gorman GS(6)(8), Bonnen 
PE(21), Taylor RW(6)(8), Hirano M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, H. Houston Merritt Neuromuscular Research Center, 
Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, New York, USA.
(2)Genetics Division, Department of Pediatrics, King Saud bin Abdulaziz 
University for Health Science, King Abdulaziz Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi 
Arabia.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Columbia University, New 
York, New York, USA.
(4)Center for Biomedical Network Research on Rare Diseases, Instituto de Salud 
Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
(5)Research Group on Neuromuscular and Mitochondrial Diseases, Vall d'Hebron 
Research Institute, Autonomous University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Wellcome Centre for Mitochondrial Research, Translational and Clinical 
Research Institute, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle 
upon Tyne, United Kingdom.
(7)Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht University Medical Centre, 
Maastricht, Netherlands.
(8)NHS Highly Specialised Service for Rare Mitochondrial Disorders, Newcastle 
upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom.
(9)Clinical Genetics Service, University of Bristol NHS Foundation Trust, 
Bristol, United Kingdom.
(10)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center 
Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
(11)Mailman School of Public Health and.
(12)Department of Biological Sciences, Columbia University, New York, New York, 
USA.
(13)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University Irving Medical 
Center, New York, New York, USA.
(14)Department of Human Genetics, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 
Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands.
(15)Radboud Centre for Mitochondrial Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Amalia 
Children's Hospital, Nijmegen, Netherlands.
(16)Translational Metabolic Laboratory, Department of Laboratory Medicine, 
Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands.
(17)MRC Mitochondrial Biology Unit and.
(18)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, School of Clinical Medicine, University 
of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(19)Department of Genetics and Cell Biology, Clinical Genomics Unit, and.
(20)School for Mental Health and Neuroscience, Maastricht University, 
Maastricht, Netherlands.
(21)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas, USA.

Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) depletion/deletions syndromes (MDDS) encompass a 
clinically and etiologically heterogenous group of mitochondrial disorders 
caused by impaired mtDNA maintenance. Among the most frequent causes of MDDS are 
defects in nucleoside/nucleotide metabolism, which is critical for synthesis and 
homeostasis of the deoxynucleoside triphosphate (dNTP) substrates of mtDNA 
replication. A central enzyme for generating dNTPs is ribonucleotide reductase, 
a critical mediator of de novo nucleotide synthesis composed of catalytic RRM1 
subunits in complex with RRM2 or p53R2. Here, we report 5 probands from 4 
families who presented with ptosis and ophthalmoplegia as well as other clinical 
manifestations and multiple mtDNA deletions in muscle. We identified 3 RRM1 
loss-of-function variants, including a dominant catalytic site variant 
(NP_001024.1: p.N427K) and 2 homozygous recessive variants at p.R381, which has 
evolutionarily conserved interactions with the specificity site. Atomistic 
molecular dynamics simulations indicate mechanisms by which RRM1 variants affect 
protein structure. Cultured primary skin fibroblasts of probands manifested 
mtDNA depletion under cycling conditions, indicating impaired de novo nucleotide 
synthesis. Fibroblasts also exhibited aberrant nucleoside diphosphate and dNTP 
pools and mtDNA ribonucleotide incorporation. Our data reveal that primary RRM1 
deficiency and, by extension, impaired de novo nucleotide synthesis are causes 
of MDDS.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI145660
PMCID: PMC9246377
PMID: 35617047 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors have declared 
that no conflict of interest exists.