1. J Thromb Haemost. 2022 Aug;20(8):1900-1909. doi: 10.1111/jth.15772. Epub 2022 
Jun 15.

Generation of a thrombopoietin-deficient thrombocytopenia model in zebrafish.

Yang L(1), Wu L(1)(2), Meng P(1), Zhang X(1), Zhao D(3), Lin Q(1), Zhang Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cell, Developmental and Integrative Biology, School of Medicine, 
South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Hematology, Guangzhou First People's Hospital, School of 
Medicine, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Guangdong Provincial Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Guangzhou, 
China.

BACKGROUND: The production of platelets is tightly regulated by thrombopoietin 
(THPO). Mutations in the THPO gene cause thrombocytopenia. Although mice lacking 
Thpo present with thrombocytopenia, predicting phenotypes and pathogenicity of 
novel THPO mutations in mice is limited. Zebrafish can be a powerful tool for 
fast validation and study of candidate genes of human hematological diseases and 
have already been used as a model of human thrombocytopenia.
OBJECTIVES: We aim to investigate the role of Thpo in zebrafish thrombopoiesis 
and to establish a Thpo-deficient zebrafish model. The model could be applied 
for illustrating the clinically discovered human THPO variants of which the 
clinical significance is not known and to evaluate the effect of THPO receptor 
agonists (THPO-Ras), as well as a screening platform for new drugs.
METHODS: We generated a thpo loss-of-function zebrafish model using CRISPR/Cas9. 
After disruption of zebrafish thpo, thposzy6 zebrafish presented with a 
significant reduction of thpo expression and developed thrombocytopenia. 
Furthermore, we performed in vivo studies with zebrafish with the thposzy6 
mutation and found two human clinical point mutations (c.091C > T and 
c.112C > T) that were responsible for the thrombocytopenia phenotype. In 
addition, effects of THPO-RAs used as therapeutics against thrombocytopenia were 
evaluated in the Tg(mpl:eGFP);thposzy6 line.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: Zebrafish with the mutation thposzy6 presented with a 
significant reduction of thpo expression and developed thrombocytopenia. Thpo 
loss-of-function zebrafish model can serve as a valuable preclinical model for 
thrombocytopenia caused by thpo-deficiency, as well as a tool to study human 
clinical THPO variants and evaluate the effect of THPO-RAs.

© 2022 International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis.

DOI: 10.1111/jth.15772
PMID: 35622056 [Indexed for MEDLINE]