1. Children (Basel). 2022 Apr 25;9(5):613. doi: 10.3390/children9050613.

Quantitative MR in Paediatric Patients with Wilson Disease: A Case Series 
Review.

Janowski K(1), Shumbayawonda E(2), Kelly M(2), Ferreira C(2), Pronicki M(3), 
Grajkowska W(3), Naorniakowska M(1), Pawliszak P(4), Chełstowska S(4), 
Jurkiewicz E(4), Banerjee R(2), Socha P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, Nutritional Disorders and 
Pediatrics, The Children's Memorial Health Institute, 04-736 Warsaw, Poland.
(2)Perspectum Ltd., Oxford OX4 2LL, UK.
(3)Department of Pathology, The Children's Memorial Health Institute, 04-736 
Warsaw, Poland.
(4)Department of Diagnostic Imaging, The Children's Memorial Health Institute, 
04-736 Warsaw, Poland.

Wilson disease (WD) is a liver disorder characterized by improper copper 
metabolism. Although non-invasive tools are currently used to support diagnosis 
and management, this is still an area of unmet need, as patients present with a 
wide range of symptoms. Our aim was to investigate the potential utility of 
multiparametric magnetic resonance imaging (mpMRI) and quantitative magnetic 
resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP+) to support patient management. MRI 
examinations of 7 children and young adults aged 8-16 years (six at diagnosis) 
were performed alongside a standard of care clinical and histological 
examination. Images were quantitatively analyzed to derive metrics of liver 
(corrected T1 (cT1; fibro-inflammation), MR liver fat (proton density fat 
fraction; PDFF)), and biliary health (MRCP+). MRI-PDFF provided a more dynamic 
characterization of fat compared with that provided by ultrasound. Those with 
elevated histological scores of fibrosis, inflammation, and steatosis had 
elevated mpMRI values. MRCP+ managed to identify dilatations in the biliary tree 
which were not observed during the standard of care examination. mpMRI and MRCP+ 
metrics show early promise as markers to assess both liver and biliary health in 
Wilson disease. Investigations to understand and explore the utility of these 
markers are warranted and should be performed.

DOI: 10.3390/children9050613
PMCID: PMC9139168
PMID: 35626790

Conflict of interest statement: The funders had no role in the design of the 
study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of 
the manuscript, or in the decision to publish the results. The members and 
employees of The Children’s Memorial Health Institute (K.J., M.P., W.G., M.N., 
P.P., S.C., E.J., P.S.) declare no conflict of interest with this study. All 
Perspectum employees (E.S., M.K., C.F., R.B.) declare conflict of interest. 
Perspectum Ltd. is a privately funded commercial enterprise that develops 
medical devices to address unmet clinical needs, including LiverMultiScan and 
MRCP+. Perspectum is the sponsor of this study.