1. Front Physiol. 2022 May 10;13:798395. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2022.798395. 
eCollection 2022.

Involvement of the SIRT1/PGC-1α Signaling Pathway in Noise-Induced Hidden 
Hearing Loss.

Liu YH(1)(2), Jiang YH(1)(2), Li CC(1)(2), Chen XM(3)(4)(5)(6), Huang LG(7), 
Zhang M(1)(2), Ruan B(1)(2), Wang XC(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Center of Clinical Aerospace Medicine, School of Aerospace Medicine, Key 
Laboratory of Aerospace Medicine of Ministry of Education, Air Force Medical 
University, Xi'an, China.
(2)Department of Avation Medicine, Xi-Jing Hospital, Air Force Military Medical 
University, Xi'an, China.
(3)Medical School of Chinese PLA, Beijing, China.
(4)Senior Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, The Sixth Medical 
Center, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China.
(5)National Clinical Research Center for Otolaryngologic Diseases, State Key Lab 
of Hearing Science, Ministry of Education, Beijing, China.
(6)Beijing Key Lab of Hearing Impairment Prevention and Treatment, Beijing, 
China.
(7)The 908th Hospital of Joint Logistics Support Force of PLA, Nanchang, China.

Objective: To establish an animal model of noise-induced hidden hearing loss 
(NIHHL), evaluate the dynamic changes in cochlear ribbon synapses and cochlear 
hair cell morphology, and observe the involvement of the SIRT1/PGC-1α signaling 
pathway in NIHHL. Methods: Male guinea pigs were randomly divided into three 
groups: control group, noise exposure group, and resveratrol treatment group. 
Each group was divided into five subgroups: the control group and 1 day, 1 week, 
2 weeks, and 1 month post noise exposure groups. The experimental groups 
received noise stimulation at 105 dB SPL for 2 h. Hearing levels were examined 
by auditory brainstem response (ABR). Ribbon synapses were evaluated by inner 
ear basilar membrane preparation and immunofluorescence. The cochlear morphology 
was observed using scanning electron microscopy. Western blotting analysis and 
immunofluorescence was performed to assess the change of SIRT1/PGC-1α signaling. 
Levels of superoxide dismutase (SOD), malondialdehyde (MDA), catalase (CAT), ATP 
and SIRT1 activity were measured using commercial testing kits. Results: In the 
noise exposure group, hearing threshold exhibited a temporary threshold shift 
(TTS), and amplitude of ABR wave I decreased irreversibly. Ribbon synapse 
density decreased after noise exposure, and the stereocilia were chaotic and 
then returned to normal. The expression and activity of SIRT1 and PGC-1α protein 
was lower than that in the control group. SOD, CAT and ATP were also influenced 
by noise exposure and were lower than those in the control group, but MDA showed 
no statistical differences compared with the control group. After resveratrol 
treatment, SIRT1 expression and activity showed a significant increase after 
noise exposure, compared with the noise exposure group. In parallel, the PGC-1α 
and antioxidant proteins were also significantly altered after noise exposure, 
compared with the noise exposure group. The damage to the ribbon synapses and 
the stereocilia were attenuated by resveratrol as well. More importantly, the 
auditory function, especially ABR wave I amplitudes, was also promoted in the 
resveratrol treatment group. Conclusion: The SIRT1/PGC-1α signaling pathway and 
oxidative stress are involved in the pathogenesis of NIHHL and could be 
potential therapeutical targets in the future.

Copyright © 2022 Liu, Jiang, Li, Chen, Huang, Zhang, Ruan and Wang.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2022.798395
PMCID: PMC9127058
PMID: 35620603

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.