1. Elife. 2022 May 30;11:e75871. doi: 10.7554/eLife.75871.

Inhibition of the sodium-dependent HCO(3)(-) transporter SLC4A4, produces a 
cystic fibrosis-like airway disease phenotype.

Saint-Criq V(1), Guequén A(2)(3), Philp AR(2)(3), Villanueva S(2), Apablaza 
T(2)(3), Fernández-Moncada I(2), Mansilla A(2)(3), Delpiano L(1), Ruminot 
I(2)(4), Carrasco C(5), Gray MA(1), Flores CA(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Biosciences Institute, The Medical School, Newcastle University, Newcastle 
upon Tyne, United Kingdom.
(2)Centro de Estudios Científicos, Valdivia, Chile.
(3)Universidad Austral de Chile, Valdivia, Chile.
(4)Universidad San Sebastián, Valdivia, Chile.
(5)Subdepartamento de Anatomía Patológica, Hospital Base de Valdivia, Valdivia, 
Chile.

Bicarbonate secretion is a fundamental process involved in maintaining acid-base 
homeostasis. Disruption of bicarbonate entry into airway lumen, as has been 
observed in cystic fibrosis, produces several defects in lung function due to 
thick mucus accumulation. Bicarbonate is critical for correct mucin deployment 
and there is increasing interest in understanding its role in airway physiology, 
particularly in the initiation of lung disease in children affected by cystic 
fibrosis, in the absence of detectable bacterial infection. The current model of 
anion secretion in mammalian airways consists of CFTR and TMEM16A as apical 
anion exit channels, with limited capacity for bicarbonate transport compared to 
chloride. However, both channels can couple to SLC26A4 anion exchanger to 
maximise bicarbonate secretion. Nevertheless, current models lack any details 
about the identity of the basolateral protein(s) responsible for bicarbonate 
uptake into airway epithelial cells. We report herein that the electrogenic, 
sodium-dependent, bicarbonate cotransporter, SLC4A4, is expressed in the 
basolateral membrane of human and mouse airways, and that it's pharmacological 
inhibition or genetic silencing reduces bicarbonate secretion. In fully 
differentiated primary human airway cells cultures, SLC4A4 inhibition induced an 
acidification of the airways surface liquid and markedly reduced the capacity of 
cells to recover from an acid load. Studies in the Slc4a4-null mice revealed a 
previously unreported lung phenotype, characterized by mucus accumulation and 
reduced mucociliary clearance. Collectively, our results demonstrate that the 
reduction of SLC4A4 function induced a CF-like phenotype, even when chloride 
secretion remained intact, highlighting the important role SLC4A4 plays in 
bicarbonate secretion and mammalian airway function.

© 2022, Saint-Criq et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.75871
PMCID: PMC9173743
PMID: 35635440 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: VS, AG, AP, SV, TA, IF, AM, LD, IR, CC, MG, CF 
No competing interests declared