1. Pol J Microbiol. 2022 Feb 23;71(1):27-34. doi: 10.33073/pjm-2022-002.

Genetic Polymorphisms of Pneumocystis jirovecii in HIV-Positive and HIV-Negative 
Patients in Northern China.

Xue T(1), Du WQ(2), Dai WJ(1), Li YS(1), Wang SF(3), Wang JL(4), Zhang XR(1).

Author information:
(1)NHC Key Laboratory of Pneumoconiosis, Key Laboratory of Prophylaxis and 
Treatment and Basic Research of Respiratory Diseases of Shanxi Province, 
Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, First Affiliated Hospital 
of Shanxi Medical University, Taiyuan, P.R. China.
(2)Department of clinical inspection, Eleventh Affiliated Hospital of Shanxi 
Medical University, Lvliang, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Clinical Inspection, First Affiliated Hospital of Shanxi 
Medical University, Taiyuan, P.R. China.
(4)Department of Translation Medicine, Jinzhou Medical University, Jinzhou, P.R. 
China.

Pneumocystis jirovecii is an opportunistic fungus that can cause severe and 
potentially fatal Pneumocystis pneumonia (PCP) in immunodeficient patients. In 
this study, we investigated the genetic polymorphisms of P. jirovecii at eight 
different loci, including six nuclear genes (ITS, 26S rRNA, sod, dhps, dhfr and 
β-Tub) and two mitochondrial genes (mtLSU-rRNA and cyb) in three PCP cases, 
including two patients with HIV infection and one without HIV infection in 
Shanxi Province, P.R. China. The gene targets were amplified by PCR followed by 
sequencing of plasmid clones. The HIV-negative patient showed a coinfection with 
two genotypes of P. jirovecii at six of the eight loci sequenced. Of the two 
HIV-positive patients, one showed a coinfection with two genotypes of P. 
jirovecii at the same two of the six loci as in the HIV-negative patient, while 
the other showed a single infection at all eight loci sequenced. None of the 
three drug target genes (dhfr, dhps and cyb) showed mutations known to be 
potentially associated with drug resistance. This is the first report of genetic 
polymorphisms of P. jirovecii in PCP patients in Shanxi Province, China. Our 
findings expand our understanding of the genetic diversity of P. jirovecii in 
China.

© 2022 Ting Xue et al., published by Sciendo.

DOI: 10.33073/pjm-2022-002
PMCID: PMC9152919
PMID: 35635165 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors do not report 
any financial or personal connections with other persons or organizations, which 
might negatively affect the contents of this publication and/or claim authorship 
rights to this publication.