1. Front Neural Circuits. 2022 May 12;16:842748. doi: 10.3389/fncir.2022.842748. 
eCollection 2022.

A Novel Device of Reaching, Grasping, and Retrieving Task for Head-Fixed Mice.

Manita S(1), Ikezoe K(1), Kitamura K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurophysiology, University of Yamanashi, Chuo, Japan.

Reaching, grasping, and retrieving movements are essential to our daily lives 
and are common in many mammalian species. To understand the mechanism for 
controlling this movement at the neural circuit level, it is necessary to 
observe the activity of individual neurons involved in the movement. For stable 
electrophysiological or optical recordings of neural activity in a behaving 
animal, head fixation effectively minimizes motion artifacts. Here, we developed 
a new device that allows mice to perform reaching, grasping, and retrieving 
movements during head fixation. In this method, agar cubes were presented as 
target objects in front of water-restricted mice, and the mice were able to 
reach, grasp, and retrieve them with their forelimb. The agar cubes were 
supplied by a custom-made automatic dispenser, which uses a microcontroller to 
control the two motors to push out the agar cubes. This agar presentation system 
supplied approximately 20 agar cubes in consecutive trials. We confirmed that 
each agar cube could be presented to the mouse with an average weight of 55 ± 3 
mg and positional accuracy of less than 1 mm. Using this system, we showed that 
head-fixed mice could perform reaching, grasping, and retrieving tasks after 1 
week of training. When the agar cube was placed near the mice, they could grasp 
it with a high success rate without extensive training. On the other hand, when 
the agar cube was presented far from the mice, the success rate was initially 
low and increased with subsequent test sessions. Furthermore, we showed that 
activity in the primary motor cortex is required for reaching movements in this 
task. Therefore, our system can be used to study neural circuit mechanisms for 
the control and learning of reaching, grasping, and retrieving movements under 
head-fixed conditions.

Copyright © 2022 Manita, Ikezoe and Kitamura.

DOI: 10.3389/fncir.2022.842748
PMCID: PMC9133411
PMID: 35633733 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.