1. Med. 2022 Jul 8;3(7):481-518.e14. doi: 10.1016/j.medj.2022.05.002. Epub 2022
May  31.

Cross-tissue, single-cell stromal atlas identifies shared pathological 
fibroblast phenotypes in four chronic inflammatory diseases.

Korsunsky I(1), Wei K(2), Pohin M(3), Kim EY(4), Barone F(5), Major T(6), Taylor 
E(6), Ravindran R(3), Kemble S(5), Watts GFM(2), Jonsson AH(2), Jeong Y(4), 
Athar H(7), Windell D(3), Kang JB(1), Friedrich M(3), Turner J(6), Nayar S(8), 
Fisher BA(9), Raza K(9), Marshall JL(5), Croft AP(5), Tamura T(4), Sholl LM(10), 
Vivero M(10), Rosas IO(11), Bowman SJ(9), Coles M(3), Frei AP(12), Lassen K(12), 
Filer A(8), Powrie F(13), Buckley CD(14), Brenner MB(15), Raychaudhuri S(16).

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Inflammation, and Immunity, Brigham and Women's 
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Center for Data 
Sciences, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Division of 
Genetics, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 
02115, USA; Department of Biomedical Informatics, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA; Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad 
Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02141, USA.
(2)Division of Rheumatology, Inflammation, and Immunity, Brigham and Women's 
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(3)Kennedy Institute of Rheumatology, Nuffield Department of Orthopaedics, 
Rheumatology and Musculoskeletal Science, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7FY, 
UK.
(4)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Division of Pulmonary and 
Critical Care Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(5)Rheumatology Research Group, Institute for Inflammation and Ageing, College 
of Medical and Dental Sciences, University of Birmingham, Queen Elizabeth 
Hospital, Birmingham B15 2WD, UK.
(6)Rheumatology Research Group, Institute for Inflammation and Ageing, College 
of Medical and Dental Sciences, University of Birmingham, Queen Elizabeth 
Hospital, Birmingham B15 2WD, UK; Birmingham Tissue Analytics, Institute for 
Inflammation and Ageing, NIHR Birmingham Biomedical Research Center and Clinical 
Research Facility, University of Birmingham, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, 
Birmingham B15 2TT, UK.
(7)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Brigham and Women's 
Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(8)Rheumatology Research Group, Institute for Inflammation and Ageing, College 
of Medical and Dental Sciences, University of Birmingham, Queen Elizabeth 
Hospital, Birmingham B15 2WD, UK; Birmingham Tissue Analytics, Institute for 
Inflammation and Ageing, NIHR Birmingham Biomedical Research Center and Clinical 
Research Facility, University of Birmingham, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, 
Birmingham B15 2TT, UK; NIHR Birmingham Biomedical Research Centre, University 
Hospitals Birmingham NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK.
(9)Rheumatology Research Group, Institute for Inflammation and Ageing, College 
of Medical and Dental Sciences, University of Birmingham, Queen Elizabeth 
Hospital, Birmingham B15 2WD, UK; NIHR Birmingham Biomedical Research Centre, 
University Hospitals Birmingham NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK.
(10)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(11)Section of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Dallas, TX 75246, USA.
(12)Roche Pharma Research and Early Development, Immunology, Infectious Diseases 
and Ophthalmology (I2O) Discovery and Translational Area, Roche Innovation 
Center Basel, Basel 4070, Switzerland.
(13)Kennedy Institute of Rheumatology, Nuffield Department of Orthopaedics, 
Rheumatology and Musculoskeletal Science, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7FY, 
UK. Electronic address: fiona.powrie@kennedy.ox.ac.uk.
(14)Kennedy Institute of Rheumatology, Nuffield Department of Orthopaedics, 
Rheumatology and Musculoskeletal Science, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7FY, 
UK; Rheumatology Research Group, Institute for Inflammation and Ageing, College 
of Medical and Dental Sciences, University of Birmingham, Queen Elizabeth 
Hospital, Birmingham B15 2WD, UK; NIHR Birmingham Biomedical Research Centre, 
University Hospitals Birmingham NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK. 
Electronic address: christopher.buckley@kennedy.ox.ac.uk.
(15)Division of Rheumatology, Inflammation, and Immunity, Brigham and Women's 
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. Electronic address: 
mbrenner@research.bwh.harvard.edu.
(16)Division of Rheumatology, Inflammation, and Immunity, Brigham and Women's 
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Center for Data 
Sciences, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Division of 
Genetics, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 
02115, USA; Department of Biomedical Informatics, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA; Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad 
Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02141, USA; Centre for Genetics and 
Genomics Versus Arthritis, Centre for Musculoskeletal Research, Manchester 
Academic Health Science Centre, The University of Manchester, Manchester M14 9PR 
UK. Electronic address: soumya@broadinstitute.org.

BACKGROUND: Pro-inflammatory fibroblasts are critical for pathogenesis in 
rheumatoid arthritis, inflammatory bowel disease, interstitial lung disease, and 
Sjögren's syndrome and represent a novel therapeutic target for chronic 
inflammatory disease. However, the heterogeneity of fibroblast phenotypes, 
exacerbated by the lack of a common cross-tissue taxonomy, has limited our 
understanding of which pathways are shared by multiple diseases.
METHODS: We profiled fibroblasts derived from inflamed and non-inflamed 
synovium, intestine, lungs, and salivary glands from affected individuals with 
single-cell RNA sequencing. We integrated all fibroblasts into a multi-tissue 
atlas to characterize shared and tissue-specific phenotypes.
FINDINGS: Two shared clusters, CXCL10+CCL19+ immune-interacting and 
SPARC+COL3A1+ vascular-interacting fibroblasts, were expanded in all inflamed 
tissues and mapped to dermal analogs in a public atopic dermatitis atlas. We 
confirmed these human pro-inflammatory fibroblasts in animal models of lung, 
joint, and intestinal inflammation.
CONCLUSIONS: This work represents a thorough investigation into fibroblasts 
across organ systems, individual donors, and disease states that reveals shared 
pathogenic activation states across four chronic inflammatory diseases.
FUNDING: Grant from F. Hoffmann-La Roche (Roche) AG.

Copyright © 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.medj.2022.05.002
PMCID: PMC9271637
PMID: 35649411 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests E.Y.K. is a member of 
the advisory board for Cell Reports Medicine. In disclosures unrelated to this 
work, E.Y.K. is a member of the Steering Committees for and receives no 
financial renumeration from NCT04409834 (Prevention of arteriovenous thrombotic 
events in critically ill COVID-19 patients, TIMI group) and REMAP-CAP ACE2 
renin-angiotensin system (RAS) modulation domain. E.Y.K. receives unrelated 
research funding from Bayer AG. In the past, E.Y.K. received unrelated research 
funding from Windtree Therapeutics. T.T. receives unrelated support from the 
Zoll Foundation. K.W. is a consultant to Mestag and Gilead Sciences and reports 
grant support from Gilead Sciences. S.R. is a scientific advisor for Rheos 
Medicines, Janssen, and Pfizer and a founder of Mestag, Inc. Y.J. and H.A. 
receive unrelated support from Bayer AG. M.B.B. is a consultant to GSK and 4FO 
Ventures and a founder of Mestag Therapeutics. M.L.S. receives unrelated 
research funding and institution consulting fees from Genentech, institution 
consulting fees from Lilly, research funding from Bristol Myers Squibb, and 
personal consulting fees from GV20 Therapeutics. M.C. is a co-founder of Mestag 
Therapeutics and obtains grant funding from and has consulted for Hoffman 
La-Roche. S.B. has provided paid consultancy services regarding Sjögren’s 
syndrome clinical trial design for the following companies in the past 3 years: 
Abbvie, AstraZeneca, BMS, Galapagos, Novartis, and Resolve Pharma. A.F. has 
received personal renumerations from Abbvie, Roche, and Janssen in the last 2 
years and institutional research funding from Roche, UCB, Nascient, Mestag, GSK, 
and Janssen. A.P.F. and K.G.L. reported being employees of F. Hoffmann-La Roche 
(Roche) AG.