1. BMJ Open. 2022 Jun 2;12(6):e056073. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-056073.

Study protocol for an epidemiological study 'Multimorbidity - identifying the 
most burdensome patterns, risk factors and potentials to reduce future burden 
(MOLTO)' based on the Finnish health examination surveys and the ongoing 
register-based follow-up.

Jääskeläinen T(1), Koponen P(2), Lundqvist A(2), Suvisaari J(2), Järvelin J(3), 
Koskinen S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health and Welfare, Finnish Institute for Health and 
Welfare, Helsinki, Finland tuija.jaaskelainen@thl.fi.
(2)Department of Public Health and Welfare, Finnish Institute for Health and 
Welfare, Helsinki, Finland.
(3)Department of Knowledge Brokers, Finnish Institute for Health and Welfare, 
Helsinki, Finland.

INTRODUCTION: Multimorbidity, defined as the co-occurrence of two or more 
long-term medical conditions, is an increasing public health concern worldwide 
causing enormous burden to individuals, healthcare systems and societies. The 
most effective way of decreasing the burden caused by multimorbidity is to find 
tools for its successful prevention but gaps in research evidence limit 
capacities to develop prevention strategies. The aim of the MOLTO study 
(Multimorbidity - identifying the most burdensome patterns, risk factors and 
potentials to reduce future burden) is to provide novel evidence required for 
cost-effective prevention of multimorbidity by defining the multimorbidity 
patterns causing the greatest burden at the population level, by examining their 
risk and protective factors and by estimating the potentials to reduce the 
future burden.
METHODS AND ANALYSIS: The MOLTO study is based on the data from the Finnish 
population-based cross-sectional (FINRISK 2002-2012, FinHealth 2017 the Migrant 
Health and Well-being Study 2010-2012) and longitudinal (Health 2000/2011) 
health examination surveys with individual-level link to administrative health 
registers, allowing register-based follow-up for the study participants. Both 
cross-sectional and longitudinal study designs will be used. Multimorbidity 
patterns will be defined using latent class analysis. The burden caused by 
multimorbidity as well as risk and protective factors for multimorbidity will be 
analysed by survival analysis methods such as Cox proportional hazards and 
Poisson regression models.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: The survey data have been collected following the 
legislation at the time of the survey. The ethics committee of the Hospital 
District of Helsinki and Uusimaa has approved the data collection and register 
linkages for each survey. The results will be published as peer-reviewed 
scientific publications.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2022. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-056073
PMCID: PMC9163539
PMID: 35654460 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: JJ is Senior Medical 
Officer of the Care Register for Health Care.