1. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2022 Oct;74(10):1615-1624. doi: 10.1002/art.42256. Epub 
2022 Sep 6.

Intracellular Sensing of DNA in Autoinflammation and Autoimmunity.

MacLauchlan S(1), Fitzgerald KA(2), Gravallese EM(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Inflammation, and Immunity, Department of Medicine, 
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.
(2)Program in Innate Immunity, Department of Medicine, University of 
Massachusetts Chan Medical School, Worcester.

Evidence has shown that DNA is a pathogen-associated molecular pattern, posing a 
unique challenge in the discrimination between endogenous and foreign DNA. This 
challenge is highlighted by certain autoinflammatory diseases that arise from 
monogenic mutations and result in periodic flares of inflammation, typically in 
the absence of autoantibodies or antigen-specific T lymphocytes. Several 
autoinflammatory diseases arise due to mutations in genes that normally prevent 
the accrual of endogenous DNA or are due to mutations that cause activation of 
intracellular DNA-sensing pathway components. Evidence from genetically modified 
murine models further support an ability of endogenous DNA and DNA sensing to 
drive disease pathogenesis, prompting the question of whether endogenous DNA can 
also induce inflammation in human autoimmune diseases. In this review, we 
discuss the current understanding of intracellular DNA sensing and downstream 
signaling pathways as they pertain to autoinflammatory disease, including the 
development of monogenic disorders such as Stimulator of interferon 
genes-associated vasculopathy with onset in infancy and Aicardi-Goutières 
syndrome. In addition, we discuss systemic rheumatic diseases, including certain 
forms of systemic lupus erythematosus, familial chilblain lupus, and other 
diseases with established links to intracellular DNA-sensing pathways, and 
highlight the lessons learned from these examples as they apply to the 
development of therapies targeting these pathways.

© 2022 American College of Rheumatology.

DOI: 10.1002/art.42256
PMCID: PMC9529773
PMID: 35656967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]