1. Ophthalmol Sci. 2022 Jun;2(2):100160. doi: 10.1016/j.xops.2022.100160.

Machine learning OCT predictors of progression from intermediate age-related 
macular degeneration to geographic atrophy and vision loss.

Lad E(1), Sleiman K(1)(2), Banks DL(3), Hariharan S(3), Clemons T(4), Herrmann 
R(5), Dauletbekov D(5), Giani A(5), Chong V(5), Chew EY(6), Toth CA(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA.
(2)The Statistical Consulting Center, Maa Data Group, Beirut, Lebanon.
(3)Department of Statistical Science, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA.
(4)The Emmes Corporation, Rockville, MD, USA.
(5)Boehringer Ingelheim International GmBH, Ingelheim am Rhein, Germany.
(6)National Eye Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(7)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To describe optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) features, age, 
gender, and systemic variables that may be used in machine/deep learning studies 
to identify high-risk patient subpopulations with high risk of progression to 
geographic atrophy (GA) and visual acuity (VA) loss in the short term.
DESIGN: prospective, longitudinal study.
SUBJECTS: We analyzed imaging data from patients with iAMD (N= 316) enrolled in 
Age-Related Eye Disease Study 2 (AREDS2) Ancillary SD-OCT with adequate SD-OCT 
imaging for repeated measures.
METHODS: Qualitative and quantitative multimodal variables from the database 
were derived at each yearly visit over 5 years. Based on statistical analyses 
developed in the field of cardiology, an algorithm was developed and used to 
select person-years without GA on colour fundus photography or SD-OCT at 
baseline. The analysis employed machine learning approaches to generate 
classification trees. Eyes were stratified as low, average, above average and 
high risk in 1 or 2 years, based on OCT and demographic features by the risk of 
GA development or decreased VA by 5+ and 10+ letters.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: new onset of SD-OCT-determined GA and VA loss.
RESULTS: We identified multiple retinal and subretinal SD-OCT and demographic 
features from the baseline visit, each of which independently conveyed low to 
high risk of new-onset GA or VA loss on each of the follow-up visits at 1 or 2 
years.
CONCLUSION: We propose a risk-stratified classification of iAMD based on the 
combination of OCT-derived retinal features, age, gender and systemic variables 
for progression to OCT-determined GA and/or VA loss. After external validation, 
the composite early endpoints may be used as exclusion or inclusion criteria for 
future clinical studies of iAMD focused on prevention of GA progression or VA 
loss.

DOI: 10.1016/j.xops.2022.100160
PMCID: PMC9161427
PMID: 35662803