1. Front Oncol. 2022 May 24;12:825703. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2022.825703. eCollection
 2022.

Cell Senescence-Related Pathways Are Enriched in Breast Cancer Patients With 
Late Toxicity After Radiotherapy and Low Radiation-Induced Lymphocyte Apoptosis.

Aguado-Flor E(1), Fuentes-Raspall MJ(2), Gonzalo R(3), Alonso C(4), Ramón Y 
Cajal T(4), Fisas D(4), Seoane A(5), Sánchez-Pla Á(3)(6), Giralt J(7)(8), Díez 
O(1)(9), Gutiérrez-Enríquez S(1).

Author information:
(1)Hereditary Cancer Genetics Group, Vall d'Hebron Institute of Oncology (VHIO), 
Vall d'Hebron Barcelona Hospital Campus, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Radiation Oncology Department, Santa Creu i Sant Pau Hospital, Barcelona, 
Spain.
(3)Statistics and Bioinformatics Unit, Vall d'Hebron Institut de Recerca (VHIR), 
Vall d'Hebron Hospital Universitari, Vall d'Hebron Barcelona Hospital Campus, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Medical Oncology Department, Santa Creu i Sant Pau Hospital, Barcelona, 
Spain.
(5)Medical Physics Department, Vall d'Hebron Hospital Universitari, Vall 
d'Hebron Barcelona Hospital Campus, Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Genetics, Microbiology and Statistics Department, Universitat de Barcelona, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(7)Radiation Oncology Department, Vall d'Hebron Hospital Universitari, Vall 
d'Hebron Barcelona Hospital Campus, Barcelona, Spain.
(8)Radiation Oncology Group, Vall d'Hebron Institute of Oncology (VHIO), Vall 
d'Hebron Barcelona Hospital Campus, Barcelona, Spain.
(9)Area of Clinical and Molecular Genetics, Vall d'Hebron Hospital Universitari, 
Vall d'Hebron Barcelona Hospital Campus, Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Radiation-induced late effects are a common cause of morbidity among 
cancer survivors. The biomarker with the best evidence as a predictive test of 
late reactions is the radiation-induced lymphocyte apoptosis (RILA) assay. We 
aimed to investigate the molecular basis underlying the distinctive RILA levels 
by using gene expression analysis in patients with and without late effects and 
in whom we had also first identified differences in RILA levels.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Peripheral blood mononuclear cells of 10 patients with 
late severe skin complications and 10 patients without symptoms, selected from 
those receiving radiotherapy from 1993 to 2007, were mock-irradiated or 
irradiated with 8 Gy. The 48-h response was analyzed in parallel by RILA assay 
and gene expression profiling with Affymetrix microarrays. Irradiated and 
non-irradiated gene expression profiles were compared between both groups. Gene 
set enrichment analysis was performed to identify differentially expressed 
biological processes.
RESULTS: Although differentially expressed mRNAs did not reach a significant 
adjusted p-value between patients suffering and not suffering clinical toxicity, 
the enriched pathways indicated significant differences between the two groups, 
either in irradiated or non-irradiated cells. In basal conditions, the main 
differentially expressed pathways between the toxicity and non-toxicity groups 
were the transport of small molecules, interferon signaling, and transcription. 
After 8 Gy, the differences lay in pathways highly related to cell senescence 
like cell cycle/NF-κB, G-protein-coupled receptors, and interferon signaling.
CONCLUSION: Patients at risk of developing late toxicity have a distinctive 
pathway signature driven by deregulation of immune and cell cycle pathways 
related to senescence, which in turn may underlie their low RILA phenotype.

Copyright © 2022 Aguado-Flor, Fuentes-Raspall, Gonzalo, Alonso, Ramón y Cajal, 
Fisas, Seoane, Sánchez-Pla, Giralt, Díez and Gutiérrez-Enríquez.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2022.825703
PMCID: PMC9170959
PMID: 35686103

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.