1. Malar J. 2022 Jun 11;21(1):186. doi: 10.1186/s12936-022-04181-y.

How has mass drug administration with dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine impacted 
molecular markers of drug resistance? A systematic review.

Moss S(1), Mańko E(2), Krishna S(3), Campino S(#)(2), Clark TG(#)(2)(4), Last 
A(#)(5).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, London School of Hygiene & 
Tropical Medicine, London, UK. sophie.moss@lshtm.ac.uk.
(2)Faculty of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, London School of Hygiene & 
Tropical Medicine, London, UK.
(3)Institute of Infection and Immunity, St George's University of London, 
London, UK.
(4)Faculty of Epidemiology and Population Health, London School of Hygiene & 
Tropical Medicine, London, UK.
(5)Faculty of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, London School of Hygiene & 
Tropical Medicine, London, UK. anna.last@lshtm.ac.uk.
(#)Contributed equally

The World Health Organization (WHO) recommends surveillance of molecular markers 
of resistance to anti-malarial drugs. This is particularly important in the case 
of mass drug administration (MDA), which is endorsed by the WHO in some settings 
to combat malaria. Dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine (DHA-PPQ) is an 
artemisinin-based combination therapy which has been used in MDA. This review 
analyses the impact of MDA with DHA-PPQ on the evolution of molecular markers of 
drug resistance. The review is split into two parts. Section I reviews the 
current evidence for different molecular markers of resistance to DHA-PPQ. This 
includes an overview of the prevalence of these molecular markers in Plasmodium 
falciparum Whole Genome Sequence data from the MalariaGEN Pf3k project. Section 
II is a systematic literature review of the impact that MDA with DHA-PPQ has had 
on the evolution of molecular markers of resistance. This systematic review 
followed PRISMA guidelines. This review found that despite being a recognised 
surveillance tool by the WHO, the surveillance of molecular markers of 
resistance following MDA with DHA-PPQ was not commonly performed. Of the total 
96 papers screened for eligibility in this review, only 20 analysed molecular 
markers of drug resistance. The molecular markers published were also not 
standardized. Overall, this warrants greater reporting of molecular marker 
prevalence following MDA implementation. This should include putative pfcrt 
mutations which have been found to convey resistance to DHA-PPQ in vitro.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-022-04181-y
PMCID: PMC9188255
PMID: 35690758 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.