1. Microbiol Spectr. 2022 Aug 31;10(4):e0096422. doi: 10.1128/spectrum.00964-22. 
Epub 2022 Jun 15.

Contaminated Incubators: Source of a Multispecies Enterobacter Outbreak of 
Neonatal Sepsis.

Hernandez-Alonso E(1), Bourgeois-Nicolaos N(1)(2), Lepainteur M(2), Derouin 
V(2), Barreault S(1), Waalkes A(3), Augusto LA(1), Gera S(2), Gleizes O(2), 
Tissieres P(1), Salipante SJ(3), de Luca D(4)(5), Doucet-Populaire F(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), CNRS, CEA, Paris-Saclay 
University, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.
(2)Department of Bacteriology-Hygiene, AP-HP Paris-Saclay University, Hôpital 
Antoine Béclère, Clamart, France.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of 
Washingtongrid.34477.33, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(4)Department of Neonatal Intensive Care, L'Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux De 
Paris, Paris-Saclay University, Hôpital Antoine Béclère, Clamart, France.
(5)Physiopathology and Therapeutic Innovation Unit, INSERM U999, Paris-Saclay 
University, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.

The genus Enterobacter includes species responsible for nosocomial outbreaks in 
fragile patients, especially in neonatal intensive care units (NICUs). 
Determining the primary source of infection is critical to outbreak management 
and patient outcomes. In this investigation, we report the management and 
control measures implemented during an Enterobacter outbreak of bloodstream 
infections in premature babies. The study was conducted in a French NICU over a 
3-year period (2016 to 2018) and included 20 premature infants with bacteremia. 
The clinical and microbiological characteristics were identified, and 
whole-genome sequencing (WGS) was performed on bacteremia isolates. Initially, 
several outbreak containment strategies were carried out with no success. Next, 
outbreak investigation pinpointed the neonatal incubators as the primary 
reservoir and source of contamination in this outbreak. A new sampling 
methodology during "on" or "in use" conditions enabled its identification, which 
led to their replacement, thus resulting in the containment of the outbreak. WGS 
analysis showed a multiclonal outbreak. Some clones were identified in different 
isolation sources, including patients and neonatal incubators. In addition, 
microbiological results showed a multispecies outbreak with a high prevalence of 
Enterobacter bugandensis and Enterobacter xiangfangensis. We conclude that the 
NICU health care environment represents an important reservoir for Enterobacter 
transmission and infection. Finally, extracting samples from the neonatal 
incubator during active use conditions improves the recovery of bacteria from 
contaminated equipment. This method should be used more frequently to achieve 
better monitoring of the NICU for HAIs prevention. IMPORTANCE Neonatal 
incubators in the NICU can be an important reservoir of pathogens responsible 
for life-threatening outbreaks in neonatal patients. Traditional disinfection 
with antiseptics is not sufficient to eradicate the microorganisms that can 
persist for long periods in the different reservoirs. Identification and 
elimination of the reservoirs are crucial for outbreak prevention and control. 
In our investigation, using a new strategy of microbiological screening of 
neonatal incubators, we demonstrated that these were the primary source of 
contamination. After their replacement, the outbreak was controlled. This new 
methodology was effective in containing this outbreak and could be a viable 
alternative for infection prevention and control in outbreak situations 
involving incubators as a reservoir.

DOI: 10.1128/spectrum.00964-22
PMCID: PMC9430301
PMID: 35703554 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.