1. J Clin Lab Anal. 2022 Jul;36(7):e24552. doi: 10.1002/jcla.24552. Epub 2022 Jun
 17.

The promising novel therapies for familial hypercholesterolemia.

Chen R(1), Lin S(2), Chen X(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine of Ningbo University, Ningbo, China.
(2)The Affiliated Ningbo First Hospital, School of Medicine of Ningbo 
University, Ningbo, China.
(3)Ningbo First Hospital Affiliated to School of Medicine of Zhejiang 
University, Ningbo, China.

BACKGROUND: The incidence of premature atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease in 
familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is high. In recent years, novel therapeutic 
modalities have shown significant lipid-lowering ability. In this paper, we 
summarize the recent developments in novel therapies for FH via the treatment of 
different targets and discuss the characteristics of each targeted therapy. 
Based on the process of protein synthesis, we attempt to summarize the 
direct-effect targets including protein, RNA, and DNA.
METHODS: For this systematic review, relevant studies are assessed by searching 
in several databases including PubMed, Web of Science, Scopus, and Google 
Scholar. The publications of original researches are considered for screening.
RESULTS: Most drugs are protein-targeted such as molecule-based and monoclonal 
antibodies, including statins, ezetimibe, alirocumab, evolocumab, and 
evinacumab. Both antisense oligonucleotide (ASO) and small interfering RNA 
(siRNA) approaches, such as mipomersen, vupanorsen, inclisiran, and ARO-ANG3, 
are designed to reduce the number of mRNA transcripts and then degrade proteins. 
DNA-targeted therapies such as adeno-associated virus or CRISPR-Cas9 
modification could be used to deliver or edit genes to address a genetic 
deficiency and improve the related phenotype.
CONCLUSION: While the therapies based on different targets including protein, 
RNA, and DNA are on different stages of development, the mechanisms of these 
novel therapies may provide new ideas for precision medicine.

© 2022 The Authors. Journal of Clinical Laboratory Analysis published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jcla.24552
PMCID: PMC9279988
PMID: 35712827 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: We do not have any conflict of interest.