1. EBioMedicine. 2022 Jul;81:104111. doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2022.104111. Epub 2022 
Jun 18.

Investigation of metabolomic biomarkers for childhood executive function and the 
role of genetic and dietary factors: The GUSTO cohort.

Huang J(1), Law E(2), Karaman I(3), McCrickerd K(4), Fogel A(5), Chong MFF(6), 
Daniel LM(7), Silveira PP(8), Chong YS(9), Eriksson JG(10), Meaney MJ(11), Huang 
J(12).

Author information:
(1)Singapore Institute for Clinical Sciences (SICS), Agency for Science, 
Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore; Department of Epidemiology and 
Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Imperial College London, Norfolk Place, 
London, UK. Electronic address: huang_jian@sics.a-star.edu.sg.
(2)Singapore Institute for Clinical Sciences (SICS), Agency for Science, 
Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore; Department of Paediatrics, Yong Loo 
Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore; Department 
of Paediatrics, Khoo Teck Puat-National University Children's Medical Institute, 
National University Hospital, Singapore.
(3)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, 
Imperial College London, Norfolk Place, London, UK.
(4)Singapore Institute for Clinical Sciences (SICS), Agency for Science, 
Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore; Department of Paediatrics, Yong Loo 
Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore; Yong Loo 
Lin School of Medicine, Human Potential Translational Research Programme, 
National University of Singapore, Singapore.
(5)Singapore Institute for Clinical Sciences (SICS), Agency for Science, 
Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore.
(6)Singapore Institute for Clinical Sciences (SICS), Agency for Science, 
Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore; Saw Swee Hock School of Public 
Health, National University of Singapore, Singapore.
(7)Department of Child Development, KK Women's and Children's Hospital, 
Singapore.
(8)Department of Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine and Ludmer Centre for 
Neuroinformatics and Mental Health, Douglas Hospital Research Centre, McGill 
University, Canada.
(9)Singapore Institute for Clinical Sciences (SICS), Agency for Science, 
Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore; Department of Obstetrics & 
Gynaecology, National University Health System, Singapore; Yong Loo Lin School 
of Medicine, Human Potential Translational Research Programme, National 
University of Singapore, Singapore.
(10)Singapore Institute for Clinical Sciences (SICS), Agency for Science, 
Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore; Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, 
Human Potential Translational Research Programme, National University of 
Singapore, Singapore; Department of General Practice and Primary Health Care, 
University of Helsinki, Finland; Folkhälsan Research Center, Helsinki, Finland.
(11)Singapore Institute for Clinical Sciences (SICS), Agency for Science, 
Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore; Department of Psychiatry, Faculty 
of Medicine and Ludmer Centre for Neuroinformatics and Mental Health, Douglas 
Hospital Research Centre, McGill University, Canada.
(12)Singapore Institute for Clinical Sciences (SICS), Agency for Science, 
Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore. Electronic address: 
jonathan_huang@sics.a-star.edu.sg.

BACKGROUND: Few studies have investigated molecular biomarkers of specific 
executive function (EF) skills in children. We aimed to characterise the 
prospective associations between metabolome and multiple domains of EF using a 
bidirectional design.
METHODS: This study was conducted within a longitudinal birth cohort, the 
Growing Up in Singapore Towards healthy Outcomes (GUSTO). Circulating levels of 
165 metabolites were quantified using a nuclear magnetic resonance based 
metabolomics platform (n = 457 (∼6yrs) and n = 524 (∼8yrs)). Parent-reported EF 
was available for 495 children (∼7yrs). Multivariate linear regression was used 
to assess the metabolite-EF relationships. We examined the role of body 
composition, dietary factors, and genetics in the metabolite-EF associations.
FINDINGS: Higher leucine level (∼6yrs) was associated with poorer EF (∼7yrs, 
Initiate (P = 0.003) and Working Memory (P = 0.004)). EF (∼7yrs) was not 
associated with leucine (∼8yrs). Importantly, we found weak evidence for 
associations of dietary factors (∼5yrs) with leucine (∼6yrs) and EF (∼7yrs). 
Each copy of C allele in rs1260326 (a leucine-related polymorphism) was 
associated with higher leucine level and poorer Initiate and Working Memory 
(P < 0.05). Amongst those with less strongly genetically influenced leucine, 
inverse association between leucine and cognitive regulation were weaker among 
those with higher BMI.
INTERPRETATION: The observed association between higher leucine level and poorer 
EF may be determined by genetics and may not be easily amenable to dietary 
interventions. Further research is needed for validation and to understand 
mechanisms.
FUNDING: Singapore National Research Foundation and Agency for Science, 
Technology and Research.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2022.104111
PMCID: PMC9214799
PMID: 35728485 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors disclose no 
conflict of interest.