1. Biomedicines. 2022 Jun 7;10(6):1339. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines10061339.

SARS-CoV-2: A Master of Immune Evasion.

Rubio-Casillas A(1), Redwan EM(2)(3), Uversky VN(4).

Author information:
(1)Biology Laboratory, Autlán Regional Preparatory School, University of 
Guadalajara, Autlán 48900, Jalisco, Mexico.
(2)Biological Science Department, Faculty of Science, King Abdulaziz University, 
P.O. Box 80203, Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Therapeutic and Protective Proteins Laboratory, Protein Research Department, 
Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology Research Institute, City for Scientific 
Research and Technology Applications, New Borg EL-Arab, Alexandria 21934, Egypt.
(4)Department of Molecular Medicine and USF Health Byrd Alzheimer's Research 
Institute, Morsani College of Medicine, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL 
33612, USA.

Viruses and their hosts have coevolved for a long time. This coevolution places 
both the pathogen and the human immune system under selective pressure; on the 
one hand, the immune system has evolved to combat viruses and virally infected 
cells, while viruses have developed sophisticated mechanisms to escape 
recognition and destruction by the immune system. SARS-CoV-2, the pathogen that 
is causing the current COVID-19 pandemic, has shown a remarkable ability to 
escape antibody neutralization, putting vaccine efficacy at risk. One of the 
virus's immune evasion strategies is mitochondrial sabotage: by causing reactive 
oxygen species (ROS) production, mitochondrial physiology is impaired, and the 
interferon antiviral response is suppressed. Seminal studies have identified an 
intra-cytoplasmatic pathway for viral infection, which occurs through the 
construction of tunneling nanotubes (TNTs), hence enhancing infection and 
avoiding immune surveillance. Another method of evading immune monitoring is the 
disruption of the antigen presentation. In this scenario, SARS-CoV-2 infection 
reduces MHC-I molecule expression: SARS-CoV-2's open reading frames (ORF 6 and 
ORF 8) produce viral proteins that specifically downregulate MHC-I molecules. 
All of these strategies are also exploited by other viruses to elude immune 
detection and should be studied in depth to improve the effectiveness of future 
antiviral treatments. Compared to the Wuhan strain or the Delta variant, Omicron 
has developed mutations that have impaired its ability to generate syncytia, 
thus reducing its pathogenicity. Conversely, other mutations have allowed it to 
escape antibody neutralization and preventing cellular immune recognition, 
making it the most contagious and evasive variant to date.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines10061339
PMCID: PMC9220273
PMID: 35740361

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.