1. Biomedicines. 2022 Jun 18;10(6):1445. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines10061445.

Connexins, Pannexins and Gap Junctions in Perinatal Brain Injury.

McDouall A(1), Zhou KQ(1), Bennet L(1), Green CR(2), Gunn AJ(1), Davidson JO(1).

Author information:
(1)U1 Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences, The 
University of Auckland, Auckland 1023, New Zealand.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences, The 
University of Auckland, Auckland 1023, New Zealand.

Perinatal brain injury secondary to hypoxia-ischemia and/or 
infection/inflammation remains a major cause of disability. Therapeutic 
hypothermia significantly improves outcomes, but in randomized controlled trials 
nearly half of infants still died or survived with disability, showing that 
additional interventions are needed. There is growing evidence that brain injury 
spreads over time from injured to previously uninjured regions of the brain. At 
least in part, this spread is related to opening of connexin hemichannels and 
pannexin channels, both of which are large conductance membrane channels found 
in many brain cells. Opening of these membrane channels releases adenosine 
triphosphate (ATP), and other neuroactive molecules, into the extracellular 
space. ATP has an important role in normal signaling, but pathologically can 
trigger the assembly of the multi-protein inflammasome complex. The inflammasome 
complex promotes activation of inflammatory caspases, and release of 
inflammatory cytokines. Overall, the connexin hemichannel appears to play a 
primary role in propagation of injury and chronic disease, and connexin 
hemichannel blockade has been shown to be neuroprotective in multiple animal 
models. Thus, there is potential for some blockers of connexin or pannexin 
channels to be developed into targeted interventions that could be used in 
conjunction with or separate to therapeutic hypothermia.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines10061445
PMCID: PMC9220888
PMID: 35740466

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.