1. Antioxidants (Basel). 2022 Jun 6;11(6):1121. doi: 10.3390/antiox11061121.

Focus on the Contribution of Oxidative Stress in Skin Aging.

Papaccio F(1), D Arino A(1), Caputo S(1), Bellei B(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Cutaneous Physiopathology and Integrated Center of Metabolomics 
Research, San Gallicano Dermatological Institute, IRCCS, 00144 Rome, Italy.

Skin aging is one of the most evident signs of human aging. Modification of the 
skin during the life span is characterized by fine lines and wrinkling, loss of 
elasticity and volume, laxity, rough-textured appearance, and pallor. In 
contrast, photoaged skin is associated with uneven pigmentation (age spot) and 
is markedly wrinkled. At the cellular and molecular level, it consists of 
multiple interconnected processes based on biochemical reactions, genetic 
programs, and occurrence of external stimulation. The principal cellular 
perturbation in the skin driving senescence is the alteration of oxidative 
balance. In chronological aging, reactive oxygen species (ROS) are produced 
mainly through cellular oxidative metabolism during adenosine triphosphate (ATP) 
generation from glucose and mitochondrial dysfunction, whereas in extrinsic 
aging, loss of redox equilibrium is caused by environmental factors, such as 
ultraviolet radiation, pollution, cigarette smoking, and inadequate nutrition. 
During the aging process, oxidative stress is attributed to both augmented ROS 
production and reduced levels of enzymatic and non-enzymatic protectors. Apart 
from the evident appearance of structural change, throughout aging, the skin 
gradually loses its natural functional characteristics and regenerative 
potential. With aging, the skin immune system also undergoes functional 
senescence manifested as a reduced ability to counteract infections and 
augmented frequency of autoimmune and neoplastic diseases. This review proposes 
an update on the role of oxidative stress in the appearance of the clinical 
manifestation of skin aging, as well as of the molecular mechanisms that 
underline this natural phenomenon sometimes accelerated by external factors.

DOI: 10.3390/antiox11061121
PMCID: PMC9220264
PMID: 35740018

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.