1. Mol Cells. 2022 Jul 31;45(7):444-453. doi: 10.14348/molcells.2022.0035. Epub 
2022 Jun 27.

Quantitative Frameworks for Multivalent Macromolecular Interactions in 
Biological Linear Lattice Systems.

Choi J(1)(2), Kim R(1)(2), Koh J(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Korea.
(2)These authors contributed equally to this work.

Multivalent macromolecular interactions underlie dynamic regulation of diverse 
biological processes in ever-changing cellular states. These interactions often 
involve binding of multiple proteins to a linear lattice including intrinsically 
disordered proteins and the chromosomal DNA with many repeating recognition 
motifs. Quantitative understanding of such multivalent interactions on a linear 
lattice is crucial for exploring their unique regulatory potentials in the 
cellular processes. In this review, the distinctive molecular features of the 
linear lattice system are first discussed with a particular focus on the 
overlapping nature of potential protein binding sites within a lattice. Then, we 
introduce two general quantitative frameworks, combinatorial and conditional 
probability models, dealing with the overlap problem and relating the binding 
parameters to the experimentally measurable properties of the linear 
lattice-protein interactions. To this end, we present two specific examples 
where the quantitative models have been applied and further extended to provide 
biological insights into specific cellular processes. In the first case, the 
conditional probability model was extended to highlight the significant impact 
of nonspecific binding of transcription factors to the chromosomal DNA on 
gene-specific transcriptional activities. The second case presents the recently 
developed combinatorial models to unravel the complex organization of target 
protein binding sites within an intrinsically disordered region (IDR) of a 
nucleoporin. In particular, these models have suggested a unique function of 
IDRs as a molecular switch coupling distinct cellular processes. The 
quantitative models reviewed here are envisioned to further advance for 
dissection and functional studies of more complex systems including 
phase-separated biomolecular condensates.

DOI: 10.14348/molcells.2022.0035
PMCID: PMC9260134
PMID: 35754369 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST The authors have no 
potential conflicts of interest to disclose.