1. Front Immunol. 2022 Jun 9;13:889875. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.889875.
eCollection  2022.

Reactive Oxygen Species and Metabolism in Leukemia: A Dangerous Liaison.

Romo-González M(1)(2), Ijurko C(1)(2), Hernández-Hernández Á(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular, Universidad de Salamanca, 
Salamanca, Spain.
(2)Instituto de Investigación Biomédica de Salamanca (IBSAL), Hospital 
Universitario de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain.

Reactive oxygen species (ROS), previously considered toxic by-products of 
aerobic metabolism, are increasingly recognized as regulators of cellular 
signaling. Keeping ROS levels low is essential to safeguard the self-renewal 
capacity of hematopoietic stem cells (HSC). HSC reside in a hypoxic environment 
and have been shown to be highly dependent on the glycolytic pathway to meet 
their energy requirements. However, when the differentiation machinery is 
activated, there is an essential enhancement of ROS together with a metabolic 
shift toward oxidative metabolism. Initiating and sustaining leukemia depend on 
the activity of leukemic stem cells (LSC). LSC also show low ROS levels, but 
unlike HSC, LSC rely on oxygen to meet their metabolic energetic requirements 
through mitochondrial respiration. In contrast, leukemic blasts show high ROS 
levels and great metabolic plasticity, both of which seem to sustain their 
invasiveness. Oxidative stress and metabolism rewiring are recognized as 
hallmarks of cancer that are intimately intermingled. Here we present a detailed 
overview of these two features, sustained at different levels, that support a 
two-way relationship in leukemia. Modifying ROS levels and targeting metabolism 
are interesting therapeutic approaches. Therefore, we provide the most recent 
evidence on the modulation of oxidative stress and metabolism as a suitable 
anti-leukemic approach.

Copyright © 2022 Romo-González, Ijurko and Hernández-Hernández.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.889875
PMCID: PMC9218220
PMID: 35757686 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.