1. Br J Haematol. 2022 Nov;199(4):482-495. doi: 10.1111/bjh.18330. Epub 2022 Jun 
26.

GATA2 deficiency and MDS/AML: Experimental strategies for disease modelling and 
future therapeutic prospects.

Kotmayer L(1), Romero-Moya D(2), Marin-Bejar O(2), Kozyra E(3)(4), Català 
A(5)(6), Bigas A(7)(8), Wlodarski MW(3)(9), Bödör C(1), Giorgetti A(2)(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)HCEMM-SE Molecular Oncohematology Research Group, 1st Department of Pathology 
and Experimental Cancer Research, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.
(2)Regenerative Medicine Program, Institut d'Investigació Biomèdica de Bellvitge 
(IDIBELL), Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Division of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Department of Pediatrics and 
Adolescent Medicine, Medical Center, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(4)Faculty of Biology, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(5)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Institut de Recerca Sant Joan de Déu, 
Hospital Sant Joan de Deu, Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Biomedical Network Research Centre on Rare Diseases, Instituto de Salud 
Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
(7)Cancer Research Program, Institut Hospital del Mar d'Investigacions Mèdiques, 
CIBERONC, Hospital del Mar, Barcelona, Spain.
(8)Josep Carreras Research Institute (IJC), Badalona, Barcelona, Spain.
(9)Department of Hematology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, 
Tennessee, USA.
(10)Fondazione Pisana Per la Scienza ONLUS (FPS), San Giuliano Terme, Italy.
(11)Department of Pathology and Experimental Therapeutics, Faculty of Medicine 
and Health Sciences, Barcelona University, Barcelona, Spain.

The importance of predisposition to leukaemia in clinical practice is being 
increasingly recognized. This is emphasized by the establishment of a novel WHO 
disease category in 2016 called "myeloid neoplasms with germline 
predisposition". A major syndrome within this group is GATA2 deficiency, a 
heterogeneous immunodeficiency syndrome with a very high lifetime risk to 
develop myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and acute myeloid leukaemia (AML). GATA2 
deficiency has been identified as the most common hereditary cause of MDS in 
adolescents with monosomy 7. Allogenic haematopoietic stem cell transplantation 
is the only curative option; however, chances of survival decrease with 
progression of immunodeficiency and MDS evolution. Penetrance and expressivity 
within families carrying GATA2 mutations is often variable, suggesting that 
co-operating extrinsic events are required to trigger the disease. Predictive 
tools are lacking, and intrafamilial heterogeneity is poorly understood; hence 
there is a clear unmet medical need. On behalf of the ERAPerMed GATA2 HuMo 
consortium, in this review we describe the genetic, clinical, and biological 
aspects of familial GATA2-related MDS, highlighting the importance of developing 
robust disease preclinical models to improve early detection and clinical 
decision-making of GATA2 carriers.

© 2022 The Authors. British Journal of Haematology published by British Society 
for Haematology and John Wiley &amp; Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/bjh.18330
PMCID: PMC9796058
PMID: 35753998 [Indexed for MEDLINE]