1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2022 Aug 18;107(9):2539-2544. doi: 
10.1210/clinem/dgac386.

Fumarate Hydratase is a Novel Gene for Familial Non-Medullary Thyroid Cancer.

Alzahrani AS(1)(2), Alswailem M(2), Alghamdi B(2), Al-Hindi H(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, King Faisal Specialist Hospital & Research Centre, 
Riyadh 11211, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Department of Molecular Oncology, King Faisal Specialist Hospital & Research 
Centre, Riyadh 11211, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, King Faisal Specialist 
Hospital & Research Centre, Riyadh 11211, Saudi Arabia.

CONTEXT: The majority of cases of epithelial cell-derived thyroid cancer are 
sporadic. Familial non-medullary thyroid cancer (FNMTC) occurs in about 5% to 9% 
of cases, either as a part of known syndromes such as Cowden syndrome or in the 
form of familial clustering of 2 or more affected family members. Hereditary 
leiomyoma and renal cell cancer (HLRCC) syndrome is a rare familial cancer 
syndrome. The underlying etiology is heterozygous germline mutations of the 
fumarate hydratase (FH) gene. In addition to extensive uterine and skin 
leiomyomas and RCC, other tumors may arise in this syndrome. However, thyroid 
cancer has never been described as part of HLRCC. Here, we describe a woman who 
presented with an aggressive poorly differentiated thyroid cancer (PDTC) and was 
found to have HLRCC syndrome because of a novel heterozygous germline FH 
mutation.
RESULTS: A 43-year-old woman presented with a large lower neck mass that was 
found to be PDTC. During her evaluation, she was found to have extensive uterine 
leiomyomatosis and bilateral adrenal nodules. Whole exome and subsequent Sanger 
sequencing of leucocyte DNA revealed a novel monoallelic nonsense FH mutation 
(c.760C>T, p.Q254*). Sequencing of the thyroid tumor tissue showed a biallelic 
loss at the same mutation site (loss of heterozygosity) and immunohistochemistry 
of the PDTC showed loss of FH staining in the tumor tissue, indicating the 
pathogenic role of this mutation in the development of PDTC in this patient.
CONCLUSION: Thyroid cancer is a novel feature of the FH-related HLRCC syndrome. 
This syndrome can be added to the rare genetic causes of syndromic FNMTC.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Endocrine Society. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1210/clinem/dgac386
PMID: 35751867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]