1. BMC Biol. 2022 Jun 27;20(1):151. doi: 10.1186/s12915-022-01317-z.

The quorum sensing peptide EntF* promotes colorectal cancer metastasis in mice: 
a new factor in the host-microbiome interaction.

Wynendaele E(#)(1), Debunne N(#)(1), Janssens Y(1), De Spiegeleer A(1)(2), 
Verbeke F(1), Tack L(1), Van Welden S(2), Goossens E(3), Knappe D(4), Hoffmann 
R(4), Van De Wiele C(5), Laukens D(2), Van Eenoo P(5), Vereecke L(6), Van 
Immerseel F(3), De Wever O(7), De Spiegeleer B(8).

Author information:
(1)Drug Quality and Registration Group, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine and Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine and 
Health Sciences, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.
(3)Department of Pathology, Bacteriology and Poultry diseases, Faculty of 
Veterinary Medicine, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.
(4)Center of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Faculty of Chemistry and Mineralogy, 
Universität Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.
(5)Department of Diagnostic Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, 
Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.
(6)Department of Rheumatology, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Ghent, 
Belgium.
(7)Department of Human Structure and Repair, Faculty of Medicine and Health 
Sciences, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.
(8)Drug Quality and Registration Group, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium. Bart.DeSpiegeleer@UGent.be.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Colorectal cancer, one of the most common malignancies worldwide, is 
associated with a high mortality rate, mainly caused by metastasis. Comparative 
metagenome-wide association analyses of healthy individuals and cancer patients 
suggest a role for the human intestinal microbiota in tumor progression. 
However, the microbial molecules involved in host-microbe communication are 
largely unknown, with current studies mainly focusing on short-chain fatty acids 
and amino acid metabolites as potential mediators. Quorum sensing peptides are 
not yet considered in this context since their presence in vivo and their 
ability to affect host cells have not been reported so far.
RESULTS: Here, we show that EntF*, a metabolite of the quorum sensing peptide 
EntF produced by Enterococcus faecium, is naturally present in mice bloodstream. 
Moreover, by using an orthotopic mouse model, we show that EntF* promotes 
colorectal cancer metastasis in vivo, with metastatic lesions in liver and lung 
tissues. In vitro tests suggest that EntF* regulates E-cadherin expression and 
consequently the epithelial-mesenchymal transition, via the CXCR4 receptor. In 
addition, alanine-scanning analysis indicates that the first, second, sixth, and 
tenth amino acid of EntF* are critical for epithelial-mesenchymal transition and 
tumor metastasis.
CONCLUSION: Our work identifies a new class of molecules, quorum sensing 
peptides, as potential regulators of host-microbe interactions. We prove, for 
the first time, the presence of a selected quorum sensing peptide metabolite in 
a mouse model, and we demonstrate its effects on colorectal cancer metastasis. 
We believe that our work represents a starting point for future investigations 
on the role of microbiome in colorectal cancer metastasis and for the 
development of novel bio-therapeutics in other disease areas.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12915-022-01317-z
PMCID: PMC9238271
PMID: 35761265 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.