1. Rev Bras Ortop (Sao Paulo). 2021 Apr 19;57(3):402-408. doi: 
10.1055/s-0041-1724082. eCollection 2022 Jun.

Intra-articular Infiltration of Platelet-Rich Plasma versus Hyaluronic Acid in 
Patients with Primary Knee Osteoarthritis: Preliminary Results from a Randomized 
Clinical Trial.

Arliani GG(1), Durigon TS(1), Pedroso JP(1), Ferreira GF(1), Oksman D(1), 
Oliveira VO(1).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Ortopedia e Traumatologia, Instituto Prevent Senior, São 
Paulo, SP, Brasil.

Objective  The present study aimed to compare the effects of intraarticular 
infiltration of platelet-rich plasma with those of hyaluronic acid infiltration 
in the treatment of patients with primary knee osteoarthritis. Methods  A 
randomized clinical trial was conducted with 29 patients who received an 
intraarticular infiltration with hyaluronic acid (control group) or 
platelet-rich plasma. Clinical outcomes were assessed using the visual analog 
scale for pain and the Western Ontario and McMaster Universities Arthritis Index 
(WOMAC) questionnaire before and after the intervention. In addition, the 
posttreatment adverse effects were recorded. Categorical variables were analyzed 
using the chi-square and Fisher exact tests, whereas continuous variables were 
analyzed using the Student t test, analysis of variance, and the Wilcoxon test; 
all calculations were performed with the Stats package of the R software. 
Results  An independent analysis of each group revealed a statistical difference 
within the first months, with improvement in the pain and function scores, but 
worsening on the 6 th month after the procedure. There was no difference in the 
outcomes between the groups receiving hyaluronic acid or platelet-rich plasma. 
There was no serious adverse effect or allergic reaction during the entire 
follow-up period. Conclusion  Intraarticular infiltration with hyaluronic acid 
or platelet-rich plasma in patients with primary knee gonarthrosis resulted in 
temporary improvement of functional symptoms and pain. There was no difference 
between interventions.

Sociedade Brasileira de Ortopedia e Traumatologia. This is an open access 
article published by Thieme under the terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution-NonDerivative-NonCommercial License, permitting copying and 
reproduction so long as the original work is given appropriate credit. Contents 
may not be used for commecial purposes, or adapted, remixed, transformed or 
built upon. ( https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).

DOI: 10.1055/s-0041-1724082
PMCID: PMC9246520
PMID: 35785122

Conflict of interest statement: Conflito de interesses Os autores declaram não 
haver conflito de interesses.