1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2022 Jun 16;10:914286. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2022.914286. 
eCollection 2022.

The Role of Lamins in the Nucleoplasmic Reticulum, a Pleiomorphic Organelle That 
Enhances Nucleo-Cytoplasmic Interplay.

Stiekema M(1)(2), Houben F(1)(3), Verheyen F(1), Borgers M(1), Menzel J(4), 
Meschkat M(4), van Zandvoort MAMJ(1)(2)(5)(6), Ramaekers FCS(1)(2), Broers 
JLV(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Cell Biology, Maastricht University Medical 
Centre, Maastricht, Netherlands.
(2)GROW-School for Oncology and Reproduction, Maastricht University Medical 
Centre, Maastricht, Netherlands.
(3)Department of Healthcare, PXL University College, Hasselt, Belgium.
(4)Abberior Instruments GmbH, Göttingen, Germany.
(5)CARIM-School for Cardiovascular Diseases, Maastricht University Medical 
Centre, Maastricht, Netherlands.
(6)Institute for Molecular Cardiovascular Research IMCAR, RWTH Aachen 
University, Aachen, Germany.

Invaginations of the nuclear membrane occur in different shapes, sizes, and 
compositions. Part of these pleiomorphic invaginations make up the nucleoplasmic 
reticulum (NR), while others are merely nuclear folds. We define the NR as 
tubular invaginations consisting of either both the inner and outer nuclear 
membrane, or only the inner nuclear membrane. Specifically, invaginations of 
both the inner and outer nuclear membrane are also called type II NR, while 
those of only the inner nuclear membrane are defined as type I NR. The formation 
and structure of the NR is determined by proteins associated to the nuclear 
membrane, which induce a high membrane curvature leading to tubular 
invaginations. Here we review and discuss the current knowledge of nuclear 
invaginations and the NR in particular. An increase in tubular invaginations of 
the nuclear envelope is associated with several pathologies, such as 
laminopathies, cancer, (reversible) heart failure, and Alzheimer's disease. 
Furthermore, viruses can induce both type I and II NR. In laminopathies, the 
amount of A-type lamins throughout the nucleus is generally decreased or the 
organization of lamins or lamin-associated proteins is disturbed. Also, lamin 
overexpression or modulation of lamin farnesylation status impacts NR formation, 
confirming the importance of lamin processing in NR formation. Virus infections 
reorganize the nuclear lamina via (de)phosphorylation of lamins, leading to an 
uneven thickness of the nuclear lamina and in turn lobulation of the nuclear 
membrane and the formation of invaginations of the inner nuclear membrane. Since 
most studies on the NR have been performed with cell cultures, we present 
additional proof for the existence of these structures in vivo, focusing on a 
variety of differentiated cardiovascular and hematopoietic cells. Furthermore, 
we substantiate the knowledge of the lamin composition of the NR by 
super-resolution images of the lamin A/C and B1 organization. Finally, we 
further highlight the essential role of lamins in NR formation by demonstrating 
that (over)expression of lamins can induce aberrant NR structures.

Copyright © 2022 Stiekema, Houben, Verheyen, Borgers, Menzel, Meschkat, van 
Zandvoort, Ramaekers and Broers.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2022.914286
PMCID: PMC9243388
PMID: 35784476

Conflict of interest statement: JM and MM were employed by Abberior Instruments 
GmbH. The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the 
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as 
a potential conflict of interest.