1. Ann Med. 2022 Dec;54(1):1867-1883. doi: 10.1080/07853890.2022.2089728.

Neural regeneration therapy after spinal cord injury induces unique brain 
functional reorganizations in rhesus monkeys.

Rao JS(1), Zhao C(2), Wei RH(1), Feng T(1), Bao SS(1), Zhao W(3), Tian Z(4), Liu 
Z(5)(6)(7), Yang ZY(3), Li XG(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Science and Medical Engineering, Beijing Key Laboratory 
for Biomaterials and Neural Regeneration, Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for 
Biomedical Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, PR China.
(2)Institute of Rehabilitation Engineering, China Rehabilitation Science 
Institute, Beijing, PR China.
(3)Department of Neurobiology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, PR China.
(4)Department of Anesthesiology, Xuanwu Hospital Capital Medical University, 
Beijing, PR China.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Brain and Cognitive Science, Institute of Biophysics, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, PR China.
(6)Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center, Institute of Artificial 
Intelligence, Hefei, PR China.
(7)Department of Biology, College of Life Sciences, University of Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, PR China.

PURPOSE: Spinal cord injury (SCI) destroys the sensorimotor pathway and induces 
brain plasticity. However, the effect of treatment-induced spinal cord tissue 
regeneration on brain functional reorganization remains unclear. This study was 
designed to investigate the large-scale functional interactions in the brains of 
adult female Rhesus monkeys with injured and regenerated thoracic spinal cord.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging 
(fMRI) combined with Granger Causality analysis (GCA) and motor behaviour 
analysis were used to assess the causal interaction between sensorimotor 
cortices, and calculate the relationship between causal interaction and hindlimb 
stepping in nine Rhesus monkeys undergoing lesion-induced spontaneous recovery 
(injured, n = 4) and neurotrophin-3/chitosan transplantation-induced 
regeneration (NT3-chitosan, n = 5) after SCI.
RESULTS: The results showed that the injured and NT3-chitosan-treated animals 
had distinct spatiotemporal features of brain functional reorganization. The 
spontaneous recovery followed the model of "early intra-hemispheric 
reorganization dominant, late inter-hemispheric reorganization dominant", 
whereas regenerative therapy animals showed the opposite trend. Although the 
variation degree of information flow intensity was consistent, the tendency and 
the relationship between local neuronal activity properties and coupling 
strength were different between the two groups. In addition, the injured and 
NT3-chitosan-treated animals had similar motor adjustments but various 
relationship modes between motor performance and information flow intensity.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings show that brain functional reorganization induced by 
regeneration therapy differed from spontaneous recovery after SCI. The influence 
of unique changes in brain plasticity on the therapeutic effects of future 
regeneration therapy strategies should be considered. Key messagesNeural 
regeneration elicited a unique spatiotemporal mode of brain functional 
reorganization in the spinal cord injured monkeys, and that regeneration does 
not simply reverse the process of brain plasticity induced by spinal cord injury 
(SCI).Independent "properties of local activity - intensity of information flow" 
relationships between the injured and treated animals indicating that 
spontaneous recovery and regenerative therapy exerted different effects on the 
reorganization of the motor network after SCI.A specific information flow from 
the left thalamus to the right insular can serve as an indicator to reflect a 
heterogeneous "information flow - motor performance" relationship between 
injured and treated animals at similar motor adjustments.

DOI: 10.1080/07853890.2022.2089728
PMCID: PMC9272921
PMID: 35792748 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the authors.