1. Front Vet Sci. 2022 Jun 22;9:907616. doi: 10.3389/fvets.2022.907616.
eCollection  2022.

Treatment Effects of Intra-Articular Allogenic Mesenchymal Stem Cell Secretome 
in an Equine Model of Joint Inflammation.

Kearney CM(1), Khatab S(2), van Buul GM(2)(3), Plomp SGM(4), Korthagen NM(4), 
Labberté MC(1), Goodrich LR(5), Kisiday JD(5), Van Weeren PR(4), van Osch 
GJVM(2)(6), Brama PAJ(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Veterinary Medicine, University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.
(2)Department of Orthopaedics and Sports Medicine, Erasmus MC, University 
Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
(3)Beacon Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.
(4)Department of Clinical Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht 
University, Utrecht, Netherlands.
(5)Equine Orthopaedic Research Center, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, 
CO, United States.
(6)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center 
Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Allogenic mesenchymal stem cell (MSC) secretome is a novel 
intra-articular therapeutic that has shown promise in in vitro and small animal 
models and warrants further investigation.
OBJECTIVES: To investigate if intra-articular allogenic MSC-secretome has 
anti-inflammatory effects using an equine model of joint inflammation.
STUDY DESIGN: Randomized positively and negatively controlled experimental 
study.
METHOD: In phase 1, joint inflammation was induced bilaterally in radiocarpal 
joints of eight horses by injecting 0.25 ng lipopolysaccharide (LPS). After 2 h, 
the secretome of INFy and TNFα stimulated allogeneic equine MSCs was injected in 
one randomly assigned joint, while the contralateral joint was injected with 
medium (negative control). Clinical parameters (composite welfare scores, joint 
effusion, joint circumference) were recorded, and synovial fluid samples were 
analyzed for biomarkers (total protein, WBCC; eicosanoid mediators, CCL2; TNFα; 
MMP; GAGs; C2C; CPII) at fixed post-injection hours (PIH 0, 8, 24, 72, and 168 
h). The effects of time and treatment on clinical and synovial fluid parameters 
and the presence of time-treatment interactions were evaluated. For phase 2, 
allogeneic MSC-secretome vs. allogeneic equine MSCs (positive control) was 
tested using a similar methodology.
RESULTS: In phase 1, the joint circumference was significantly (p < 0.05) lower 
in the MSC-secretome treated group compared to the medium control group at PIH 
24, and significantly higher peak synovial GAG values were noted at PIH 24 (p < 
0.001). In phase 2, no significant differences were noted between the treatment 
effects of MSC-secretome and MSCs.
MAIN LIMITATIONS: This study is a controlled experimental study and therefore 
cannot fully reflect natural joint disease. In phase 2, two therapeutics are 
directly compared and there is no negative control.
CONCLUSIONS: In this model of joint inflammation, intra-articular MSC-secretome 
injection had some clinical anti-inflammatory effects. An effect on cartilage 
metabolism, evident as a rise in GAG levels was also noted, although it is 
unclear whether this could be considered a beneficial or detrimental effect. 
When directly comparing MSC-secretome to MSCs in this model results were 
comparable, indicating that MSC-secretome could be a viable off-the-shelf 
alternative to MSC treatment.

Copyright © 2022 Kearney, Khatab, van Buul, Plomp, Korthagen, Labberté, 
Goodrich, Kisiday, Van Weeren, van Osch and Brama.

DOI: 10.3389/fvets.2022.907616
PMCID: PMC9257274
PMID: 35812845

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.