1. Front Oncol. 2022 Jun 23;12:889591. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2022.889591. eCollection
 2022.

Genomic Alterations Identification and Resistance Mechanisms Exploration of 
NSCLC With Central Nervous System Metastases Using Liquid Biopsy of 
Cerebrospinal Fluid: A Real-World Study.

Shen F(1), Liang N(2), Fan Z(3), Zhao M(4), Kang J(5), Wang X(6), Hu Q(7), Mu 
Y(8), Wang K(9), Yuan M(9), Chen R(9), Guo W(1), Dong G(10), Zhao J(11), Bai 
J(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Shanxi Province Cancer Hospital, Shanxi 
Hospital Affiliated to Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, 
Cancer Hospital Affiliated to Shanxi Medical University, Taiyuan, China.
(2)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Peking 
Union Medical College and Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Medical Oncology, Air Force Medical Center, Chinese People's 
Liberation Army (PLA), Beijing, China.
(4)Department of Oncology, Hebei Chest Hospital, Research Center of Hebei Lung 
Cancer Prevention and Treatment, Shijiazhuang, China.
(5)Department of Oncology, Honghui Hospital, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, 
China.
(6)Department of Medical Oncology, Shaanxi Provincial People's Hospital, Xi'an, 
China.
(7)Department of Oncology, The Affiliated Hospital of Inner Mongolia Medical 
University, Hohhot, China.
(8)Department of Clinical Laboratory Center, The Affiliated People's Hospital of 
Inner Mongolia Medical University, Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region Cancer 
Hospital, Hohhot, China.
(9)Medical Center, Geneplus-Beijing, Beijing, China.
(10)Department of Medical Oncology, Tangshan People's Hospital, Tangshan, China.
(11)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of 
Education/Beijing), Department I of Thoracic Oncology, Peking University Cancer 
Hospital and Institute, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Genomic profiling of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) can be used to detect 
actionable mutations and guide clinical treatment of non-small cell lung cancer 
(NSCLC) patients with central nervous system (CNS) metastases. Examining the 
performance of CSF samples in real-world settings can confirm the potential of 
CSF genotyping for guiding therapy in clinical practice.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We included 1,396 samples from 970 NSCLC patients with CNS 
metastases in real-world settings. All samples underwent targeted 
next-generation sequencing of 1,021 cancer-relevant genes. In total, 100 CSF 
samples from 77 patients who had previously received targeted treatment were 
retrospectively analyzed to explore the mechanisms of TKI-resistance.
RESULTS: For NSCLC patients with CNS metastases, CSF samples were slightly more 
often used for genomic sequencing in treated patients with only distant CNS 
metastases compared to other patients (10.96% vs. 0.81-9.61%). Alteration rates 
in CSF samples were significantly higher than those in plasma, especially for 
copy number variants (CNV). The MSAFs of CSF samples were significantly higher 
than those of plasma and tumor tissues (all p <0.001). Remarkably, detection 
rates of all actionable mutations and EGFR in CSF were higher than those in 
plasma samples of treated patients (all p <0.0001). For concordance between 
paired CSF and plasma samples that were simultaneously tested, the MSAF of the 
CSF was significantly higher than that of matched plasma cfDNA (p <0.001). From 
multiple comparisons, it can be seen that CSF better detects alterations 
compared to plasma, especially CNV and structural variant (SV) alterations. CSF 
cfDNA in identifying mutations can confer the reason for the limited efficacy of 
EGFR-TKIs for 56 patients (78.87%, 56/71).
CONCLUSIONS: This real-world large cohort study confirmed that CSF had higher 
sensitivity than plasma in identifying actionable mutations and showed high 
potential in exploring underlying resistance mechanisms. CSF can be used in 
genomics profiling to facilitate the broad exploration of potential resistance 
mechanisms for NSCLC patients with CNS metastases.

Copyright © 2022 Shen, Liang, Fan, Zhao, Kang, Wang, Hu, Mu, Wang, Yuan, Chen, 
Guo, Dong, Zhao and Bai.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2022.889591
PMCID: PMC9259993
PMID: 35814426

Conflict of interest statement: KW, MY, and RC are current employees of 
Geneplus-Beijing. The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted 
in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be 
construed as a potential conflict of interest.