1. Eur J Case Rep Intern Med. 2022 Jun 28;9(6):003400. doi: 10.12890/2022_003400.
 eCollection 2022.

Fibrinogen Deficiency with Thrombotic Manifestations.

Tamayo-Velasco Á(1)(2)(3), Cebeira MJ(1), Bombín-Canal C(1), Acevedo-García 
RM(4), Peñarrubia-Ponce MJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Haematology and Haemotherapy Department, Hospital Clínico Universitario de 
Valladolid, Valladolid, Spain.
(2)BioCritic - Group for Biomedical Research in Critical Care Medicine, 
Valladolid, Spain.
(3)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Infecciosas 
(CIBERINFEC), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Haematology and Haemotherapy Department, Complejo Hospitalario Insular 
Materno Infantil de Gran Canaria, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Las Palmas, Spain.

Fibrinogen deficiencies are very rare. Qualitative fibrinogen deficiencies 
(dysfibrinogenaemia and hypodysfibrinogenemia) are functional disorders that can 
present with both haemorrhagic symptoms and with thrombotic phenomena as unique 
and paradoxical manifestation. We present the case of a 77-year-old man being 
investigated for a partially thrombosed abdominal aortic aneurysm as well as an 
ischaemic stroke 20 years previously. Basic coagulation tests were normal but 
extended tests revealed a lengthened thrombin time (TT) combined with a 
significant drop in fibrinogen concentration measured with the Clauss assay and 
by nephelometry. After secondary fibrinogen deficiencies were ruled out, a 
heterozygous variant in the FGG gene was detected by next-generation sequencing, 
and congenital hypodysfibrinogenemia was diagnosed. Acenocumarol was initiated 
and no new thrombotic or haemorrhagic events had occurred after a year of 
follow-up. In almost 25% of cases, thrombotic events may be the only clinical 
manifestation of functional fibrinogen deficiencies. They are a rare cause of 
thrombophilia, and are probably underdiagnosed due to normal standard 
coagulation test results as well as a possible absence of haemorrhagic events. 
Consequently, a TT test (an initial 'rule out' test) should be requested in 
order to promptly identify these patients. Moreover, discrepancies in derived 
and Clauss fibrinogen test results should suggest a functional disorder. 
Finally, new coagulation techniques based on the functional characterization of 
clot formation, such as ROTEM or thrombin generation assay, could help 
characterize these entities and suggest new therapeutic approaches.
LEARNING POINTS: Functional fibrinogen deficiencies can present with thrombotic 
manifestations only, and are a rare and probably underdiagnosed cause of 
thrombophilia.Thrombin time is a highly sensitive test to rule out other 
conditions as aPTT and PT results may be within normal ranges, especially in 
functional deficiencies.Discrepancies between derived and Clauss fibrinogen 
findings, fibrinogen protein measurements and the use of new techniques (ROTEM 
or thrombin generation) are important for correct approach.

© EFIM 2022.

DOI: 10.12890/2022_003400
PMCID: PMC9267712
PMID: 35821906

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interests: The Authors declare that 
there are no competing interests.