1. Cureus. 2022 Jun 9;14(6):e25787. doi: 10.7759/cureus.25787. eCollection 2022 
Jun.

Fulminant Coxsackievirus Myocarditis in an Immunocompetent Adult: A Case Report 
and Literature Analysis.

Jain A(1), Rane RP(1), Mumtaz M(1), Butt AY(1), Abdelsalam M(1), Waseem S(1).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, Conemaugh Memorial Medical Center, Johnstown, USA.

Myocarditis is an inflammatory condition that impacts cardiac myocytes and is 
caused mostly by viruses. It can manifest as chest pain, dyspnea, palpitations, 
fatigue, syncope, shortness of breath, and in severe cases frank cardiogenic 
shock. It accounts for around 10 percent of all sudden cardiac deaths in young 
adults, who are described as being in their early thirties. Inflammatory 
cardiomyopathy resulting from acute myocarditis may also appear as new-onset 
heart failure (HF), delaying the diagnosis and treatment of these patients. It 
is crucial to recognize the sensitivity of symptom onset, especially in young 
individuals; mildly elevated troponin levels that are inconsistent with the 
severity of left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) impairment and associated 
left ventricular dilatation strongly suggest inflammatory cardiomyopathy rather 
than acute myocarditis. The current treatment for myocarditis is primarily 
supportive, with an emphasis on the management of heart failure and arrhythmias 
in accordance with clinical practice guidelines. In this case report, we 
describe a male in his early forties who presented with abrupt onset exertional 
shortness of breath and chest discomfort. His cardiac catheterization did not 
show evidence of coronary artery disease; however, an echocardiogram revealed 
new-onset heart failure with reduced ejection fraction, the diagnosis of 
coxsackievirus myocarditis was made based on his clinical presentation, and a 
positive coxsackievirus immunoassay.

Copyright © 2022, Jain et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.25787
PMCID: PMC9272903
PMID: 35832753

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.