1. Maxillofac Plast Reconstr Surg. 2022 Jul 18;44(1):25. doi: 
10.1186/s40902-022-00355-5.

Multidisciplinary approach to Gorlin-Goltz syndrome: from diagnosis to surgical 
treatment of jawbones.

Spadari F(1), Pulicari F(1), Pellegrini M(2), Scribante A(2), Garagiola U(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Surgical and Dental Sciences, Maxillo-Facial and 
Odontostomatology Unit, School of Orthodontics, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda 
Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, University of Milan, Milan, Italy.
(2)Department of Clinical-Surgical, Diagnostic and Pediatric Sciences Section of 
Dentistry, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
(3)Department of Biomedical Surgical and Dental Sciences, Maxillo-Facial and 
Odontostomatology Unit, School of Orthodontics, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda 
Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, University of Milan, Milan, Italy. 
umberto.garagiola@unimi.it.

BACKGROUND: Gorlin syndrome, also known as Gorlin-Goltz syndrome (GGS) or basal 
cell nevus syndrome (BCNS) or nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome (NBCCS), is 
an autosomal dominant familial cancer syndrome. It is characterized by the 
presence of numerous basal cell carcinomas (BCCs), along with skeletal, 
ophthalmic, and neurological abnormalities. It is essential to anticipate the 
diagnosis by identifying the pathology through the available diagnostic tests, 
clinical signs, and radiological manifestations, setting up an adequate 
treatment plan.
MAIN BODY: In the first part, we searched recent databases including MEDLINE 
(PubMed), Embase, and the Cochrane Library by analyzing the etiopathogenesis of 
the disease, identifying the genetic alterations underlying them. Subsequently, 
we defined what are, to date, the major and minor clinical diagnostic criteria, 
the possible genetic tests to be performed, and the pathologies with which to 
perform differential diagnosis. The radiological investigations were reviewed 
based on the most recent literature, and in the second part, we performed a 
review regarding the existing jawbone protocols, treating simple enucleation, 
enucleation with bone curettage in association or not with topical use of 
cytotoxic chemicals, and "en bloc" resection followed by possible bone 
reconstruction, marsupialization, decompression, and cryotherapy.
CONCLUSION: To promote the most efficient and accurate management of GGS, this 
article summarizes the clinical features of the disease, pathogenesis, 
diagnostic criteria, differential diagnosis, and surgical protocols. To arrive 
at an early diagnosis of the syndrome, it would be advisable to perform 
radiographic and clinical examinations from the young age of the patient. The 
management of the patient with GGS requires a multidisciplinary approach 
ensuring an adequate quality of life and effective treatment of symptoms.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40902-022-00355-5
PMCID: PMC9288940
PMID: 35843976

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.