1. Clin Trials. 2022 Oct;19(5):522-533. doi: 10.1177/17407745221103853. Epub 2022
 Jul 19.

Rethinking intercurrent events in defining estimands for tuberculosis trials.

Pham TM(1), Tweed CD(1), Carpenter JR(1)(2), Kahan BC(1), Nunn AJ(1), Crook 
AM(1), Esmail H(1), Goodall R(1), Phillips PP(3), White IR(1).

Author information:
(1)MRC Clinical Trials Unit at UCL, London, UK.
(2)Department of Medical Statistics, London School of Hygiene and Tropical 
Medicine, London, UK.
(3)UCSF Center for Tuberculosis, University of California San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA, USA.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Tuberculosis remains one of the leading causes of death from an 
infectious disease globally. Both choices of outcome definitions and approaches 
to handling events happening post-randomisation can change the treatment effect 
being estimated, but these are often inconsistently described, thus inhibiting 
clear interpretation and comparison across trials.
METHODS: Starting from the ICH E9(R1) addendum's definition of an estimand, we 
use our experience of conducting large Phase III tuberculosis treatment trials 
and our understanding of the estimand framework to identify the key decisions 
regarding how different event types are handled in the primary outcome 
definition, and the important points that should be considered in making such 
decisions. A key issue is the handling of intercurrent (i.e. post-randomisation) 
events (ICEs) which affect interpretation of or preclude measurement of the 
intended final outcome. We consider common ICEs including treatment changes and 
treatment extension, poor adherence to randomised treatment, re-infection with a 
new strain of tuberculosis which is different from the original infection, and 
death. We use two completed tuberculosis trials (REMoxTB and STREAM Stage 1) as 
illustrative examples. These trials tested non-inferiority of new tuberculosis 
treatment regimens versus a control regimen. The primary outcome was a binary 
composite endpoint, 'favourable' or 'unfavourable', which was constructed from 
several components.
RESULTS: We propose the following improvements in handling the above-mentioned 
ICEs and loss to follow-up (a post-randomisation event that is not in itself an 
ICE). First, changes to allocated regimens should not necessarily be viewed as 
an unfavourable outcome; from the patient perspective, the potential harms 
associated with a change in the regimen should instead be directly quantified. 
Second, handling poor adherence to randomised treatment using a per-protocol 
analysis does not necessarily target a clear estimand; instead, it would be 
desirable to develop ways to estimate the treatment effects more relevant to 
programmatic settings. Third, re-infection with a new strain of tuberculosis 
could be handled with different strategies, depending on whether the outcome of 
interest is the ability to attain culture negativity from infection with any 
strain of tuberculosis, or specifically the presenting strain of tuberculosis. 
Fourth, where possible, death could be separated into tuberculosis-related and 
non-tuberculosis-related and handled using appropriate strategies. Finally, 
although some losses to follow-up would result in early treatment 
discontinuation, patients lost to follow-up before the end of the trial should 
not always be classified as having an unfavourable outcome. Instead, loss to 
follow-up should be separated from not completing the treatment, which is an ICE 
and may be considered as an unfavourable outcome.
CONCLUSION: The estimand framework clarifies many issues in tuberculosis trials 
but also challenges trialists to justify and improve their outcome definitions. 
Future trialists should consider all the above points in defining their 
outcomes.

DOI: 10.1177/17407745221103853
PMCID: PMC9523802
PMID: 35850542 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interests: The 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.