1. Bioengineering (Basel). 2022 Jul 11;9(7):305. doi: 
10.3390/bioengineering9070305.

Analytical Studies of Antimicrobial Peptides as Diagnostic Biomarkers for the 
Detection of Bacterial and Viral Pneumonia.

Bakare OO(1)(2), Gokul A(1)(3), Keyster M(1).

Author information:
(1)Environmental Biotechnology Laboratory (EBL), Department of Biotechnology, 
University of the Western Cape, Cape Town 7535, South Africa.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Basic Medical Sciences, Olabisi 
Onabanjo University, Sagamu 120107, Ogun State, Nigeria.
(3)Department of Plant Sciences, Qwaqwa Campus, University of the Free State, 
Phuthadithjaba 9866, South Africa.

Pneumonia remains one of the leading causes of infectious mortality and 
significant economic losses among our growing population. The lack of specific 
biomarkers for correct and timely diagnosis to detect patients' status is a bane 
towards initiating a proper treatment plan for the disease; thus, current 
biomarkers cannot distinguish between pneumonia and other associated conditions 
such as atherosclerotic plaques and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). 
Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) are potential candidates for detecting numerous 
illnesses due to their compensatory roles as theranostic molecules. This 
research sought to generate specific data for parental AMPs to identify viral 
and bacterial pneumonia pathogens using in silico technology. The parental 
antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) used in this work were AMPs discovered in our 
previous in silico analyses using the HMMER algorithm, which were used to 
generate derivative (mutated) AMPs that would bind with greater affinity, in 
order to detect the bacterial and viral receptors using an in silico 
site-directed mutagenesis approach. These AMPs' 3D structures were subsequently 
predicted and docked against receptor proteins. The result shows putative AMPs 
with the potential capacity to detect pneumonia caused by these pathogens 
through their binding precision with high sensitivity, accuracy, and specificity 
for possible use in point-of-care diagnosis. These peptides' tendency to detect 
receptor proteins of viral and bacterial pneumonia with precision justifies 
their use for differential diagnostics, in an attempt to reduce the problems of 
indiscriminate overuse, toxicity due to the wrong prescription, bacterial 
resistance, and the scarcity and high cost of existing pneumonia antibiotics.

DOI: 10.3390/bioengineering9070305
PMCID: PMC9311714
PMID: 35877356

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.