1. Antibiotics (Basel). 2022 Jul 18;11(7):965. doi: 10.3390/antibiotics11070965.

Marine Actinobacteria a New Source of Antibacterial Metabolites to Treat Acne 
Vulgaris Disease-A Systematic Literature Review.

De La Hoz-Romo MC(1)(2), Díaz L(1)(2), Villamil L(1).

Author information:
(1)Doctoral Program of Biosciences, School of Engineering, Universidad de La 
Sabana, Chía 140013, Colombia.
(2)Bioprospecting Research Group, School of Engineering, Universidad de La 
Sabana, Chía 140013, Colombia.

Acne vulgaris is a multifactorial disease that remains under-explored; up to 
date it is known that the bacterium Cutibacterium acnes is involved in the 
disease occurrence, also associated with a microbial dysbiosis. Antibiotics have 
become a mainstay treatment generating the emergence of antibiotic-resistant 
bacteria. In addition, there are some reported side effects of alternative 
treatments, which indicate the need to investigate a different therapeutic 
approach. Natural products continue to be an excellent option, especially those 
extracted from actinobacteria, which represent a prominent source of metabolites 
with a wide range of biological activities, particularly the marine 
actinobacteria, which have been less studied than their terrestrial 
counterparts. Therefore, this systematic review aimed to identify and evaluate 
the potential anti-infective activity of metabolites isolated from marine 
actinobacteria strains against bacteria related to the development of acne 
vulgaris disease. It was found that there is a variety of compounds with 
anti-infective activity against Staphylococcus aureus and Staphylococcus 
epidermidis, bacteria closely related to acne vulgaris development; 
nevertheless, there is no report of a compound with antibacterial activity or 
quorum-sensing inhibition toward C. acnes, which is a surprising result. Since 
two of the most widely used antibiotics for the treatment of acne targeting C. 
acnes were obtained from actinobacteria of the genus Streptomyces, this 
demonstrates a great opportunity to pursue further studies in this field, 
considering the potential of marine actinobacteria to produce new anti-infective 
compounds.

DOI: 10.3390/antibiotics11070965
PMCID: PMC9311749
PMID: 35884220

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.