1. Pathogens. 2022 Jul 10;11(7):784. doi: 10.3390/pathogens11070784.

Association of Intrauterine Microbes with Endometrial Factors in Intrauterine 
Adhesion Formation and after Medicine Treatment.

Wen Y(1)(2), Wu Q(1), Zhang L(1), He J(1)(3), Chen Y(1), Yang X(1)(4), Zhang 
K(1), Niu X(1), Li S(5).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Bio-Resources, Key 
Laboratory for Microbial Resources of the Ministry of Education, School of Life 
Sciences, Yunnan University, Kunming 650091, China.
(2)Department of Reproduction and Genetics, The First Affiliated Hospital of 
Kunming Medical University, Kunming 650091, China.
(3)Kunming Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, Kunming University, Kunming 
650214, China.
(4)Regenerative Medicine Research Center, The First People's Hospital of Yunnan 
Province, Kunming 650034, China.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Southwestern Chinese Medicine Resources, Innovative 
Institute of Chinese Medicine and Pharmacy, Chengdu University of Traditional 
Chinese Medicine, Chengdu 611137, China.

Intrauterine adhesions (IUAs) have caused serious harm to women's reproductive 
health. Although emerging evidence has linked intrauterine microbiome to 
gynecological diseases, the association of intrauterine microbiome with IUA, 
remains unknown. We performed metagenome-wide association, metabolomics, and 
transcriptomics studies on IUA and non-IUA uteri of adult rats to identify 
IUA-associated microbial species, which affected uterine metabolites and 
endometrial transcriptions. A rat model was used with one side of the duplex 
uterus undergoing IUA and the other remaining as a non-IUA control. Both 16S 
rRNA sequencing and metagenome-wide association analysis revealed that instead 
of Mycoplasmopsis specie in genital tract, murine lung pathogen 
Mycoplasmopsispulmonis markedly increased in IUA samples and displayed a 
distinct positive interaction with the host immune system. Moreover, most of the 
IUA-enriched 58 metabolites positively correlate with M.pulmonis, which 
inversely correlates with a mitotic progression inhibitor named 3-hydroxycapric 
acid. A comparison of metabolic profiles of intrauterine flushing fluids from 
human patients with IUA, endometritis, and fallopian tube obstruction suggested 
that rat IUA shared much similarity to human IUA. The endometrial gene 
Tenascin-N, which is responsible for extracellular matrix of wounds, was highly 
up-regulated, while the key genes encoding parvalbumin, trophectoderm Dkkl1 and 
telomerase involved in leydig cells, trophectoderm cells, activated T cells and 
monocytes were dramatically down-regulated in rat IUA endometria. Treatment for 
rat IUA with estrogen (E2), oxytetracycline (OTC), and a traditional Chinese 
patent medicine GongXueNing (GXN) did not reduce the incidence of IUA, though 
inflammatory factor IL-6 was dramatically down-regulated (96-86%) with all 
three. Instead, in both the E2 and OTC treated groups, IUA became worse with a 
highly up-regulated B cell receptor signaling pathway, which may be associated 
with the significantly increased proportions of Ulvibacter or Staphylococcus. 
Our results suggest an association between intrauterine microbiota alterations, 
certain uterine metabolites, characteristic changes in endometrial 
transcription, and IUA and the possibility to intervene in IUA formation by 
targeting the causal factors, microbial infection, and Tenascin-like proteins.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens11070784
PMCID: PMC9322781
PMID: 35890029

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.