1. Alzheimers Dement (N Y). 2022 Jul 25;8(1):e12326. doi: 10.1002/trc2.12326. 
eCollection 2022.

Differences and similarities between familial and sporadic frontotemporal 
dementia: An Italian single-center cohort study.

Benussi A(1)(2), Libri I(1), Premi E(3), Alberici A(2), Cantoni V(1), Gadola 
Y(1), Rivolta J(1), Pengo M(4), Gazzina S(5), Calhoun VD(6), Gasparotti R(7), 
Zetterberg H(8)(9)(10)(11)(12), Ashton NJ(8)(13)(14)(15), Blennow K(8)(9), 
Padovani A(1)(2), Borroni B(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Neurology Unit Department of Clinical and Experimental Sciences University of 
Brescia Brescia Italy.
(2)Neurology Unit Department of Neurological and Vision Sciences ASST Spedali 
Civili Brescia Italy.
(3)Stroke Unit Department of Neurological and Vision Sciences ASST Spedali 
Civili Brescia Italy.
(4)Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine University of Brescia 
Brescia Italy.
(5)Neurophysiology Unit Department of Neurological and Vision Sciences ASST 
Spedali Civili Brescia Italy.
(6)The Mind Research Network Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering 
University of New Mexico Albuquerque New Mexico USA.
(7)Neuroradiology Unit University of Brescia Brescia Italy.
(8)Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology Department of Psychiatry and 
Neurochemistry The Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of Gothenburg Mölndal 
Sweden.
(9)Clinical Neurochemistry Laboratory Sahlgrenska University Hospital Mölndal 
Sweden.
(10)UK Dementia Research Institute at UCL London UK.
(11)Department of Neurodegenerative Disease UCL Institute of Neurology London 
UK.
(12)Hong Kong Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases Hong Kong China.
(13)Wallenberg Centre for Molecular and Translational Medicine University of 
Gothenburg Mölndal Sweden.
(14)King's College London Institute of Psychiatry Psychology & Neuroscience 
Maurice Wohl Clinical Neuroscience Institute London UK.
(15)NIHR Biomedical Research Centre for Mental Health & Biomedical Research Unit 
for Dementia at South London & Maudsley NHS Foundation London UK.

INTRODUCTION: The possibility to generalize our understandings on treatments and 
assessments to both familial frontotemporal dementia (f-FTD) and sporadic FTD 
(s-FTD) is a fundamental perspective for the near future, considering the 
constant advancement in potential disease-modifying therapies that target 
particular genetic forms of FTD. We aimed to investigate differences in clinical 
features, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and blood-based biomarkers between f-FTD 
and s-FTD.
METHODS: In this longitudinal cohort study, we evaluated a consecutive sample of 
symptomatic FTD patients, classified as f-FTD and s-FTD according to Goldman 
scores (GS). All patients underwent clinical, behavioral, and neuropsychiatric 
symptom assessment, CSF biomarkers and serum neurofilament light (NfL) analysis, 
and brain atrophy evaluation with magnetic resonance imaging.
RESULTS: Of 570 patients with FTD, 123 were classified as f-FTD, and 447 as 
s-FTD. In the f-FTD group, 95 had a pathogenic FTD mutation while 28 were 
classified as GS = 1 or 2; of the s-FTD group, 133 were classified as GS = 3 and 
314 with GS = 4. f-FTD and s-FTD cases showed comparable demographic features, 
except for younger age at disease onset, age at diagnosis, and higher years of 
education in the f-FTD group (all P < .05). f-FTD showed worse behavioral 
disturbances as measured with Frontal Behavioral Inventory (FBI) negative 
behaviors (14.0 ± 7.6 vs. 11.6 ± 7.4, P = .002), and positive behaviors 
(20.0 ± 11.0 vs. 17.4 ± 11.8, P = .031). Serum NfL concentrations were higher in 
patients with f-FTD (70.9 ± 37.9 pg/mL) compared to s-FTD patients 
(37.3 ± 24.2 pg/mL, P < .001), and f-FTD showed greater brain atrophy in the 
frontal and temporal regions and basal ganglia. Patients with f-FTD had 
significantly shorter survival than those with s-FTD (P = .004).
DISCUSSION: f-FTD and s-FTD are very similar clinical entities, but with 
different biological mechanisms, and different rates of progression. The 
parallel characterization of both f-FTD and s-FTD will improve our understanding 
of the disease, and aid in designing future clinical trials for both genetic and 
sporadic forms of FTD.
HIGHLIGHTS: Do clinical features and biomarkers differ between patients with 
familial frontotemporal dementia (f-FTD) and sporadic FTD (s-FTD)?In this cohort 
study of 570 patients with FTD, f-FTD and s-FTD share similar demographic 
features, but with younger age at disease onset and diagnosis in the f-FTD 
group.f-FTD showed higher serum neurofilament light concentrations, greater 
brain damage, and shorter survival, compared to s-FTD.f-FTD and s-FTD are very 
similar clinical entities, but with different cognitive reserve mechanisms and 
different rates of progression.

© 2022 The Authors. Alzheimer's & Dementia: Translational Research & Clinical 
Interventions published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of Alzheimer's 
Association.

DOI: 10.1002/trc2.12326
PMCID: PMC9310192
PMID: 35898667

Conflict of interest statement: H.Z. has served at scientific advisory boards 
and/or as a consultant for Abbvie, Alector, Annexon, Artery Therapeutics, 
AZTherapies, CogRx, Denali, Eisai, Nervgen, Pinteon Therapeutics, Red Abbey 
Labs, Passage Bio, Roche, Samumed, Siemens Healthineers, Triplet Therapeutics, 
and Wave; has given lectures in symposia sponsored by Cellectricon, Fujirebio, 
Alzecure, Biogen, and Roche; and is a co‐founder of Brain Biomarker Solutions in 
Gothenburg AB (BBS), which is a part of the GU Ventures Incubator Program 
(outside submitted work). K.B. has served as a consultant, at advisory boards, 
or at data monitoring committees for Abcam, Axon, Biogen, JOMDD/Shimadzu; Julius 
Clinical, Lilly, MagQu, Novartis, Roche Diagnostics, and Siemens Healthineers, 
and is a co‐founder of Brain Biomarker Solutions in Gothenburg AB (BBS), which 
is a part of the GU Ventures Incubator Program. Author disclosures are available 
in the supporting information.