1. Neuroimage Clin. 2022;35:103114. doi: 10.1016/j.nicl.2022.103114. Epub 2022
Jul  13.

Determining the OPTIMAL DTI analysis method for application in cerebral small 
vessel disease.

Egle M(1), Hilal S(2), Tuladhar AM(3), Pirpamer L(4), Bell S(5), Hofer E(6), 
Duering M(7), Wason J(8), Morris RG(9), Dichgans M(10), Schmidt R(4), Tozer 
DJ(5), Barrick TR(11), Chen C(2), de Leeuw FE(3), Markus HS(5).

Author information:
(1)Stroke Research Group, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. Electronic address: marco.egle@web.de.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, National University of Singapore, Singapore; 
Memory Ageing and Cognition Center, National University Health System, 
Singapore.
(3)Department of Neurology, Donders Center for Medical Neuroscience, Radboud 
University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(4)Department of Neurology, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria.
(5)Stroke Research Group, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(6)Department of Neurology, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria; Institute 
for Medical Informatics, Statistics and Documentation, Medical University of 
Graz, Graz, Austria.
(7)Institute for Stroke and Dementia Research, University Hospital, LMU Munich, 
Munich, Germany; Medical Image Analysis Center (MIAC) and Department of 
Biomedical Engineering, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(8)Population Health Sciences Institute, Newcastle University, Baddiley-Clark 
Building, Newcastle Upon Tyne, United Kingdom.
(9)Department of Psychology (R.G.M.), King's College, Institute of Psychiatry, 
Psychology and Neuroscience, London, United Kingdom.
(10)Institute for Stroke and Dementia Research, University Hospital, LMU Munich, 
Munich, Germany; Munich Cluster for Systems Neurology (SyNergy), Munich, 
Germany; German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Munich, Germany.
(11)Neurosciences Research Centre, Institute for Molecular and Clinical 
Sciences, St George's, University of London, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: DTI is sensitive to white matter (WM) microstructural damage and has 
been suggested as a surrogate marker for phase 2 clinical trials in cerebral 
small vessel disease (SVD). The study's objective is to establish the best way 
to analyse the diffusion-weighted imaging data in SVD for this purpose. The 
ideal method would be sensitive to change and predict dementia conversion, but 
also straightforward to implement and ideally automated. As part of the OPTIMAL 
collaboration, we evaluated five different DTI analysis strategies across six 
different cohorts with differing SVD severity.
METHODS: Those 5 strategies were: (1) conventional mean diffusivity WM histogram 
measure (MD median), (2) a principal component-derived measure based on 
conventional WM histogram measures (PC1), (3) peak width skeletonized mean 
diffusivity (PSMD), (4) diffusion tensor image segmentation θ (DSEG θ) and (5) a 
WM measure of global network efficiency (Geff). The association between each 
measure and cognitive function was tested using a linear regression model 
adjusted by clinical markers. Changes in the imaging measures over time were 
determined. In three cohort studies, repeated imaging data together with data on 
incident dementia were available. The association between the baseline measure, 
change measure and incident dementia conversion was examined using Cox 
proportional-hazard regression or logistic regression models. Sample size 
estimates for a hypothetical clinical trial were furthermore computed for each 
DTI analysis strategy.
RESULTS: There was a consistent cross-sectional association between the imaging 
measures and impaired cognitive function across all cohorts. All baseline 
measures predicted dementia conversion in severe SVD. In mild SVD, PC1, PSMD and 
Geff predicted dementia conversion. In MCI, all markers except Geff predicted 
dementia conversion. Baseline DTI was significantly different in patients 
converting to vascular dementia than to Alzheimer' s disease. Significant change 
in all measures was associated with dementia conversion in severe but not in 
mild SVD. The automatic and semi-automatic measures PSMD and DSEG θ required the 
lowest minimum sample sizes for a hypothetical clinical trial in single-centre 
sporadic SVD cohorts.
CONCLUSION: DTI parameters obtained from all analysis methods predicted 
dementia, and there was no clear winner amongst the different analysis 
strategies. The fully automated analysis provided by PSMD offers advantages 
particularly for large datasets.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nicl.2022.103114
PMCID: PMC9421487
PMID: 35908307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.