1. J Crohns Colitis. 2023 Jan 27;17(1):49-60. doi: 10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjac103.

Chromosomal Numerical Aberrations and Rare Copy Number Variation in Patients 
with Inflammatory Bowel Disease.

Dirvanskyte P(1), Gurram B(2), Bolton C(3)(4), Warner N(5), Jones KDJ(4)(6), 
Griffin HR(7); Genomics England Research Consortium; Park JY(8), Keller KM(9), 
Gilmour KC(10), Hambleton S(7), Muise AM(5)(11)(12)(13)(14), Wysocki C(15), 
Uhlig HH(1)(16)(17).

Author information:
(1)Translational Gastroenterology Unit and Biomedical Research Centre, Nuffield 
Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas TX, USA.
(3)Institute of Child Health, University College London, London, UK.
(4)Paediatric Gastroenterology Department, Great Ormond Street Hospital for 
Children NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(5)SickKids Inflammatory Bowel Disease Centre, Hospital for Sick Children, 
Toronto, ON, Canada.
(6)Nuffield Department of Orthopaedics, Rheumatology and Musculoskeletal 
Sciences, Kennedy Institute of Rheumatology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(7)Primary Immunodeficiency Group, Newcastle University Translational and 
Clinical Research Institute, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(8)Department of Pathology and the Eugene McDermott Center for Human Growth and 
Development. UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA.
(9)German Clinic for Diagnostics [DKD], Helios Klinik, Wiesbaden, Germany.
(10)Laboratory of Immunology and Cellular Therapy, Great Ormond Street Hospital 
for Children, NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(11)Department of Biochemistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(12)Cell Biology Program, Sick Kids Research Institute, Hospital for Sick 
Children, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(13)Department of Pediatrics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(14)Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(15)Department of Pediatrics, and Department of Internal Medicine, University of 
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA.
(16)Biomedical Research Centre, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(17)Department of Paediatrics, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Inflammatory bowel diseases [IBD] have a complex polygenic 
aetiology. Rare genetic variants can cause monogenic intestinal inflammation. 
The impact of chromosomal aberrations and large structural abnormalities on IBD 
susceptibility is not clear. We aimed to comprehensively characterise the 
phenotype and prevalence of patients with IBD who possess rare numerical and 
structural chromosomal abnormalities.
METHODS: We performed a systematic literature search of databases PubMed and 
Embase; and analysed gnomAD, Clinvar, the 100 000 Genomes Project, and DECIPHER 
databases. Further, we analysed international paediatric IBD cohorts to 
investigate the role of IL2RA duplications in IBD susceptibility.
RESULTS: A meta-analysis suggests that monosomy X [Turner syndrome] is 
associated with increased expressivity of IBD that exceeds the population 
baseline (1.86%, 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.48 to 2.34%) and causes a 
younger age of IBD onset. There is little evidence that Klinefelter syndrome, 
Trisomy 21, Trisomy 18, mosaic Trisomy 9 and 16, or partial trisomies contribute 
to IBD susceptibility. Copy number analysis studies suggest inconsistent 
results. Monoallelic loss of X-linked or haploinsufficient genes is associated 
with IBD by hemizygous or heterozygous deletions, respectively. However, 
haploinsufficient gene deletions are detected in healthy reference populations, 
suggesting that the expressivity of IBD might be overestimated. One duplication 
that has previously been identified as potentially contributing to IBD risk 
involves the IL2RA/IL15R loci. Here we provide additional evidence that a 
microduplication of this locus may predispose to very-early-onset IBD by 
identifying a second case in a distinct kindred. However, the penetrance of 
intestinal inflammation in this genetic aberration is low [<2.6%].
CONCLUSIONS: Turner syndrome is associated with increased susceptibility to 
intestinal inflammation. Duplication of the IL2RA/IL15R loci may contribute to 
disease risk.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of European 
Crohn’s and Colitis Organisation.

DOI: 10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjac103
PMCID: PMC9880952
PMID: 35907265 [Indexed for MEDLINE]