1. Front Neurol. 2022 Jul 12;13:890638. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2022.890638.
eCollection  2022.

Multi-Omics Interdisciplinary Research Integration to Accelerate Dementia 
Biomarker Development (MIRIADE).

Mavrina E(1)(2), Kimble L(1)(2), Waury K(1)(3), Gogishvili D(1)(3), Gómez de San 
José N(1)(4), Das S(1)(5), Coppens S(1)(6), Fernandes Gomes B(1)(7), Mravinacová 
S(1)(8), Wojdała AL(1)(9), Bolsewig K(1)(10), Bayoumy S(1)(10), Burtscher 
F(1)(11), Mohaupt P(1)(12), Willemse E(1)(10), Teunissen C(1)(10); MIRIADE 
consortium.

Author information:
(1)MIRIADE Consortium: Multiomics Interdisciplinary Research Integration to 
Address DEmentia Diagnosis.
(2)KIN Center for Digital Innovation, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, 
Netherlands.
(3)Centre for Integrative Bioinformatics VU (IBIVU) - Center for Integrative 
Bioinformatics, Department of Computer Science, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(4)Department of Neurology, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany.
(5)ADx NeuroSciences, Gent, Belgium.
(6)National Measurement Laboratory at Laboratory of the Government Chemist 
(LGC), Teddington, United Kingdom.
(7)Department of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry, Institute of Neuroscience and 
Physiology, the Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of Gothenburg, Mölndal, 
Sweden.
(8)Division of Affinity Proteomics, Department of Protein Science, Kungliga 
Tekniska Högskolan (KTH) Royal Institute of Technology, SciLifeLab, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(9)Laboratory of Clinical Neurochemistry, Department of Medicine and Surgery, 
University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy.
(10)Neurochemistry Laboratory, Department of Clinical Chemistry, Amsterdam 
Neuroscience, Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, 
Netherlands.
(11)Luxembourg Centre for Systems Biomedicine, University of Luxembourg, 
Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg.
(12)Institute for Regenerative Medicine and Biotherapy - Plateforme de 
Protéomique Clinique (IRMB-PPC), Institute for Neurosciences of Montpellier 
(INM), Université de Montpellier, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de 
Montpellier, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM) 
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), Montpellier, France.

Proteomics studies have shown differential expression of numerous proteins in 
dementias but have rarely led to novel biomarker tests for clinical use. The 
Marie Curie MIRIADE project is designed to experimentally evaluate development 
strategies to accelerate the validation and ultimate implementation of novel 
biomarkers in clinical practice, using proteomics-based biomarker development 
for main dementias as experimental case studies. We address several knowledge 
gaps that have been identified in the field. First, there is the 
technology-translation gap of different technologies for the discovery (e.g., 
mass spectrometry) and the large-scale validation (e.g., immunoassays) of 
biomarkers. In addition, there is a limited understanding of conformational 
states of biomarker proteins in different matrices, which affect the selection 
of reagents for assay development. In this review, we aim to understand the 
decisions taken in the initial steps of biomarker development, which is done via 
an interim narrative update of the work of each ESR subproject. The results 
describe the decision process to shortlist biomarkers from a proteomics to 
develop immunoassays or mass spectrometry assays for Alzheimer's disease, Lewy 
body dementia, and frontotemporal dementia. In addition, we explain the approach 
to prepare the market implementation of novel biomarkers and assays. Moreover, 
we describe the development of computational protein state and interaction 
prediction models to support biomarker development, such as the prediction of 
epitopes. Lastly, we reflect upon activities involved in the biomarker 
development process to deduce a best-practice roadmap for biomarker development.

Copyright © 2022 Mavrina, Kimble, Waury, Gogishvili, Gómez de San José, Das, 
Coppens, Fernandes Gomes, Mravinacová, Wojdała, Bolsewig, Bayoumy, Burtscher, 
Mohaupt, Willemse, Teunissen and the MIRIADE consortium.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2022.890638
PMCID: PMC9315267
PMID: 35903119

Conflict of interest statement: SD is an employee of ADx NeuroSciences, Gent, 
Belgium. SC is an employee of National Measurement Laboratory at LGC, London, 
UK. CT has a collaboration contract with ADx Neurosciences, Quanterix, and Eli 
Lilly, performed contract research or received grants from AC-Immune, Axon 
Neurosciences, Bioconnect, Biogen, Brainstorm Therapeutics, Celgene, EIP Pharma, 
Eisai, PeopleBio, Quanterix, Roche, Toyama, and Vivoryon. She serves on 
editorial boards of Medidact Neurologie/Springer, Alzheimer Research and 
Therapy, Neurology: Neuroimmunology & Neuroinflammation, and is editor of a 
Neuromethods book Springer. The remaining authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.