1. Front Pharmacol. 2022 Jul 18;13:941013. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2022.941013. 
eCollection 2022.

Network analysis combined with pharmacological evaluation strategy to reveal the 
mechanism of Tibetan medicine Wuwei Shexiang pills in treating rheumatoid 
arthritis.

He Q(1), Tan X(2), Geng S(3), Du Q(2), Pei Z(4), Zhang Y(1), Wang S(1), Zhang 
Y(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Southwestern Chinese Medicine Resources, School of 
Ethnic Medicine, Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Chengdu, 
China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Southwestern Chinese Medicine Resources, School of 
Pharmacy, Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Chengdu, China.
(3)Affiliated Hospital of University of Tibetan Medicine, University of Tibetan 
Medicine, Lasa, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Southwestern Chinese Medicine Resources, Innovative 
Institute of Chinese Medicine and Pharmacy, Chengdu University of Traditional 
Chinese Medicine, Chengdu, China.

Tibetan medicine is an important part of traditional Chinese medicine and a 
significant representative of ethnic medicine in China. Tibetan medicine is 
gradually recognized by the world for its unique curative effects. Wuwei 
Shexiang pills (WPW) has been widely used to treat "Zhenbu" disease (Also known 
as rheumatoid arthritis) in Tibetan medicine, however, its potential bioactive 
ingredients and mechanism for RA treatment remain unclear. In this study, we 
used a combination of gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS), 
ultra-performance liquid chromatography coupled with quadrupole time-of-fight 
mass spectrometry (UPLC-Q-TOF/MS), network analysis and experimental validation 
to elucidate the potential pharmacodynamic substances and mechanisms of WPW in 
the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). The results showed that songoramine, 
cheilanthifoline, saussureanine C, acoric acid, arjunolic acid, peraksine, 
ellagic acid, arjungenin and other 11 components may be the main activities of 
WPW in the treatment of RA. PIK3CA, AKT, MAPK, IL-6, TNF, MMP1, MMP3, and CDK1 
are considered as core targets. PI3K-AKT, MAPK, apoptosis, cell cycle, and other 
signaling pathways may be the key pathways for WPW to play a role in the 
treatment of RA. Furthermore, we validated the underlying molecular mechanism of 
WPW predicted by network analysis and demonstrated its possible mechanism 
through in vivo animal experiments. It was found that WPW could significantly 
improve the degree of paw swelling, and reduce ankle joint diameter and 
arthritis index. Further histomorphological analysis showed that WPW could 
reduce the degree of synovial tissue inflammation and ankle joint cartilage 
damage. Meanwhile, WPW could down-regulate the levels of IL-6, IL-1β, and IL-17, 
and increase the levels of IL-10 and IL-4 in the serum of AA rats. TUNEL 
staining confirmed that WPW could significantly promote the apoptosis of 
synovial cells. Moreover, the immunohistochemical results showed that WPW 
decreased the expression of PI3K, AKT, MAPK, MMP1, MMP3, CDK1, and Bcl-2, as 
well as increased the expression of Bax protein. In conclusion, we successfully 
combined GC-MS, UPLC-Q-TOF/MS, network analysis, and experimental validation 
strategies to elucidate the inhibition of inflammation by WPW in AA model rats 
via PI3K/AKT, MAPK, cell cycle and apoptotic pathways process. This not only 
provides new evidence for the study of potential pharmacodynamic substances and 
the mechanism of WPW in the treatment of RA, but also provides ideas for the 
study of other Tibetan medicine compound preparations.

Copyright © 2022 He, Tan, Geng, Du, Pei, Zhang, Wang and Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2022.941013
PMCID: PMC9340267
PMID: 35924046

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.