1. Elife. 2022 Aug 5;11:e74810. doi: 10.7554/eLife.74810.

Allosteric stabilization of calcium and phosphoinositide dual binding engages 
several synaptotagmins in fast exocytosis.

Kobbersmed JRL(#)(1)(2), Berns MMM(#)(2)(3), Ditlevsen S(1), Sørensen JB(2), 
Walter AM(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mathematical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, 
Denmark.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)Molecular and Theoretical Neuroscience, Leibniz-Institut für Molekulare 
Pharmakologie, FMP im CharitéCrossOver, Berlin, Germany.
(#)Contributed equally

Synaptic communication relies on the fusion of synaptic vesicles with the plasma 
membrane, which leads to neurotransmitter release. This exocytosis is triggered 
by brief and local elevations of intracellular Ca2+ with remarkably high 
sensitivity. How this is molecularly achieved is unknown. While synaptotagmins 
confer the Ca2+ sensitivity of neurotransmitter exocytosis, biochemical 
measurements reported Ca2+ affinities too low to account for synaptic function. 
However, synaptotagmin's Ca2+ affinity increases upon binding the plasma 
membrane phospholipid PI(4,5)P2 and, vice versa, Ca2+ binding increases 
synaptotagmin's PI(4,5)P2 affinity, indicating a stabilization of the 
Ca2+/PI(4,5)P2 dual-bound state. Here, we devise a molecular exocytosis model 
based on this positive allosteric stabilization and the assumptions that (1.) 
synaptotagmin Ca2+/PI(4,5)P2 dual binding lowers the energy barrier for vesicle 
fusion and that (2.) the effect of multiple synaptotagmins on the energy barrier 
is additive. The model, which relies on biochemically measured Ca2+/PI(4,5)P2 
affinities and protein copy numbers, reproduced the steep Ca2+ dependency of 
neurotransmitter release. Our results indicate that each synaptotagmin engaging 
in Ca2+/PI(4,5)P2 dual-binding lowers the energy barrier for vesicle fusion by 
~5 kBT and that allosteric stabilization of this state enables the synchronized 
engagement of several (typically three) synaptotagmins for fast exocytosis. 
Furthermore, we show that mutations altering synaptotagmin's allosteric 
properties may show dominant-negative effects, even though synaptotagmins act 
independently on the energy barrier, and that dynamic changes of local PI(4,5)P2 
(e.g. upon vesicle movement) dramatically impact synaptic responses. We conclude 
that allosterically stabilized Ca2+/PI(4,5)P2 dual binding enables 
synaptotagmins to exert their coordinated function in neurotransmission.

Plain Language Summary: For our brains and nervous systems to work properly, the 
nerve cells within them must be able to ‘talk’ to each other. They do this by 
releasing chemical signals called neurotransmitters which other cells can detect 
and respond to. Neurotransmitters are packaged in tiny membrane-bound spheres 
called vesicles. When a cell of the nervous system needs to send a signal to its 
neighbours, the vesicles fuse with the outer membrane of the cell, discharging 
their chemical contents for other cells to detect. The initial trigger for 
neurotransmitter release is a short, fast increase in the amount of calcium ions 
inside the signalling cell. One of the main proteins that helps regulate this 
process is synaptotagmin which binds to calcium and gives vesicles the signal to 
start unloading their chemicals. Despite acting as a calcium sensor, 
synaptotagmin actually has a very low affinity for calcium ions by itself, 
meaning that it would not be efficient for the protein to respond alone. 
Synpatotagmin is more likely to bind to calcium if it is attached to a molecule 
called PIP2, which is found in the membranes of cells The effect also occurs in 
reverse, as the binding of calcium to synaptotagmin increases the protein’s 
affinity for PIP2. However, how these three molecules – synaptotagmin, PIP2, and 
calcium – work together to achieve the physiological release of 
neurotransmitters is poorly understood. To help answer this question, 
Kobbersmed, Berns et al. set up a computer simulation of ‘virtual vesicles’ 
using available experimental data on synaptotagmin’s affinity with calcium and 
PIP2. In this simulation, synaptotagmin could only trigger the release of 
neurotransmitters when bound to both calcium and PIP2. The model also showed 
that each ‘complex’ of synaptotagmin/calcium/PIP2 made the vesicles more likely 
to fuse with the outer membrane of the cell – to the extent that only a handful 
of synaptotagmin molecules were needed to start neurotransmitter release from a 
single vesicle. These results shed new light on a biological process central to 
the way nerve cells communicate with each other. In the future, Kobbersmed, 
Berns et al. hope that this insight will help us to understand the cause of 
diseases where communication in the nervous system is impaired.

© 2022, Kobbersmed, Berns et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.74810
PMCID: PMC9489213
PMID: 35929728 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: JK, MB, SD, JS, AW No competing interests 
declared