1. Cancer Res. 2022 Oct 4;82(19):3435-3448. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-22-0325.

An Immunogenic Model of KRAS-Mutant Lung Cancer Enables Evaluation of Targeted 
Therapy and Immunotherapy Combinations.

Boumelha J(#)(1), de Carné Trécesson S(#)(1), Law EK(#)(2)(3)(4)(5), 
Romero-Clavijo P(1), Coelho MA(1), Ng KW(6), Mugarza E(1), Moore C(1), Rana 
S(1)(7), Caswell DR(8), Murillo M(1)(7), Hancock DC(1), Argyris 
PP(2)(3)(4)(5)(9), Brown WL(2)(3)(4), Durfee C(2)(3)(4)(10), Larson LK(2)(3)(4), 
Vogel RI(3)(11), Suárez-Bonnet A(12)(13), Priestnall SL(12)(13), East P(14), 
Ross SJ(15), Kassiotis G(6), Molina-Arcas M(1), Swanton C(8), Harris 
R(2)(3)(4)(5)(10)(16), Downward J(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Oncogene Biology Laboratory, Francis Crick Institute, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Biophysics, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota.
(3)Masonic Cancer Center, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota.
(4)Institute for Molecular Virology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, 
Minnesota.
(5)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, 
Minnesota.
(6)Retroviral Immunology Laboratory, Francis Crick Institute, London, United 
Kingdom.
(7)Lung Cancer Group, Division of Molecular Pathology, Institute of Cancer 
Research, London, United Kingdom.
(8)Translational Cancer Therapeutics Laboratory, Francis Crick Institute, 
London, United Kingdom.
(9)Division of Oral and Maxillofacial Pathology, School of Dentistry, University 
of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota.
(10)Department of Biochemistry and Structural Biology, University of Texas 
Health San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas.
(11)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Women's Health, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota.
(12)Experimental Histopathology, Francis Crick Institute, London, United 
Kingdom.
(13)Department of Pathobiology and Population Sciences, Royal Veterinary 
College, Hatfield, United Kingdom.
(14)Bioinformatics and Biostatistics, Francis Crick Institute, London, United 
Kingdom.
(15)AstraZeneca Oncology R&amp;D, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(16)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Texas Health San Antonio, San 
Antonio, Texas.
(#)Contributed equally

Mutations in oncogenes such as KRAS and EGFR cause a high proportion of lung 
cancers. Drugs targeting these proteins cause tumor regression but ultimately 
fail to elicit cures. As a result, there is an intense interest in how to best 
combine targeted therapies with other treatments, such as immunotherapies. 
However, preclinical systems for studying the interaction of lung tumors with 
the host immune system are inadequate, in part due to the low tumor mutational 
burden in genetically engineered mouse models. Here we set out to develop mouse 
models of mutant KRAS-driven lung cancer with an elevated tumor mutational 
burden by expressing the human DNA cytosine deaminase, APOBEC3B, to mimic the 
mutational signature seen in human lung cancer. This failed to substantially 
increase clonal tumor mutational burden and autochthonous tumors remained 
refractory to immunotherapy. However, establishing clonal cell lines from these 
tumors enabled the generation of an immunogenic syngeneic transplantation model 
of KRAS-mutant lung adenocarcinoma that was sensitive to immunotherapy. 
Unexpectedly, antitumor immune responses were not directed against neoantigens 
but instead targeted derepressed endogenous retroviral antigens. The ability of 
KRASG12C inhibitors to cause regression of KRASG12C -expressing tumors was 
markedly potentiated by the adaptive immune system, highlighting the importance 
of using immunocompetent models for evaluating targeted therapies. Overall, this 
model provides a unique opportunity for the study of combinations of targeted 
and immunotherapies in immune-hot lung cancer.
SIGNIFICANCE: This study develops a mouse model of immunogenic KRAS-mutant lung 
cancer to facilitate the investigation of optimal combinations of targeted 
therapies with immunotherapies.

©2022 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-22-0325
PMCID: PMC7613674
PMID: 35930804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: J.D. has acted as a 
consultant for AstraZeneca, Bayer, Jubilant, Theras, Vividion and Novartis. S.R. 
is an employee of AstraZeneca. C.S. receives grant support from Archer Dx, 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer–Ingelheim and Ono Pharmaceutical; has consulted for 
AstraZeneca, Bicycle Therapeutics, Celgene, Genentech, GRAIL, GSK, Illumina, 
Medicxi, MSD, Novartis and the Sarah Cannon Research Institute; receives grant 
support and has consulted for Bristol Myers Squibb, Pfizer and Roche–Ventana; is 
an advisory board member and is involved in trials sponsored by AstraZeneca; has 
stock options in Epic Sciences, GRAIL; and has stock options and is a co-founder 
of Achilles Therapeutics. The other authors declare that they have no potential 
conflicts of interest.