1. Gastroenterology. 2022 Dec;163(6):1593-1612. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2022.07.076.  Epub 2022 Aug 7.

Combined MEK and STAT3 Inhibition Uncovers Stromal Plasticity by Enriching for 
Cancer-Associated Fibroblasts With Mesenchymal Stem Cell-Like Features to 
Overcome Immunotherapy Resistance in Pancreatic Cancer.

Datta J(1), Dai X(2), Bianchi A(2), De Castro Silva I(2), Mehra S(2), Garrido 
VT(2), Lamichhane P(3), Singh SP(2), Zhou Z(2), Dosch AR(2), Messaggio F(2), Ban 
Y(4), Umland O(5), Hosein PJ(6), Nagathihalli NS(1), Merchant NB(7).

Author information:
(1)Division of Surgical Oncology, Dewitt Daughtry Department of Surgery, 
University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, Florida; Sylvester 
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Miami, Miami, Florida.
(2)Division of Surgical Oncology, Dewitt Daughtry Department of Surgery, 
University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, Florida.
(3)Division of Surgical Oncology, Dewitt Daughtry Department of Surgery, 
University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, Florida; Clovis Oncology, 
Boulder, Colorado.
(4)Bioinformatics and Biostatistics Shared Resource, Sylvester Comprehensive 
Cancer Center, Miami, Florida.
(5)Diabetes Research Institute, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, 
Miami, Florida.
(6)Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Miami, Miami, Florida; 
Department of Medicine, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, 
Florida.
(7)Division of Surgical Oncology, Dewitt Daughtry Department of Surgery, 
University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, Florida; Sylvester 
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Miami, Miami, Florida. Electronic 
address: nmerchant@med.miami.edu.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: We have shown that reciprocally activated rat sarcoma 
(RAS)/mitogen-activated protein kinase/extracellular signal-regulated kinase 
(MEK) and Janus kinase/signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 
(STAT3) pathways mediate therapeutic resistance in pancreatic ductal 
adenocarcinoma (PDAC), while combined MEK and STAT3 inhibition (MEKi+STAT3i) 
overcomes such resistance and alters stromal architecture. We now determine 
whether MEKi+STAT3i reprograms the cancer-associated fibroblast (CAF) and immune 
microenvironment to overcome resistance to immune checkpoint inhibition in PDAC.
METHODS: CAF and immune cell transcriptomes in MEKi (trametinib)+STAT3i 
(ruxolitinib)-treated vs vehicle-treated 
Ptf1aCre/+;LSL-KrasG12D/+;Tgfbr2flox/flox (PKT) tumors were examined via 
single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNAseq). Clustered regularly interspaced short 
palindromic repeats/clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats 
associated protein 9 silencing of CAF-restricted Map2k1/Mek1 or Stat3, or both, 
enabled interrogation of CAF-dependent effects on immunologic remodeling in 
orthotopic models. Tumor growth, survival, and immune profiling via mass 
cytometry by time-of-flight were examined in PKT mice treated with vehicle, 
anti-programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1) monotherapy, and MEKi+STAT3i 
combined with anti-PD1.
RESULTS: MEKi+STAT3i attenuates Il6/Cxcl1-expressing proinflammatory and 
Lrrc15-expressing myofibroblastic CAF phenotypes while enriching for 
Ly6a/Cd34-expressing CAFs exhibiting mesenchymal stem cell-like features via 
scRNAseq in PKT mice. This CAF plasticity is associated with M2-to-M1 
reprogramming of tumor-associated macrophages, and enhanced trafficking of 
cluster of differentiation 8+ T cells, which exhibit distinct effector 
transcriptional programs. These MEKi+STAT3i-induced effects appear 
CAF-dependent, because CAF-restricted Mek1/Stat3 silencing mitigates 
inflammatory-CAF polarization and myeloid infiltration in vivo. Addition of 
MEKi+STAT3i to PD-1 blockade not only dramatically improves antitumor responses 
and survival in PKT mice but also augments recruitment of activated/memory T 
cells while improving their degranulating and cytotoxic capacity compared with 
anti-PD-1 monotherapy. Importantly, treatment of a patient who has 
chemotherapy-refractory metastatic PDAC with MEKi (trametinib), STAT3i 
(ruxolitinib), and PD-1 inhibitor (nivolumab) yielded clinical benefit.
CONCLUSIONS: Combined MEKi+STAT3i mitigates stromal inflammation and enriches 
for CAF phenotypes with mesenchymal stem cell-like properties to overcome 
immunotherapy resistance in PDAC.

Copyright © 2022 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2022.07.076
PMCID: PMC10257389
PMID: 35948109 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures: The authors declare no potential 
conflicts of interest.