1. Pediatr Res. 2023 Apr;93(5):1368-1374. doi: 10.1038/s41390-022-02243-0. Epub 
2022 Aug 16.

Polygenic risk scores and the need for pharmacotherapy in neonatal abstinence 
syndrome.

Bibi S(#)(1), Gaddis N(#)(2), Johnson EO(2), Lester BM(3), Kraft W(4), Singh 
R(1), Terrin N(5), Adeniyi-Jones S(6), Davis JM(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Division of Newborn Medicine, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)RTI International, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Alpert Medical School of Brown University and Women 
and Infants Hospital, Providence, RI, USA.
(4)Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, 
PA, USA.
(5)Tufts Clinical and Translational Science Institute, Tufts School of Graduate 
Biomedical Sciences, Boston, MA, USA.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(7)Division of Newborn Medicine, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA. 
jdavis@tuftsmedicalcenter.org.
(8)Tufts Clinical and Translational Science Institute, Tufts School of Graduate 
Biomedical Sciences, Boston, MA, USA. jdavis@tuftsmedicalcenter.org.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: The aim of this study was to identify genetic variants associated 
with NAS through a genome-wide association study (GWAS) and estimate a Polygenic 
Risk Score (PRS) model for NAS.
METHODS: A prospective case-control study included 476 in utero opioid-exposed 
term neonates. A GWAS of 1000 genomes-imputed genotypes was performed to 
identify variants associated with need for pharmacotherapy for NAS. PRS models 
for estimating genetic predisposition were generated via a nested 
cross-validation approach using 382 neonates of European ancestry. PRS 
predictive ability, discrimination, and calibration were assessed.
RESULTS: Cross-ancestry GWAS identified one intergenic locus on chromosome 7 
downstream of SNX13 exhibiting genome-wide association with need for 
pharmacotherapy. PRS models derived from the GWAS for a subset of the European 
ancestry neonates reliably discriminated between need for pharmacotherapy using 
cis variant effect sizes within validation sets of European and African American 
ancestry neonates. PRS were less effective when applying variant effect sizes 
across datasets and in calibration analyses.
CONCLUSIONS: GWAS has the potential to identify genetic loci associated with 
need for pharmacotherapy for NAS and enable development of clinically predictive 
PRS models. Larger GWAS with additional ancestries are needed to confirm the 
observed SNX13 association and the accuracy of PRS in NAS risk prediction 
models.
IMPACT: Genetic associations appear to be important in neonatal abstinence 
syndrome. This is the first genome-wide association in neonates with neonatal 
abstinence syndrome. Polygenic risk scores can be developed examining 
single-nucleotide polymorphisms across the entire genome. Polygenic risk scores 
were higher in neonates receiving pharmacotherapy for treatment of their 
neonatal abstinence syndrome. Future studies with larger cohorts are needed to 
better delineate these genetic associations.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to the International Pediatric 
Research Foundation, Inc.

DOI: 10.1038/s41390-022-02243-0
PMCID: PMC9931940
PMID: 35974158 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None of the authors have 
any conflicts of interest to disclose