1. Gut. 2023 Jun;72(6):1186-1195. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2022-327216. Epub 2022 Aug 
17.

Novel prime-boost immune-based therapy inhibiting both hepatitis B and D virus 
infections.

Burm R(1), Maravelia P(2), Ahlen G(2), Ciesek S(3)(4)(5), Caro Perez N(2), 
Pasetto A(2), Urban S(6), Van Houtte F(1), Verhoye L(1), Wedemeyer H(7), 
Johansson M(8), Frelin L(2), Sällberg M(9), Meuleman P(10).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Liver Infectious Diseases (LLID), Department of Diagnostic 
Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Ghent University, Ghent, 
Belgium.
(2)Division of Clinical Microbiology, Department of Laboratory Medicine, 
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Institute for Medical Virology, University Hospital, Goethe University, 
Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(4)Fraunhofer Institute for Translational Medicine and Pharmacology ITMP, 
Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(5)German Center for Infection Research, DZIF, External partner site, Frankfurt 
am Main, Germany.
(6)Department of Infectious Diseases, Molecular Virology, University Hospital 
Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(7)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Endocrinology, Hannover 
Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
(8)School of Medical Sciences, Inflammatory Response and Infection 
Susceptibility Centre (iRiSC), Faculty of Medicine and Health, Örebro 
University, Orebro, Sweden.
(9)Division of Clinical Microbiology, Department of Laboratory Medicine, 
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden philip.meuleman@ugent.be 
matti.sallberg@ki.se.
(10)Laboratory of Liver Infectious Diseases (LLID), Department of Diagnostic 
Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Ghent University, Ghent, 
Belgium philip.meuleman@ugent.be matti.sallberg@ki.se.

Comment in
    Gut. 2023 Jun;72(6):1030-1032. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2022-328381.

OBJECTIVE: Chronic HBV/HDV infections are a major cause of liver cancer. Current 
treatments can only rarely eliminate HBV and HDV. Our previously developed 
preS1-HDAg immunotherapy could induce neutralising antibodies to HBV in vivo and 
raise HBV/HDV-specific T-cells. Here, we further investigate if a heterologous 
prime-boost strategy can circumvent T-cell tolerance and preclude HDV 
superinfection in vivo.
DESIGN: A DNA prime-protein boost strategy was evaluated for immunogenicity in 
mice and rabbits. Its ability to circumvent T-cell tolerance was assessed in 
immunocompetent hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg)-transgenic mice. 
Neutralisation of HBV and HDV was evaluated both in vitro and in immunodeficient 
human-liver chimeric mice upon adoptive transfer.
RESULTS: The prime-boost strategy elicits robust HBV/HDV-specific T-cells and 
preS1-antibodies that can effectively prevent HBV and HDV (co-)infection in 
vitro and in vivo. In a mouse model representing the chronic HBsAg carrier 
state, active immunisation primes high levels of preS1-antibodies and 
HDAg-specific T-cells. Moreover, transfer of vaccine-induced antibodies 
completely protects HBV-infected human-liver chimeric mice from HDV 
superinfection.
CONCLUSION: The herein described preS1-HDAg immunotherapy is shown to be 
immunogenic and vaccine-induced antibodies are highly effective at preventing 
HBV and HDV (super)infection both in vitro and in vivo. Our vaccine can 
complement current and future therapies for the control of chronic HBV and HDV 
infection.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2023. Re-use permitted under CC BY. Published 
by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/gutjnl-2022-327216
PMCID: PMC10176361
PMID: 35977815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: MS and LF are founders and 
shareholders of Svenska Vaccinfabriken, which holds the IP to the immunogens 
described in this manuscript. All other authors report no potential conflicts. 
All authors have submitted the ICMJE Form for Disclosure of Potential Conflicts 
of Interest. Conflicts that the editors consider relevant to the content of the 
manuscript have been disclosed.