1. Cell Discov. 2022 Aug 16;8(1):80. doi: 10.1038/s41421-022-00433-y.

Treatment of allergic eosinophilic asthma through engineered IL-5-anchored 
chimeric antigen receptor T cells.

Chen S(#)(1)(2), Chen G(#)(2), Xu F(#)(2), Sun B(2), Chen X(2), Hu W(3), Li 
F(4), Syeda MZ(2), Chen H(4), Wu Y(1), Wu P(3), Jing R(5), Geng X(1)(2), Zhang 
L(1), Tang L(1), Li W(4), Chen Z(4), Zhang C(4)(6), Sun J(5), Chen W(3)(7), Shen 
H(8)(9), Ying S(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)International Institutes of Medicine, the Fourth Affiliated Hospital of 
Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Yiwu, Zhejiang, China.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Department of Respiratory and Critical Care 
Medicine of the Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of 
Medicine, Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease of Zhejiang Province, Hangzhou, 
Zhejiang, China.
(3)Department of Cell Biology and Department of Cardiology of the Second 
Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 
China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease of Zhejiang Province, Department of 
Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Second Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang 
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(5)Department of Cell Biology and Bone Marrow Transplantation Center of the 
First Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, 
Zhejiang, China.
(6)Department of Anatomy, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, 
Zhejiang, China.
(7)Key Laboratory for Biomedical Engineering of Ministry of Education, State Key 
Laboratory for Modern Optical Instrumentation, College of Biomedical Engineering 
and Instrument Science, Collaborative Innovation Center for Diagnosis and 
Treatment of Infectious Diseases, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 
China.
(8)Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease of Zhejiang Province, Department of 
Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Second Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang 
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. huahaoshen@zju.edu.cn.
(9)State Key Lab of Respiratory Disease, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China. 
huahaoshen@zju.edu.cn.
(10)International Institutes of Medicine, the Fourth Affiliated Hospital of 
Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Yiwu, Zhejiang, China. yings@zju.edu.cn.
(11)Department of Pharmacology and Department of Respiratory and Critical Care 
Medicine of the Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of 
Medicine, Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease of Zhejiang Province, Hangzhou, 
Zhejiang, China. yings@zju.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

Severe eosinophilic asthma (SEA) is a therapy-resistant respiratory condition 
with poor clinical control. Treatment efficacy and patient compliance of current 
therapies remain unsatisfactory. Here, inspired by the remarkable success of 
chimeric antigen receptor-based cellular adoptive immunotherapies demonstrated 
for the treatment of a variety of malignant tumors, we engineered a 
cytokine-anchored chimeric antigen receptor T (CCAR-T) cell system using a 
chimeric IL-5-CD28-CD3ζ receptor to trigger T-cell-mediated killing of 
eosinophils that are elevated during severe asthma attacks. IL-5-anchored CCAR-T 
cells exhibited selective and effective killing capacity in vitro and restricted 
eosinophil differentiation with apparent protection against allergic airway 
inflammation in two mouse models of asthma. Notably, a single dose of 
IL-5-anchored CCAR-T cells resulted in persistent protection against 
asthma-related conditions over three months, significantly exceeding the typical 
therapeutic window of current mAb-based treatments in the clinics. This study 
presents a cell-based treatment strategy for SEA and could set the stage for a 
new era of precision therapies against a variety of intractable allergic 
diseases in the future.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41421-022-00433-y
PMCID: PMC9381771
PMID: 35973984

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.