1. mBio. 2022 Oct 26;13(5):e0203222. doi: 10.1128/mbio.02032-22. Epub 2022 Aug
16.

Evidence for a Widespread Third System for Bacterial Polysaccharide Export 
across the Outer Membrane Comprising a Composite OPX/β-Barrel Translocon.

Schwabe J(1), Pérez-Burgos M(1), Herfurth M(1), Glatter T(2), Søgaard-Andersen 
L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecophysiology, Max Planck Institute for Terrestrial 
Microbiologygrid.419554.8, Marburg, Germany.
(2)Core Facility for Mass Spectrometry & Proteomics, Max Planck Institute for 
Terrestrial Microbiologygrid.419554.8, Marburg, Germany.

In Gram-negative bacteria, secreted polysaccharides have multiple critical 
functions. In Wzx/Wzy- and ABC transporter-dependent pathways, an outer membrane 
(OM) polysaccharide export (OPX) type translocon exports the polysaccharide 
across the OM. The paradigm OPX protein Wza of Escherichia coli is an octamer in 
which the eight C-terminal domains form an α-helical OM pore and the eight 
copies of the three N-terminal domains (D1 to D3) form a periplasmic cavity. In 
synthase-dependent pathways, the OM translocon is a 16- to 18-stranded β-barrel 
protein. In Myxococcus xanthus, the secreted polysaccharide EPS 
(exopolysaccharide) is synthesized in a Wzx/Wzy-dependent pathway. Here, using 
experiments, phylogenomics, and computational structural biology, we identify 
and characterize EpsX as an OM 18-stranded β-barrel protein important for EPS 
synthesis and identify AlgE, a β-barrel translocon of a synthase-dependent 
pathway, as its closest structural homolog. We also find that EpsY, the OPX 
protein of the EPS pathway, consists only of the periplasmic D1 and D2 domains 
and completely lacks the domain for spanning the OM (herein termed a D1D2OPX 
protein). In vivo, EpsX and EpsY mutually stabilize each other and interact in 
in vivo pulldown experiments supporting their direct interaction. Based on these 
observations, we propose that EpsY and EpsX make up and represent a third type 
of translocon for polysaccharide export across the OM. Specifically, in this 
composite translocon, EpsX functions as the OM-spanning β-barrel translocon 
together with the periplasmic D1D2OPX protein EpsY. Based on computational 
genomics, similar composite systems are widespread in Gram-negative bacteria. 
IMPORTANCE Bacteria secrete a wide variety of polysaccharides that have critical 
functions in, e.g., fitness, surface colonization, and biofilm formation and in 
beneficial and pathogenic human-, animal-, and plant-microbe interactions. In 
Gram-negative bacteria, export of these chemically diverse polysaccharides 
across the outer membrane depends on two known translocons, i.e., an outer 
membrane OPX protein in Wzx/Wzy- and ABC transporter-dependent pathways and an 
outer membrane 16- to 18-stranded β-barrel protein in synthase-dependent 
pathways. Here, using a combination of experiments in Myxococcus xanthus, 
phylogenomics, and computational structural biology, we provide evidence 
supporting that a third type of translocon can export polysaccharides across the 
outer membrane. Specifically, in this translocon, an outer membrane-spanning 
β-barrel protein functions together with an entirely periplasmic OPX protein 
that completely lacks the domain for spanning the OM. Computational genomics 
support that similar composite systems are widespread in Gram-negative bacteria.

DOI: 10.1128/mbio.02032-22
PMCID: PMC9601211
PMID: 35972145 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.