1. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2022 Aug 22;41(1):256. doi: 10.1186/s13046-022-02442-x.

Fisetin induces DNA double-strand break and interferes with the repair of 
radiation-induced damage to radiosensitize triple negative breast cancer cells.

Khozooei S(1)(2), Lettau K(1)(2), Barletta F(3), Jost T(4)(5), Rebholz S(1)(2), 
Veerappan S(1)(2), Franz-Wachtel M(6), Macek B(6), Iliakis G(7), Distel 
LV(4)(5), Zips D(1)(2), Toulany M(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Division of Radiobiology and Molecular Environmental Research, Department of 
Radiation Oncology, University of Tuebingen, Roentgenweg 11, 72076, Tuebingen, 
Germany.
(2)German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), partner site Tuebingen, German Cancer 
Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Quantitative Biology Center (QBiC), University of Tuebingen, Auf der 
Morgenstelle 10, 72076, Tuebingen, Germany.
(4)Department of Radiation Oncology, Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, 
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.
(5)Comprehensive Cancer Center Erlangen-EMN (CCC ER-EMN), Universitätsklinikum 
Erlangen, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.
(6)Proteome Center Tuebingen, University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany.
(7)Divison of Experimental Radiation Oncology, Department of Radiation Oncology, 
Institutsgruppe 1, Bauteil A, 4.038, University of Duisburg-Essen, Hufelandstr. 
55, 45122 , Essen, Germany.
(8)Division of Radiobiology and Molecular Environmental Research, Department of 
Radiation Oncology, University of Tuebingen, Roentgenweg 11, 72076, Tuebingen, 
Germany. mahmoud.toulany@uni-tuebingen.de.
(9)German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), partner site Tuebingen, German Cancer 
Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. mahmoud.toulany@uni-tuebingen.de.

BACKGROUND: Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is associated with 
aggressiveness and a poor prognosis. Besides surgery, radiotherapy serves as the 
major treatment modality for TNBC. However, response to radiotherapy is limited 
in many patients, most likely because of DNA damage response (DDR) signaling 
mediated radioresistance. Y-box binding protein-1 (YB-1) is a multifunctional 
protein that regulates the cancer hallmarks among them resisting to 
radiotherapy-induced cell death. Fisetin, is a plant flavonol of the flavonoid 
family of plant polyphenols that has anticancer properties, partially through 
inhibition of p90 ribosomal S6 kinase (RSK)-mediated YB-1 phosphorylation. The 
combination of fisetin with radiotherapy has not yet been investigated.
METHODS: Activation status of the RSK signaling pathway in total cell lysate and 
in the subcellular fractions was analyzed by Western blotting. Standard 
clonogenic assay was applied to test post-irradiation cell survival. γH2AX foci 
assay and 3 color fluorescence in situ hybridization analyses were performed to 
study frequency of double-strand breaks (DSB) and chromosomal aberrations, 
respectively. The underlying repair pathways targeted by fisetin were studied in 
cells expressing genomically integrated reporter constructs for the DSB repair 
pathways via quantifying the expression of green fluorescence protein by flow 
cytometry. Flow cytometric quantification of sub-G1 cells and the protein 
expression of LC3-II were employed to measure apoptosis and autophagy, 
respectively. Kinase array and phosphoproteomics were performed to study the 
effect of fisetin on DDR response signaling.
RESULTS: We showed that the effect of fisetin on YB-1 phosphorylation in TNBC 
cells is comparable to the effect of the RSK pharmacological inhibitors. Similar 
to ionizing radiation (IR), fisetin induces DSB. Additionally, fisetin impairs 
repair of IR-induced DSB through suppressing the classical non-homologous 
end-joining and homologous recombination repair pathways, leading to chromosomal 
aberration as tested by metaphase analysis. Effect of fisetin on DSB repair was 
partially dependent on YB-1 expression. Phosphoproteomic analysis revealed that 
fisetin inhibits DDR signaling, which leads to radiosensitization in TNBC cells, 
as shown in combination with single dose or fractionated doses irradiation.
CONCLUSION: Fisetin acts as a DSB-inducing agent and simultaneously inhibits 
repair of IR-induced DSB. Thus, fisetin may serve as an effective therapeutic 
strategy to improve TNBC radiotherapy outcome.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13046-022-02442-x
PMCID: PMC9394010
PMID: 35989353 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.