1. Front Aging Neurosci. 2022 Aug 2;14:935033. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2022.935033. 
eCollection 2022.

Development of a system to analyze oral frailty associated with Alzheimer's 
disease using a mouse model.

Kuramoto E(1), Kitawaki A(1), Yagi T(2), Kono H(3), Matsumoto SE(4), Hara H(4), 
Ohyagi Y(5), Iwai H(1), Yamanaka A(1), Goto T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral Anatomy and Cell Biology, Graduate School of Medical and 
Dental Sciences, Kagoshima University, Kagoshima, Japan.
(2)Department of Oral Health Science, Kobe Tokiwa University, Kobe, Japan.
(3)Department of Biomaterials Science, Graduate School of Medical and Dental 
Sciences, Kagoshima University, Kagoshima, Japan.
(4)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, 
Kagoshima University, Kagoshima, Japan.
(5)Department of Neurology and Geriatric Medicine, Ehime University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Ehime, Japan.

The rapid aging of the population makes the detection and prevention of frailty 
increasingly important. Oral frailty has been proposed as a novel frailty 
phenotype and is defined as a decrease in oral function coexisting with a 
decline in cognitive and physical functions. Oral frailty has received 
particular attention in relation to Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, the 
pathomechanisms of oral frailty related to AD remain unknown. It is assumed that 
the mesencephalic trigeminal nucleus (Vmes), which controls mastication, is 
affected by AD pathology, and as a result, masticatory function may be impaired. 
To investigate this possibility, we included male 3 × Tg-AD mice and their 
non-transgenic counterpart (NonTg) of 3-4 months of age in the present study. 
Immunohistochemistry revealed amyloid-β deposition and excessive tau 
phosphorylation in the Vmes of 3 × Tg-AD mice. Furthermore, vesicular glutamate 
transporter 1-immunopositive axon varicosities, which are derived from Vmes 
neurons, were significantly reduced in the trigeminal motor nucleus of 3 × Tg-AD 
mice. To investigate whether the AD pathology observed in the Vmes affects 
masticatory function, we analyzed electromyography of the masseter muscle during 
feeding. The 3 × Tg-AD mice showed a significant delay in masticatory rhythm 
compared to NonTg mice. Furthermore, we developed a system to simultaneously 
record bite force and electromyography of masseter, and devised a new method to 
estimate bite force during food chewing in mice. Since the muscle activity of 
the masseter showed a high correlation with bite force, it could be accurately 
estimated from the muscle activity. The estimated bite force of 3 × Tg-AD mice 
eating sunflower seeds was predominantly smaller than that of NonTg mice. 
However, there was no difference in masseter weight or muscle fiber 
cross-sectional area between the two groups, suggesting that the decreased bite 
force and delayed mastication rhythm observed in 3 × Tg-AD mice were not due to 
abnormality of the masseter. In conclusion, the decreased masticatory function 
observed in 3 × Tg-AD mice was most likely caused by AD pathology in the Vmes. 
Thus, novel quantitative analyses of masticatory function using the mouse model 
of AD enabled a comprehensive understanding of oral frailty pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2022 Kuramoto, Kitawaki, Yagi, Kono, Matsumoto, Hara, Ohyagi, Iwai, 
Yamanaka and Goto.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2022.935033
PMCID: PMC9380890
PMID: 35983379

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.