1. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2022 Aug 8;9:916841. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2022.916841. 
eCollection 2022.

Potential ferroptosis key genes in calcific aortic valve disease.

Li XZ(1), Xiong ZC(1), Zhang SL(2), Hao QY(1), Gao M(3), Wang JF(1), Gao JW(1), 
Liu PM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Guangzhou Key Laboratory on the Molecular 
Mechanisms of Major Cardiovascular Disease, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory 
of Arrhythmia and Electrophysiology, Sun Yat-Sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, Sun Yat-Sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Radiology, Sun Yat-Sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.

Calcific aortic valve disease (CAVD) is a highly prevalent condition that 
comprises a disease continuum, ranging from microscopic changes to profound 
fibro-calcific leaflet remodeling, culminating in aortic stenosis, heart 
failure, and ultimately premature death. Ferroptosis has been hypothesized to 
contribute to the pathogenesis of CAVD. We aimed to study the association 
between ferroptosis genes and CAVD and reveal the potential roles of ferroptosis 
in CAVD. CAVD-related differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified via 
bioinformatic analysis of Datasets GSE51472 and GSE12644 obtained from Gene 
Expression Omnibus. A ferroptosis dataset containing 259 genes was obtained from 
the Ferroptosis Database. We then intersected with CAVD-related DEGs to identify 
the ferroptosis DEGs. Subsequently, protein-protein interaction networks and 
functional enrichment analyses were performed for ferroptosis DEGs. Then, we 
used miRWalk3.0 to predict the target pivotal microRNAs. An in vitro model of 
CAVD was constructed using human aortic valve interstitial cells. The qRT-PCR 
and western blotting methods were used to validate the ferroptosis DEGs 
identified by the microarray data. A total of 21 ferroptosis DEGs in CAVD 
containing 12 upregulated and nine downregulated genes were identified. The 
results of the Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) and analysis of the KEGG 
pathway by WebGestalt indicated that the ferroptosis DEGs were enriched in six 
signaling pathways among which NAFLD (including IL-6, BID, and PRKAA2 genes) and 
HIF-1 (including IL-6, HIF-1, and HMOX1 genes) signaling pathways were also 
verified by DAVID and/or Metascape. Finally, the in vitro results showed that 
the mRNA and protein expression levels of IL-6, HIF-1α, HMOX1, and BID were 
higher, while the levels of PRKAA2 were lower in the Pi-treated group than those 
in the control group. However, the addition of ferrostatin-1 (a selective 
ferroptosis inhibitor) significantly reversed the above changes. Therefore, 
IL-6, HIF-1α, HMOX1, BID, and PRKAA2 are potential key genes closely associated 
with ferroptosis in CAVD. Further work is required to explore the underlying 
ferroptosis-related molecular mechanisms and provide possible therapeutic 
targets for CAVD.

Copyright © 2022 Li, Xiong, Zhang, Hao, Gao, Wang, Gao and Liu.

DOI: 10.3389/fcvm.2022.916841
PMCID: PMC9395208
PMID: 36003913

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.