1. Foods. 2022 Aug 21;11(16):2524. doi: 10.3390/foods11162524.

An Exploratory Critical Review on TNF-α as a Potential Inflammatory Biomarker 
Responsive to Dietary Intervention with Bioactive Foods and Derived Products.

Quarta S(1), Massaro M(2), Carluccio MA(2), Calabriso N(2), Bravo L(3), Sarria 
B(3), García-Conesa MT(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological and Environmental Sciences and Technologies 
(DISTEBA), University of Salento, 73100 Lecce, Italy.
(2)National Research Council (CNR), Institute of Clinical Physiology (IFC), 
73100 Lecce, Italy.
(3)Institute of Food Science, Technology and Nutrition (ICTAN), Spanish National 
Research Council (CSIC), José Antonio Nováis 10, 28040 Madrid, Spain.
(4)Research Group on Quality, Safety and Bioactivity of Plant Foods, Centro de 
Edafología y Biología Aplicada del Segura (CEBAS), Spanish National Research 
Council (CSIC), Campus de Espinardo, 30100 Murcia, Spain.

This review collects and critically examines data on the levels of tumour 
necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α) in lean, overweight and obese subjects, and the 
effects of intervention with different foods and food products containing 
bioactive constituents in overweight/obese individuals. We additionally explore 
the influence of different single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) on TNF-α 
levels and compare the response to food products with that to some anti-obesity 
drugs. Our aim was to provide an overview of the variability, consistency, and 
magnitude of the reported effects of dietary factors on TNF-α, and to envisage 
the reliability of measuring changes in the levels of this cytokine as a 
biomarker responsive to food intervention in association with the reduction in 
body weight. Regarding the circulating levels of TNF-α, we report: (i) a large 
intra-group variability, with most coefficients of variation (CV%) values being 
≥30% and, in many cases, >100%; (ii) a large between-studies variability, with 
baseline TNF-α values ranging from <1.0 up to several hundred pg/mL; (iii) 
highly variable effects of the different dietary approaches with both 
statistically significant and not significant decreases or increases of the 
protein, and the absolute effect size varying from <0.1 pg/mL up to ≈50 pg/mL. 
Within this scenario of variability, it was not possible to discern clear 
differentiating limits in TNF-α between lean, overweight, and obese individuals 
or a distinct downregulatory effect on this cytokine by any of the different 
dietary approaches reviewed, i.e., polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs), 
Vitamin-D (VitD), mixed (micro)nutrients, (poly)phenols or other phytochemicals. 
Further, there was not a clear relationship between the TNF-α responses and body 
weight changes. We found similarities between dietary and pharmacological 
treatments in terms of variability and limited evidence of the TNF-α response. 
Different factors that contribute to this variability are discussed and some 
specific recommendations are proposed to reinforce the need to improve future 
studies looking at this cytokine as a potential biomarker of response to dietary 
approaches.

DOI: 10.3390/foods11162524
PMCID: PMC9407274
PMID: 36010524

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.