1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2022 Aug 11;10:838992. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2022.838992. 
eCollection 2022.

Aristolochic acid I exposure decreases oocyte quality.

Li W(1)(2), Zhang J(1), Yu X(1), Meng F(1), Huang J(1), Zhang L(2)(3), Wang 
S(1)(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Center for Reproductive Medicine, Cheeloo College of Medicine, Shandong 
University, Jinan, China.
(2)Advanced Medical Research Institute, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, 
China.
(3)Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Animal Resistance Biology, College of 
Life Sciences, Shandong Normal University, Jinan, Shandong, China.
(4)National Research Center for Assisted Reproductive Technology and 
Reproductive Genetics, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, China.
(5)Key Laboratory of Reproductive Endocrinology of Ministry of Education, Jinan, 
Shandong, China.
(6)Shandong Provincial Clinical Research Center for Reproductive Health, Jinan, 
Shandong, China.

Oocyte quality is a determinant of a successful pregnancy. The final step of 
oocyte development is oocyte maturation, which is susceptible to environmental 
exposures. Aristolochic acids (AAs), widely existing in Aristolochia and Asarum 
plants that have been used in traditional medicine, can result in a smaller 
ovary and fewer superovulated oocytes after in vivo exposure to mice. However, 
whether AAs affect oocyte maturation and the underlying mechanism(s) are 
unclear. In this study, we focused on the effect of Aristolochic acid I (AAI), a 
major compound of AAs, on the maturation of in vitro cultured mouse oocytes. We 
showed that AAI exposure significantly decreased oocyte quality, including 
elevated aneuploidy, accompanied by aberrant chiasma patterns and spindle 
organization, and decreased first polar body extrusion and fertilization 
capability. Moreover, embryo development potential was also dramatically 
decreased. Further analyses revealed that AAI exposure significantly decreased 
mitochondrial membrane potential and ATP synthesis and increased the level of 
reactive oxygen species (ROS), implying impaired mitochondrial function. 
Insufficient ATP supply can cause aberrant spindle assembly and excessive ROS 
can cause premature loss of sister chromatid cohesion and thus alterations in 
chiasma patterns. Both aberrant spindles and changed chiasma patterns can 
contribute to chromosome misalignment and thus aneuploidy. Therefore, AAI 
exposure decreases oocyte quality probably via impairing mitochondrial function.

Copyright © 2022 Li, Zhang, Yu, Meng, Huang, Zhang and Wang.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2022.838992
PMCID: PMC9402977
PMID: 36036003

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.