1. J Pain Res. 2022 Aug 23;15:2483-2504. doi: 10.2147/JPR.S362204. eCollection 
2022.

Evidence-Based Clinical Guidelines from the American Society of Pain and 
Neuroscience for the Use of Implantable Peripheral Nerve Stimulation in the 
Treatment of Chronic Pain.

Strand N(1), D'Souza RS(2), Hagedorn JM(3), Pritzlaff S(4), Sayed D(5), Azeem 
N(6), Abd-Elsayed A(7), Escobar A(8), Huntoon MA(9), Lam CM(5), Deer TR(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Division of Pain Medicine, Mayo Clinic, 
Scottsdale, AZ, USA.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology and Perioperative Medicine, Division of Pain 
Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(3)iSpine Pain Physicians, Burnsville, MN, USA.
(4)Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine, Division of Pain Medicine, 
University of California-Davis, Sacramento, CA, USA.
(5)The University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS, USA.
(6)Florida Spine & Pain Specialists, Bradenton, FL, USA.
(7)Department of Anesthesiology, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, USA.
(8)Comprehensive Centers for Pain Management, Toledo, OH, USA.
(9)Department of Anesthesiology, Virginia Commonwealth University, Henrico, VA, 
USA.
(10)The Spine and Nerve Center of the Virginias, Charleston, WV, USA.

The objective of this peripheral nerve stimulation consensus guideline is to add 
to the current family of consensus practice guidelines and incorporate a 
systematic review process. The published literature was searched from relevant 
electronic databases, including PubMed, Scopus, Cochrane Central Register of 
Controlled Trials, and Web of Science from database inception to March 29, 2021. 
Inclusion criteria encompassed studies that described peripheral nerve 
stimulation in patients in terms of clinical outcomes for various pain 
conditions, physiological mechanism of action, surgical technique, technique of 
placement, and adverse events. Twenty randomized controlled trials and 33 
prospective observational studies were included in the systematic review 
process. There is Level I evidence supporting the efficacy of PNS for treatment 
of chronic migraine headaches via occipital nerve stimulation; chronic 
hemiplegic shoulder pain via stimulation of nerves innervating the trapezius, 
supraspinatus, and deltoid muscles; failed back surgery syndrome via 
subcutaneous peripheral field stimulation; and lower extremity neuropathic and 
lower extremity post-amputation pain. Evidence from current Level I studies 
combined with newer technologies facilitating less invasive and easier electrode 
placement make peripheral nerve stimulation an attractive alternative for 
managing patients with complex pain disorders. Peripheral nerve stimulation 
should be used judiciously as an adjunct for chronic and acute postoperative 
pain following adequate patient screening and positive diagnostic nerve block or 
stimulation trial.

© 2022 Strand et al.

DOI: 10.2147/JPR.S362204
PMCID: PMC9419727
PMID: 36039168

Conflict of interest statement: Dr Jonathan M Hagedorn reports personal fees 
from Abbott, Boston Scientific, Medtronic, Nevro, and Saluda, outside the 
submitted work. Dr Scott Pritzlaff reports personal fees from EBT Medical, SPR 
Therapeutics, and Nalu Medical, during the conduct of the study. Dr Dawood Sayed 
reports grants from Spr, during the conduct of the study; personal fees from 
Spr, Nevro, Medtronic, and Abbott, outside the submitted work. Dr Alexander 
Escobar reports personal fees from Abbott, personal fees from Boston Scientific, 
personal fees from Medtronic, personal fees from Nevro, outside the submitted 
work. Dr Mark Huntoon reports fees from SPR for consulting and teaching, outside 
the submitted work; and Saluda- Membership on Clinical Events Committee for 
national study. Dr Timothy R Deer reports personal fees, from Abbott, personal 
fees, from Vertos, grants from Flowonix, personal fees, from SpineThera, 
personal fees, from Saluda, from Mainstay, personal fees, from Nalu, personal 
fees, from Cornerloc, personal fees, from Ethos, personal fees, from SPR 
Therapuetics, personal fees from SI Bone, personal fees from Nevro, personal 
fees from Medtronic, personal fees, from Boston Scientific, personal fees, from 
PainTeq, personal fees from Tissue Tech, personal fees, from Spinal Simplicity, 
from Avanos, outside the submitted work; in addition, Dr Timothy R Deer has a 
patent Abbott pending to DRG Leads pending. The authors report no other 
conflicts of interest in this work.