1. Curr Res Immunol. 2022 Aug 18;3:159-166. doi: 10.1016/j.crimmu.2022.08.001. 
eCollection 2022.

Salmonella-induced immune response reduces recurrence and tumor dissemination in 
preclinical melanoma model.

Mónaco A(1), Plata MC(1), Chilibroste S(1), Vola M(2), Chabalgoity JA(1), Moreno 
M(1).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Desarrollo Biotecnológico, Instituto de Higiene, Facultad de 
Medicina, Universidad de la República, Montevideo, Uruguay.
(2)Cátedra de Dermatología, Hospital de Clínicas, Facultad de Medicina, 
Universidad de la República, Montevideo, Uruguay.

Localized melanoma is easy to remove by surgery, resulting in a high five-year 
relative survival rate. However, when disseminated the disease management is 
challenging. The use of immunotherapies, such as anti-checkpoint monoclonal 
antibodies, has improved treatment options but still only a small percentage of 
patients responds to these expensive treatments. In this work, we apply a 
bacteria-based immunotherapy using LVR01, an attenuated Salmonella enterica 
serovar Typhimurium, as neoadjuvant therapy one week before surgery in a 
preclinical disseminated murine melanoma model. LVR01 administration resulted in 
tumor growth retardation prior to tumor resection, due to a rapid upregulation 
of inflammatory genes in the tumor microenvironment. As a consequence, cell 
infiltration increased, particularly neutrophils, macrophages and NK cells, 
being the latter involved in Salmonella anti-tumor activity. Besides, 
tumor-draining lymph node infiltration is characterized by reinvigorated CD4+ 
and CD8+ lymphocytes. Induced immune response could account for the prevention 
or delay of tumor recurrence and appearance of metastasis, resulting in a 
prolonged overall survival after surgery. Furthermore, upon rechallenge mice 
show partial protection, suggesting the existence of specific memory against 
melanoma. We propose that neoadjuvant LVR01 treatment could represent an 
interesting inexpensive alternative that may ease tumor resection, while 
preventing tumor recurrence in patients with melanoma.

© 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.crimmu.2022.08.001
PMCID: PMC9403904
PMID: 36032415

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.