1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2022 Aug 16;13:987397. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2022.987397. eCollection 2022.

The application of new concepts of the assessment of the thyroid state to 
pregnant women.

Fitzgerald SP(1)(2), Bean NG(3), Fitzgerald SP(4)(5), Falhammar H(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)The Departments of General Medicine and Endocrinology, The Royal Adelaide 
Hospital, Adelaide, SA, Australia.
(2)School of Medicine, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, Australia.
(3)Adjunct Professor, School of Mathematical Science, University of Adelaide, 
Adelaide, SA, Australia.
(4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, The Townsville Hospital, 
Townsville, QLD, Australia.
(5)School of Medicine, University of Queensland, St Lucia, QLD, Australia.
(6)Department of Endocrinology, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(7)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden.

Recently proposed concepts regarding the nature and assessment of the thyroid 
state have provided a model more consistent with empiric evidence. It now 
appears likely that there are no such entities as thyroid set points and 
individual euthyroidism. Rather than there being discrete thyroid states, 
peripheral organ parameters are associated with thyroid function in a continuous 
manner. Thyroid hormone levels and, in particular, levels of free thyroxine now 
appear to be superior to thyrotropin levels as indicators of the thyroid state. 
Complicating the assessment of the correlations of the thyroid state with 
pregnancy outcomes are the contribution of the placenta to maternal thyroid 
function, fetal thyroid development, the multiple potential pathways to any 
particular outcome, the likely presence of small critical periods of time, the 
differing genetics of fetal and maternal tissues, and the unreliability of 
thyroid hormone assays. Nevertheless, there is no apparent reason for there to 
be a change in pregnancy to the basic principles of thyroid hormone action. The 
relationships between mild abnormalities of the thyroid state and pregnancy 
outcomes and the value of treating such mild abnormalities remain uncertain and 
controversial. The evidence suggests that further investigation of these 
clinical questions might better be based on thyroid hormone, particularly free 
thyroxine, levels. In the investigation of borderline low thyroid states, the 
categories of subclinical hypothyroidism and isolated hypothyroxinemia might 
both be abandoned with attention being directed to low free thyroxine levels 
regardless of the thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) levels. For these changes to 
occur, there would ideally be improvements in the assays for free thyroxine in 
pregnancy. The evidence suggests that, just as in the non-pregnant situation, 
pregnancy guidelines based on thyrotropin levels may need revision.

Copyright © 2022 Fitzgerald, Bean, Fitzgerald and Falhammar.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2022.987397
PMCID: PMC9424676
PMID: 36051398 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.