1. Rom J Morphol Embryol. 2022 Jan-Mar;63(1):181-189. doi: 10.47162/RJME.63.1.19.

Brachial and subclavian arteries aneurysms due to tuberous sclerosis complex 
mechanisms - case report and literature review.

Craiu DC(1), Bastian AE, Zurac SA, Băilă SL, Croitoru M, Craiu M, Diaconu R, 
Vinţan MA, Bârcă DG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Medical Genetics, Carol Davila University of 
Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania; mcraiu@yahoo.com; Department of 
Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Medicine and Pharmacy of Craiova, 
Romania; raduteodiaconu@yahoo.com.

INTRODUCTION: Tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) is a rare autosomal dominant 
condition characterized by cutaneous, cerebral, and other multiorgan 
involvement. Aneurysms due to TSC pathogenic mechanism are rarely present, 
mainly aortic, renal, or intracranial and very few associated with peripheral 
circulation. A TSC patient, aged 31 years, who developed brachial and subclavian 
arteries aneurysms is presented. The question of a random association of the 
aneurysms with TSC versus aneurysms within pathogenic released mammalian target 
of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway effect was raised.
CASE PRESENTATION: Patient's file, available from the age of six months, was 
analyzed for demonstration of the TSC diagnosis. Patient was examined, and 
cerebral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was repeated. Surgery and angiographic 
reports and images were reviewed. Pathology of the aneurysmal wall available 
from surgery was reexamined and special stainings and immunohistochemistry 
markers were applied. Genetic characterization of the patient was performed. 
Definite TSC was diagnosed based on major criteria [ungual fibromas, shagreen 
patch, cortical tubers, subependymal nodules (SENs), subependymal giant cell 
astrocytoma (SEGA)], minor criteria (confetti skin lesions, dental enamel pits, 
gingival fibromas), genetic result showing heterozygous variant in exon 8 of 
TSC1 gene (c.733C>T-p.Arg245*). Pathology analysis revealed markedly thickened 
aneurysmal wall due to smooth muscle cells (SMCs) proliferation in media and 
neoformation vessels with similar characteristics in the aneurysmal wall.
DISCUSSIONS AND CONCLUSIONS: This is a rare case with aneurysms related to TSC, 
with an exceptional peripheral localization. Pathology exam is the key 
investigation in demonstrating the TSC-related pathogenic mechanism. A 
literature review showed 73 TSC cases presenting aneurysms published until now.

DOI: 10.47162/RJME.63.1.19
PMCID: PMC9593110
PMID: 36074682 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interests.