1. Front Mol Neurosci. 2022 Aug 25;15:937133. doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2022.937133. 
eCollection 2022.

Neuronal cell death mechanisms in Alzheimer's disease: An insight.

Goel P(1), Chakrabarti S(2), Goel K(3), Bhutani K(2), Chopra T(2), Bali S(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Shri Atal Bihari Vajpayee Government Medical 
College Chhainsa, Faridabad, India.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Maharishi Markandeshwar Institute of Medical 
Sciences and Research, Maharishi Markandeshwar (Deemed to be University), 
Ambala, India.
(3)Department of Community Medicine and School of Public Health, Post Graduate 
Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, India.
(4)Department of Surgery, Maharishi Markandeshwar Institute of Medical Sciences 
and Research, Maharishi Markandeshwar (Deemed to be University), Ambala, India.

Regulated cell death (RCD) is an ordered and tightly orchestrated set of 
changes/signaling events in both gene expression and protein activity and is 
responsible for normal development as well as maintenance of tissue homeostasis. 
Aberrant activation of this pathway results in cell death by various mechanisms 
including apoptosis, necroptosis, pyroptosis, ferroptosis, and 
autophagy-dependent cell death. Such pathological changes in neurons alone or in 
combination have been observed in the pathogenesis of various neurodegenerative 
diseases including Alzheimer's disease (AD). Pathological hallmarks of AD focus 
primarily on the accumulation of two main protein markers: amyloid β peptides 
and abnormally phosphorylated tau proteins. These protein aggregates result in 
the formation of A-β plaques and neuro-fibrillary tangles (NFTs) and induce 
neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration over years to decades leading to a 
multitude of cognitive and behavioral deficits. Autopsy findings of AD reveal 
massive neuronal death manifested in the form of cortical volume shrinkage, 
reduction in sizes of gyri to up to 50% and an increase in the sizes of sulci. 
Multiple forms of cell death have been recorded in neurons from different 
studies conducted so far. However, understanding the mechanism/s of neuronal 
cell death in AD patients remains a mystery as the trigger that results in 
aberrant activation of RCD is unknown and because of the limited availability of 
dying neurons. This review attempts to elucidate the process of Regulated cell 
death, how it gets unregulated in response to different intra and extracellular 
stressors, various forms of unregulated cell death, their interplay and their 
role in pathogenesis of Alzheimer's Disease in both human and experimental 
models of AD. Further we plan to explore the correlation of both amyloid-beta 
and Tau with neuronal loss as seen in AD.

Copyright © 2022 Goel, Chakrabarti, Goel, Bhutani, Chopra and Bali.

DOI: 10.3389/fnmol.2022.937133
PMCID: PMC9454331
PMID: 36090249

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.