1. Front Bioeng Biotechnol. 2022 Aug 8;10:869111. doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2022.869111.
 eCollection 2022.

Nanocellulose Composites as Smart Devices With Chassis, Light-Directed DNA 
Storage, Engineered Electronic Properties, and Chip Integration.

Bencurova E(1), Shityakov S(2), Schaack D(1), Kaltdorf M(1), Sarukhanyan E(1), 
Hilgarth A(3), Rath C(4), Montenegro S(3), Roth G(4)(5), Lopez D(6), Dandekar 
T(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Functional Genomics and Systems Biology Group, Department of Bioinformatics, 
Biocenter, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany.
(2)Laboratory of Chemoinformatics, Infochemistry Scientific Center, ITMO 
University, Saint Petersburg, Russia.
(3)Aerospace Information Technology, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany.
(4)Laboratory for Microarray Copying, Center for Biological Systems Analysis 
(ZBSA), University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(5)BioCopy GmbH, Emmendingen, Germany.
(6)Centro Nacional de Biotecnologia CNB, Universidad Autonoma de Madrid, Madrid, 
Spain.
(7)Structural and Computational Biology, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, 
Heidelberg, Germany.

The rapid development of green and sustainable materials opens up new 
possibilities in the field of applied research. Such materials include 
nanocellulose composites that can integrate many components into composites and 
provide a good chassis for smart devices. In our study, we evaluate four 
approaches for turning a nanocellulose composite into an information storage or 
processing device: 1) nanocellulose can be a suitable carrier material and 
protect information stored in DNA. 2) Nucleotide-processing enzymes (polymerase 
and exonuclease) can be controlled by light after fusing them with light-gating 
domains; nucleotide substrate specificity can be changed by mutation or pH 
change (read-in and read-out of the information). 3) Semiconductors and 
electronic capabilities can be achieved: we show that nanocellulose is rendered 
electronic by iodine treatment replacing silicon including microstructures. 
Nanocellulose semiconductor properties are measured, and the resulting potential 
including single-electron transistors (SET) and their properties are modeled. 
Electric current can also be transported by DNA through G-quadruplex DNA 
molecules; these as well as classical silicon semiconductors can easily be 
integrated into the nanocellulose composite. 4) To elaborate upon 
miniaturization and integration for a smart nanocellulose chip device, we 
demonstrate pH-sensitive dyes in nanocellulose, nanopore creation, and kinase 
micropatterning on bacterial membranes as well as digital PCR micro-wells. 
Future application potential includes nano-3D printing and fast molecular 
processors (e.g., SETs) integrated with DNA storage and conventional 
electronics. This would also lead to environment-friendly nanocellulose chips 
for information processing as well as smart nanocellulose composites for 
biomedical applications and nano-factories.

Copyright © 2022 Bencurova, Shityakov, Schaack, Kaltdorf, Sarukhanyan, Hilgarth, 
Rath, Montenegro, Roth, Lopez and Dandekar.

DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2022.869111
PMCID: PMC9465592
PMID: 36105598

Conflict of interest statement: Author GR was employed by BioCopy GmbH. The 
remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any 
commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential 
conflict of interest.