1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2022 Sep 19;18(9):e1009788. doi:
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009788.  eCollection 2022 Sep.

A spatially resolved stochastic model reveals the role of supercoiling in 
transcription regulation.

Geng Y(1), Bohrer CH(2)(3), Yehya N(3), Hendrix H(3), Shachaf L(2), Liu J(4), 
Xiao J(3), Roberts E(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.
(2)Department of Biophysics, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, 
United States of America.
(3)Department of Biophysics and Biophysical Chemistry, Johns Hopkins School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.
(4)Center for Cell Dynamics, Department of Cell Biology, Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.

In Escherichia coli, translocation of RNA polymerase (RNAP) during transcription 
introduces supercoiling to DNA, which influences the initiation and elongation 
behaviors of RNAP. To quantify the role of supercoiling in transcription 
regulation, we developed a spatially resolved supercoiling model of 
transcription. The integrated model describes how RNAP activity feeds back with 
the local DNA supercoiling and how this mechanochemical feedback controls 
transcription, subject to topoisomerase activities and stochastic topological 
domain formation. This model establishes that transcription-induced supercoiling 
mediates the cooperation of co-transcribing RNAP molecules in highly expressed 
genes, and this cooperation is achieved under moderate supercoiling diffusion 
and high topoisomerase unbinding rates. It predicts that a topological domain 
could serve as a transcription regulator, generating substantial transcriptional 
noise. It also shows the relative orientation of two closely arranged genes 
plays an important role in regulating their transcription. The model provides a 
quantitative platform for investigating how genome organization impacts 
transcription.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009788
PMCID: PMC9522292
PMID: 36121892 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.