1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2022 Sep 2;10:965076. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2022.965076. 
eCollection 2022.

The ribosome inhibitor chloramphenicol induces motility deficits in human 
spermatozoa: A proteomic approach identifies potentially involved proteins.

Bisconti M(1), Leroy B(2), Gallagher MT(3), Senet C(1), Martinet B(4), Arcolia 
V(5), Wattiez R(2), Kirkman-Brown JC(6), Simon JF(5), Hennebert E(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Cell Biology, Research Institute for Biosciences, Research 
Institute for Health Sciences and Technology, University of Mons, Mons, Belgium.
(2)Laboratory of Proteomics and Microbiology, CISMa, Research Institute for 
Biosciences, University of Mons, Mons, Belgium.
(3)Centre for Systems Modelling and Quantitative Biomedicine, University of 
Birmingham, Centre for Human Reproductive Science, Birmingham Women's and 
Children's National Health Service Foundation Trust, Birmingham, United Kingdom.
(4)Evolutionary Biology and Ecology, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, 
Belgium.
(5)Clinique de Fertilité Régionale de Mons, CHU Ambroise Paré Hospital, Mons, 
Belgium.
(6)Institute of Metabolism and Systems Research, University of Birmingham, 
Centre for Human Reproductive Science, Birmingham Women's and Children's 
National Health Service Foundation Trust, Birmingham, United Kingdom.

Mature spermatozoa are almost completely devoid of cytoplasm; as such it has 
long been believed that they do not contain ribosomes and are therefore not 
capable of synthesising proteins. However, since the 1950s, various studies have 
shown translational activity within spermatozoa, particularly during their in 
vitro capacitation. But the type of ribosomes involved (cytoplasmic or 
mitochondrial) is still debated. Here, we investigate the presence and activity 
of the two types of ribosomes in mature human spermatozoa. By targeting 
ribosomal RNAs and proteins, we show that both types of ribosomes are localized 
in the midpiece as well as in the neck and the base of the head of the 
spermatozoa. We assessed the impact of cycloheximide (CHX) and chloramphenicol 
(CP), inhibitors of cytoplasmic and mitochondrial ribosomes, respectively, on 
different sperm parameters. Neither CHX, nor CP impacted sperm vitality, 
mitochondrial activity (measured through the ATP content), or capacitation 
(measured through the content in phosphotyrosines). However, increasing CP 
concentrations induced a decrease in total and progressive motilities as well as 
on some kinematic parameters while no effect was observed with CHX. A 
quantitative proteomic analysis was performed by mass spectrometry in SWATH mode 
to compare the proteomes of spermatozoa capacitated in the absence or presence 
of the two ribosome inhibitors. Among the ∼700 proteins identified in the 
different tested conditions, 3, 3 and 25 proteins presented a modified abundance 
in the presence of 1 and 2 mg/ml of CHX, and 1 mg/ml of CP, respectively. The 
observed abundance variations of some CP-down regulated proteins were validated 
using Multiple-Reaction Monitoring (MRM). Taken together, our results are in 
favor of an activity of mitochondrial ribosomes. Their inhibition by CP results 
in a decrease in the abundance of several proteins, at least FUNDC2 and QRICH2, 
and consequently induces sperm motility deficits.

Copyright © 2022 Bisconti, Leroy, Gallagher, Senet, Martinet, Arcolia, Wattiez, 
Kirkman-Brown, Simon and Hennebert.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2022.965076
PMCID: PMC9478589
PMID: 36120567

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.