1. Front Oncol. 2022 Sep 6;12:995027. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2022.995027. eCollection 
2022.

Radiofrequency ablation in combination with CD73 inhibitor AB680 reduces tumor 
growth and enhances anti-tumor immunity in a syngeneic model of pancreatic 
ductal adenocarcinoma.

Faraoni EY(1), Strickland LN(1), O'Brien BJ(1), Barraza JF(1), Thosani NC(2), 
Wray CJ(3), Mills TW(4), Bailey-Lundberg JM(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, McGovern Medical School, The University of 
Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX, United States.
(2)Center for Interventional Gastroenterology at UTHealth (iGUT), McGovern 
Medical School, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, 
Houston, TX, United States.
(3)Department of Surgery, McGovern Medical School, The University of Texas 
Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX, United States.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, McGovern Medical School, The University of Texas 
Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX, United States.
(5)Department of Anesthesiology, Center for Perioperative Medicine, McGovern 
Medical School, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, 
Houston, TX, United States.

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma presents a 5-year overall survival rate of 11%, 
placing an imperative need for the discovery and application of innovative 
treatments. Radiofrequency ablation represents a promising therapy for PDA, as 
studies show it induces coagulative necrosis and a host adaptive immune 
response. In this work we evaluated the effects of RFA treatment in vivo by 
establishing a syngeneic mouse model of PDA and performing tumor ablation in one 
flank. Our studies revealed RFA acutely impaired PDA tumor growth; however, such 
effects were not sustained one week after treatment. Adenosine (ADO) pathway 
represents a strong immunosuppressive mechanism that was shown to play a role in 
PDA progression and preliminary data from ongoing clinical studies suggest ADO 
pathway inhibition may improve therapeutic outcomes. Thus, to investigate 
whether ADO generation may be involved in tumor growth relapse after RFA, we 
evaluated adenosine-monophosphate (AMP), ADO and inosine (INO) levels by HPLC 
and found they were acutely increased after treatment. Thus, we evaluated an in 
vivo CD73 inhibition in combination with RFA to study ADO pathway implication in 
RFA response. Results showed combination therapy of RFA and a CD73 small 
molecule inhibitor (AB680) in vivo promoted sustained tumor growth impairment up 
to 10 days after treatment as evidenced by increased necrosis and anti-tumor 
immunity, suggesting RFA in combination with CD73 inhibitors may improve PDA 
patient response.

Copyright © 2022 Faraoni, Strickland, O’Brien, Barraza, Thosani, Wray, Mills and 
Bailey-Lundberg.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2022.995027
PMCID: PMC9486545
PMID: 36147911

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The reviewer WY declared a 
shared parent affiliation with authors to the handling editor at the time of 
review.