1. BMJ Open Ophthalmol. 2022 Jun;7(1):e000955. doi: 10.1136/bmjophth-2021-000955.

Reduction of disinfection efficacy of contact lens care products on the global 
market in the presence of contact lenses and cases.

Walters R(1), Campolo A(1), Miller E(1), Gabriel MM(1), Crary M(2), McAnally 
C(1), Shannon P(1).

Author information:
(1)R&D Microbiology, Alcon Research, LLC, Fort Worth, Texas, USA.
(2)R&D Microbiology, Alcon Research, LLC, Fort Worth, Texas, USA 
monica.crary@alcon.com.

OBJECTIVE: Sight-threatening infections can be caused by pathogenic 
micro-organisms colonising the cornea, leading to microbial keratitis (MK). 
These micro-organisms can be introduced to the eye via improper contact lens use 
and care. MK can also result from ineffective contact lens care solutions 
(CLCs), even if the patient is following best practice guidelines. Therefore, it 
is critical to understand the differences between the effectiveness of popular 
CLCs on the global market.
METHODS AND ANALYSIS: Following the International Standards Organisation 
standards 14 729 and 18259, bacteria (Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Serratia 
marcescens, Staphylococcus aureus), fungi (Candida albicans, Fusarium strains) 
and Acanthamoeba strains were inoculated into each CLC with and without contact 
lenses, and held for the manufacturer's stated disinfection time. Plate counts 
were conducted to determine the number of surviving micro-organisms.
RESULTS: All CLCs examined met the primary log reduction criteria during 
stand-alone testing for Pseudomonas, Staphylococcus, Candida and Fusarium. renu 
Multiplus, All Clean Soft, and Kombilösung Super did not meet the primary 
criteria when challenged with Serratia. Only OPTI-FREE Express exceeded 4 log 
reduction for both strains of Acanthamoeba tested. We noted a substantial 
reduction in disinfection efficacy when CLCs were challenged with Fusarium in 
the presence of lenses and cases versus stand-alone testing. OPTI-FREE Express 
demonstrated significantly less net log reduction loss than the other four CLCs 
tested.
CONCLUSION: Of the popular CLCs on the global market, the product which relies 
on dual biocides polyquaternium-1 and myristamidopropyl dimethylamine 
demonstrated the highest disinfection efficacy in microbial disinfection 
challenges in the absence and presence of contact lenses.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2022. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjophth-2021-000955
PMCID: PMC9226912
PMID: 36161836 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: All authors are/were 
employees of Alcon Research.