1. Curr Opin Biotechnol. 2022 Dec;78:102807. doi: 10.1016/j.copbio.2022.102807. 
Epub 2022 Sep 27.

Biologics-based degraders - an expanding toolkit for targeted-protein 
degradation.

VanDyke D(1), Taylor JD(2), Kaeo KJ(3), Hunt J(2), Spangler JB(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Johns Hopkins 
University, Baltimore, MD, USA; Translational Tissue Engineering Center, Johns 
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA; Biologics 
Engineering, R&D, AstraZeneca, Gaithersburg, MD, USA.
(2)Biologics Engineering, R&D, AstraZeneca, Cambridge, UK.
(3)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Johns Hopkins 
University, Baltimore, MD, USA; Translational Tissue Engineering Center, Johns 
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(4)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Johns Hopkins 
University, Baltimore, MD, USA; Translational Tissue Engineering Center, Johns 
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA; Bloomberg∼Kimmel 
Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, 
USA; Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, MD, USA; Department of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA; Department of Oncology, Johns 
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA; Department of 
Ophthalmology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA. 
Electronic address: jamie.spangler@jhu.edu.

Targeted protein degradation (TPD) is a broadly useful proteome editing tool for 
biological research and therapeutic development. TPD offers several advantages 
over functional inhibition alone, including the ability to target previously 
undruggable proteins and the substantial and sustained knockout of protein 
activity. A variety of small molecule approaches hijack endogenous 
protein degradation machinery, but are limited to proteins with a cytosolic 
domain and suitable binding pocket. Recently, biologics-based methods have 
expanded the TPD toolbox by allowing access to extracellular and surface-exposed 
proteins and increasing target specificity. Here, we summarize recent advances 
in the use of biologics to deplete proteins through either the 
ubiquitin-proteasome system or the lysosomal degradation pathway, and discuss 
routes to their effective delivery as potential therapeutic interventions.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.copbio.2022.102807
PMCID: PMC9742328
PMID: 36179405 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement The authors 
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships that may be 
considered as potential competing interests: James Hunt holds shares in 
AstraZeneca.