1. J Obstet Gynaecol Res. 2022 Dec;48(12):3179-3190. doi: 10.1111/jog.15454. Epub
 2022 Oct 2.

Identification of novel genetic and epigenetic regulators of different tissue 
types of cervical cancer.

Chandra S(1), Sarkar S(1), Mandal P(1).

Author information:
(1)Biomedical Genetics Laboratory, Department of Zoology, The University of 
Burdwan, West Bengal, India.

OBJECTIVES: The study aimed to find differential gene mutations, DNA 
methylation, and expression profiles among different categories of cervical 
cancer samples.
METHODS: The study was based on freely available gene mutations, promoter 
methylation, and gene expression status of The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) 
cervical cancer samples and adjacent normal tissues in the Genomic Data Commons 
(GDC) portal. The association of CpG island methylation with gene expression was 
determined through negative correlation analysis.
RESULTS: We identified that the ErbB signaling pathway and proteoglycans pathway 
was significantly associated with adenocarcinoma cervical cancers patients. In 
these pathways, missense mutation especially S310F in the ERBB2 gene as well as 
G12D and A146T in the KRAS gene were significantly associated with 
adenocarcinoma cases. Furthermore, a comparison of SCC cases with adjacent 
control tissues revealed differential hypermethylation of two CpG positions of 
the KAAG1 gene and differential downregulation of NPY1R and NPY5R genes in 
cervical squamous cell carcinoma compared to cervical adenocarcinoma cases and 
adjacent normal tissues. Specifically, the hypermethylation of the promoter 
region of the KAAG1 gene might be responsible for the carcinogenesis of cervical 
squamous cells exclusively and methylation marks can be reversible by the widely 
used drug, azacytidine. In contrast, adenocarcinoma cervical cancer cases may be 
treated with floxuridine which is successfully utilized for other 
tissue-specific adenocarcinoma cases.
CONCLUSIONS: These results provide valuable insight into the differential 
molecular markers among the categories of cervical cancer, which helps our 
ability to classify these cancers and for targeted therapy.

© 2022 Japan Society of Obstetrics and Gynecology.

DOI: 10.1111/jog.15454
PMID: 36184073 [Indexed for MEDLINE]