1. mSystems. 2022 Oct 26;7(5):e0073722. doi: 10.1128/msystems.00737-22. Epub 2022
 Oct 3.

Identification of Cyclic-di-GMP-Modulating Protein Residues by Bidirectionally 
Evolving a Social Behavior in Pseudomonas fluorescens.

Kessler C(1), Kim W(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Duquesne University, Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania, USA.

Modulation of the intracellular cyclic di-GMP (c-di-GMP) pool is central to the 
formation of structured bacterial communities. Genome annotations predict the 
presence of dozens of conserved c-di-GMP catalytic enzymes in many bacterial 
species, but the functionality and regulatory control of the vast majority 
remain underexplored. Here, we begin to fill this gap by utilizing an 
experimental evolution system in Pseudomonas fluorescens Pf0-1, which repeatedly 
produces a unique social behavior through bidirectional transitions between two 
distinct phenotypes converging on c-di-GMP modulation. Parallel evolution of 33 
lineages captured 147 unique mutations among 191 evolved isolates in genes that 
are empirically demonstrated, bioinformatically predicted, or previously unknown 
to impact the intracellular pool of c-di-GMP. Quantitative chemistry confirmed 
that each mutation causing the phenotypic shift either amplifies or reduces 
c-di-GMP production. We identify missense or in-frame deletion mutations in 
numerous diguanylate cyclase genes that largely fall outside the conserved 
catalytic domain. We also describe a novel relationship between a regulatory 
component of branched-chain amino acid biosynthesis and c-di-GMP production, and 
predict functions of several other unexpected proteins that clearly impact 
c-di-GMP production. Sequential mutations that continuously disrupt or recover 
c-di-GMP production across discrete functional elements suggest a complex and 
underappreciated interconnectivity within the c-di-GMP regulome of P. 
fluorescens. IMPORTANCE Microbial communities comprise densely packed cells 
where competition for space and resources is fierce. Aging colonies of 
Pseudomonas fluorescens are known to repeatedly produce mutants with two 
distinct phenotypes that physically work together to spread away from the 
overcrowded population. We demonstrate that the mutants with one phenotype 
produce high levels of cyclic di-GMP (c-di-GMP) and those with the second 
phenotype produce low levels. C-di-GMP is an intracellular signaling molecule 
which regulates many bacterial traits that cause tremendous clinical and 
environmental problems. Here, we analyze 147 experimentally selected mutations, 
which manifest either of the two phenotypes, to identify key residues in diverse 
proteins that force or shut down c-di-GMP production. Our data indicate that the 
intracellular pool of c-di-GMP is modulated through the catalytic activities of 
many independent c-di-GMP enzymes, which appear to be in tune with several 
proteins with no known links to c-di-GMP modulation.

DOI: 10.1128/msystems.00737-22
PMCID: PMC9600634
PMID: 36190139 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.