1. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2022 Nov 15;455:116266. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2022.116266.  Epub 2022 Oct 7.

Ex vivo exposures to arsenite and its methylated trivalent metabolites alter 
gene transcription in mouse sperm cells.

Shang B(1), Venkatratnam A(2), Hartwell H(3), Douillet C(1), Cable P(1), Liu 
T(4), Zou F(4), Ideraabdullah FY(5), Fry RC(6), Stýblo M(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nutrition, Gillings School of Global Public Health, The 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, USA.
(2)Department of Nutrition, Gillings School of Global Public Health, The 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, USA; Department of Environmental 
Science and Engineering, Gillings School of Global Public Health, The University 
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, USA.
(3)Department of Environmental Science and Engineering, Gillings School of 
Global Public Health, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, USA.
(4)Department of Biostatistics, Gillings School of Global Public Health, The 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, USA.
(5)Department of Nutrition, Gillings School of Global Public Health, The 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, USA; Department of Genetics, School 
of Medicine, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, USA.
(6)Department of Environmental Science and Engineering, Gillings School of 
Global Public Health, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, USA. 
Electronic address: rfry@email.unc.edu.
(7)Department of Nutrition, Gillings School of Global Public Health, The 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, USA. Electronic address: 
Styblo@med.unc.edu.

We have previously reported that preconception exposure to iAs may contribute to 
the development of diabetes in mouse offspring by altering gene expressions in 
paternal sperm. However, the individual contributions of iAs and its methylated 
metabolites, monomethylated arsenic (MAs) and dimethylated arsenic (DMAs), to 
changes in the sperm transcriptome could not be determined because all three As 
species are present in sperm after in vivo iAs exposure. The goal of the present 
study was to assess As species-specific effects using an ex vivo model. We 
exposed freshly isolated mouse sperm to either 0.1 or 1 μM arsenite (iAsIII) or 
the methylated trivalent arsenicals, MAsIII and DMAsIII, and used RNA-sequencing 
to identify differentially expressed genes, enriched pathways, and associated 
protein networks. For all arsenicals tested, the exposures to 0.1 μM 
concentrations had greater effects on gene expression than 1 μM exposures. 
Transcription factor AP-1 and B cell receptor complexes were the most 
significantly enriched pathways in sperm exposed to 0.1 μM iAsIII. The Mre11 
complex and Antigen processing were top pathways targeted by exposure to 0.1 μM 
MAsIII and DMAsIII, respectively. While there was no overlap between gene 
transcripts altered by ex vivo exposures in the present study and those altered 
by in vivo exposure in our prior work, several pathways were shared, including 
PI3K-Akt signaling, Focal adhesion, and Extracellular matrix receptor 
interaction pathways. Notably, the protein networks associated with these 
pathways included those with known roles in diabetes. This study is the first to 
assess the As species-specific effects on sperm transcriptome, linking these 
effects to the diabetogenic effects of iAs exposure.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.taap.2022.116266
PMCID: PMC9753555
PMID: 36209798 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.