1. Dis Markers. 2022 Sep 26;2022:2148627. doi: 10.1155/2022/2148627. eCollection 
2022.

The Variation of Transcriptomic Perturbations is Associated with the Development 
and Progression of Various Diseases.

Dong Z(1)(2), Yan Q(1)(2), Wang X(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Biomedical Informatics Research Laboratory, School of Basic Medicine and 
Clinical Pharmacy, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing 211198, China.
(2)Big Data Research Institute, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing 211198, 
China.

BACKGROUND: Although transcriptomic data have been widely applied to explore 
various diseases, few studies have investigated the association between 
transcriptomic perturbations and disease development in a wide variety of 
diseases.
METHODS: Based on a previously developed algorithm for quantifying intratumor 
heterogeneity at the transcriptomic level, we defined the variation of 
transcriptomic perturbations (VTP) of a disease relative to the health status. 
Based on publicly available transcriptome datasets, we compared VTP values 
between the disease and health status and analyzed correlations between VTP 
values and disease progression or severity in various diseases, including 
neurological disorders, infectious diseases, cardiovascular diseases, 
respiratory diseases, liver diseases, kidney diseases, digestive diseases, and 
endocrine diseases. We also identified the genes and pathways whose expression 
perturbations correlated positively with VTP across diverse diseases.
RESULTS: VTP values were upregulated in various diseases relative to their 
normal controls. VTP values were significantly greater in define than in 
possible or probable Alzheimer's disease. VTP values were significantly larger 
in intensive care unit (ICU) COVID-19 patients than in non-ICU patients, and in 
COVID-19 patients requiring mechanical ventilatory support (MVS) than in those 
not requiring MVS. VTP correlated positively with viral loads in acquired immune 
deficiency syndrome (AIDS) patients. Moreover, the AIDS patients treated with 
abacavir or zidovudine had lower VTP values than those without such therapies. 
In pulmonary tuberculosis (TB) patients, VTP values followed the pattern: active 
TB > latent TB > normal controls. VTP values were greater in clinically apparent 
than in presymptomatic malaria. VTP correlated negatively with the cardiac index 
of left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF). In chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD), VTP showed a negative correlation with forced expiratory volume 
in the first second (FEV1). VTP values increased with H. pylori infection and 
were upregulated in atrophic gastritis caused by H. pylori infection. The genes 
and pathways whose expression perturbations correlated positively with VTP 
scores across diseases were mainly involved in the regulation of immune, 
metabolic, and cellular activities.
CONCLUSIONS: VTP is upregulated in the disease versus health status, and its 
upregulation is associated with disease progression and severity in various 
diseases. Thus, VTP has potential clinical implications for disease diagnosis 
and prognosis.

Copyright © 2022 Zehua Dong et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2022/2148627
PMCID: PMC9530920
PMID: 36204511 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.