1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2022 Oct 11;107(4_Suppl):107-117. doi:
10.4269/ajtmh.21-1344.  Print 2022 Oct 11.

Diverse Malaria Presentations across National Institutes of Health South Asia 
International Center for Excellence in Malaria Research Sites in India.

Chakrabarti R(1)(2), Chery-Karschney L(1), White J(1), Mascarenhas A(1)(2), 
Skillman KM(3), Kanjee U(3), Babar PH(1)(2), Patrapuvich R(4), Mohapatra PK(5), 
Patankar S(6), Smith JD(7), Anvikar A(8), Valecha N(9), Rahi M(10), Duraisingh 
MT(3), Rathod PK(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington.
(2)Department of Medicine, Goa Medical College and Hospital, Bambolim, Goa, 
India.
(3)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard T. H. Chan School 
of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts.
(4)Drug Research Unit for Malaria (DRUM), Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol 
University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(5)Division of Malaria, Regional Medical Research Center-Northeast (RMRC-NE), 
Dibrugarh, Assam.
(6)Department of Biosciences and Bioengineering, IIT Bombay, Powai, Mumbai, 
India.
(7)Seattle Children's Research Institute, Seattle, Washington.
(8)National Institute of Biologicals, Noida, UP, India.
(9)National Institute of Malaria Research, New Delhi, India.
(10)Division of Epidemiology and Communicable Disease, Indian Council of Medical 
Research, New Delhi, India.

The Malaria Evolution in South Asia (MESA) International Center for Excellence 
in Malaria Research (ICEMR) was established by the US National Institutes of 
Health (US NIH) as one of 10 malaria research centers in endemic countries. In 
10 years of hospital-based and field-based work in India, the MESA-ICEMR has 
documented the changing epidemiology and transmission of malaria in four 
different parts of India. Malaria Evolution in South Asia-ICEMR activities, in 
collaboration with Indian partners, are carried out in the broad thematic areas 
of malaria case surveillance, vector biology and transmission, antimalarial 
resistance, pathogenesis, and host response. The program integrates insights 
from surveillance and field studies with novel basic science studies. This is a 
two-pronged approach determining the biology behind the disease patterns seen in 
the field, and generating new relevant biological questions about malaria to be 
tested in the field. Malaria Evolution in South Asia-ICEMR activities inform 
local and international stakeholders on the current status of malaria 
transmission in select parts of South Asia including updates on regional vectors 
of transmission of local parasites. The community surveys and new laboratory 
tools help monitor ongoing efforts to control and eliminate malaria in key 
regions of South Asia including the state of evolving antimalarial resistance in 
different parts of India, new host biomarkers of recent infection, and molecular 
markers of pathogenesis from uncomplicated and severe malaria.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.21-1344
PMCID: PMC9662227
PMID: 36228910 [Indexed for MEDLINE]