1. Cardiovasc Res. 2023 Mar 31;119(2):587-598. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvac065.

Inducible apelin receptor knockdown reduces differentiation efficiency and 
contractility of hESC-derived cardiomyocytes.

Macrae RGC(1)(2), Colzani MT(2), Williams TL(1), Bayraktar S(2), Kuc RE(1), 
Pullinger AL(1)(2), Bernard WG(2), Robinson EL(3), Davenport EE(4), Maguire 
JJ(1), Sinha S(2), Davenport AP(1).

Author information:
(1)Experimental Medicine and Immunotherapeutics, University of Cambridge, 
Addenbrooke's Hospital, Level 6, Addenbrooke's Centre for Clinical 
Investigation, Box 110, Cambridge CB2 0QQ, UK.
(2)Wellcome-MRC Cambridge Stem Cell Institute, Jeffrey Cheah Biomedical Centre, 
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(3)School of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, University of Colorado Denver, 
Aurora, CO, USA.
(4)Wellcome Sanger Institute, Cambridge, UK.

AIMS: The apelin receptor, a G protein-coupled receptor, has emerged as a key 
regulator of cardiovascular development, physiology, and disease. However, there 
is a lack of suitable human in vitro models to investigate the apelinergic 
system in cardiovascular cell types. For the first time we have used human 
embryonic stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes (hESC-CMs) and a novel inducible 
knockdown system to examine the role of the apelin receptor in both 
cardiomyocyte development and to determine the consequences of loss of apelin 
receptor function as a model of disease.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Expression of the apelin receptor and its ligands in hESCs 
and hESC-CMs was determined. hESCs carrying a tetracycline-inducible short 
hairpin RNA targeting the apelin receptor were generated using the sOPTiKD 
system. Phenotypic assays characterized the consequences of either apelin 
receptor knockdown before hESC-CM differentiation (early knockdown) or in 3D 
engineered heart tissues as a disease model (late knockdown). hESC-CMs expressed 
the apelin signalling system at a similar level to the adult heart. Early apelin 
receptor knockdown decreased cardiomyocyte differentiation efficiency and 
prolonged voltage sensing, associated with asynchronous contraction. Late apelin 
receptor knockdown had detrimental consequences on 3D engineered heart tissue 
contractile properties, decreasing contractility and increasing stiffness.
CONCLUSIONS: We have successfully knocked down the apelin receptor, using an 
inducible system, to demonstrate a key role in hESC-CM differentiation. 
Knockdown in 3D engineered heart tissues recapitulated the phenotype of apelin 
receptor down-regulation in a failing heart, providing a potential platform for 
modelling heart failure and testing novel therapeutic strategies.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
European Society of Cardiology.

DOI: 10.1093/cvr/cvac065
PMCID: PMC10064845
PMID: 36239923 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: None declared.