1. Cells. 2022 Oct 7;11(19):3155. doi: 10.3390/cells11193155.

Nasal Microbiome and Its Interaction with the Host in Childhood Asthma.

Zeng Y(1)(2), Liang JQ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, Li Ka Shing Institute of Health 
Sciences, CUHK Shenzhen Research Institute, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 
Hong Kong, China.
(2)Centre for Gut Microbiota Research, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese 
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.

Childhood asthma is a major chronic non-communicable disease in infants and 
children, often triggered by respiratory tract infections. The nasal cavity is a 
reservoir for a broad variety of commensal microbes and potential pathogens 
associated with respiratory illnesses including asthma. A healthy nasal 
microenvironment has protective effects against respiratory tract infections. 
The first microbial colonisation in the nasal region is initiated immediately 
after birth. Subsequently, colonisation by nasal microbiota during infancy plays 
important roles in rapidly establishing immune homeostasis and the development 
and maturation of the immune system. Dysbiosis of microbiota residing in the 
mucosal surfaces, such as the nasopharynx and guts, triggers immune modulation, 
severe infection, and exacerbation events. Nasal microbiome dysbiosis is related 
to the onset of symptomatic infections. Dynamic interactions between viral 
infections and the nasal microbiota in early life affect the later development 
of respiratory infections. In this review, we summarise the existing findings 
related to nasal microbiota colonisation, dynamic variations, and 
host-microbiome interactions in childhood health and respiratory illness with a 
particular examination of asthma. We also discuss our current understanding of 
biases produced by environmental factors and technical concerns, the importance 
of standardised research methods, and microbiome modification for the prevention 
or treatment of childhood asthma. This review lays the groundwork for paying 
attention to an essential but less emphasized topic and improves the 
understanding of the overall composition, dynamic changes, and influence of the 
nasal microbiome associated with childhood asthma.

DOI: 10.3390/cells11193155
PMCID: PMC9563732
PMID: 36231116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.