1. Freshw Biol. 2022 Aug;67(8):1456-1467. doi: 10.1111/fwb.13953. Epub 2022 Jun
6.

Phenotypic and molecular responses of copepods to UV radiation stress in a clear 
versus a glacially turbid lake.

Tartarotti B(1), Sommaruga R(1), Saul N(2).

Author information:
(1)Lake and Glacier Research Group Department of Ecology University of Innsbruck 
Innsbruck Austria.
(2)Molecular Genetics Group Institute of Biology Humboldt University of Berlin 
Berlin Germany.

Zooplankton are exposed to multiple environmental stressors in alpine lakes. 
However, phenotypic and molecular responses of copepods to different 
environmental conditions, including ultraviolet radiation (UVR), are still not 
fully understood. Here, we tested whether gene expression patterns vary within 
the same species, Cyclops abyssorum tatricus, but in populations from different 
environments (a clear vs. a glacially turbid lake) when exposed to UVR. 
Moreover, we wanted to examine potential seasonal variation (summer vs. autumn) 
in copepod gene expression.We measured photoprotective compounds 
(mycosporine-like amino acids and carotenoids) and antioxidant capacities in two 
copepod populations and studied gene expression of heat shock proteins (hsps) as 
indicator of stress after UVR exposure in the laboratory.Compared with the 
copepod population from the clear lake, the population from the turbid lake 
showed lower mycosporine-like amino acid, but higher carotenoid concentrations 
that decreased over the season. Antioxidant capacities (both lipophilic and 
hydrophilic) were higher in autumn than in summer. The hsp60 and hsp90 genes 
were constitutively expressed, regardless of habitat origin and season, while 
hsp70 was upregulated after exposure to UVR (up to 2.8-fold change). We observed 
stronger upregulation of hsp70 gene expression in autumn for the turbid and 
summer for the clear lake, with highest gene expression 24 hr post-UVR exposure 
(up to 10.2-fold change in the turbid and 3.9-fold in the clear lake).We show 
how variation in phenotypic traits modulates hsp gene expression patterns, 
specifically hsp70 gene expression. Rapidly induced defences against cellular 
stress may improve survival in harsh environments such as alpine lakes, 
especially since these sensitive ecosystems may experience further changes in 
the future.

© 2022 The Authors. Freshwater Biology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/fwb.13953
PMCID: PMC9543624
PMID: 36249915

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare no conflict of interest.