1. Cureus. 2022 Sep 14;14(9):e29168. doi: 10.7759/cureus.29168. eCollection 2022 
Sep.

Association of Diet With Essential Tremor: A Narrative Review.

Ray A(1), Biswas DA(2).

Author information:
(1)Medicine, Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College, Datta Meghe Institute of Medical 
Sciences, Wardha, IND.
(2)Physiology, Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College, Datta Meghe Institute of 
Medical Sciences, Wardha, IND.

Essential tremor is a neurological disorder categorized by the rhythmic shaking 
of the upper limbs, lower limbs, neck, or head. The etiology of essential tremor 
is believed to be genetic variations, environmental factors, lifestyle, etc. 
Poor lifestyle and diet are important factors contributing to the onset of 
various disorders. Environment and lifestyle play a significant part in the 
dietary habits of an individual. Some diet components may probably be 
associated with the etiopathogenesis or progression of the essential tremor. 
Dietary habits may be a key influence on the commencement of tremors in healthy 
individuals. Typically, the diet of essential tremor patients is not supervised. 
It may also intensify the tremors in essential tremor patients. Association of 
the diet with the essential tremor can shed light on the root of tremor 
aggravating aspect and aid in diet modification in essential tremor patients. 
The aim of the review is to establish a relation between the diet with 
etiopathogenesis and the progression of essential tremor. The review includes 
studies providing information about essential tremor and correlating essential 
tremor with diet, lifestyle, environment, and genetic factors. Studies that did 
not provide a link to the association of essential tremor were excluded. The 
interpretation of the research indicated that genetic variations might be 
triggered due to enzymatic changes triggered by dietary patterns. Dietary 
components showed ambiguous, weak, strong, or no association. Essential tremor 
may be influenced by diet. Further research must be carried out on essential 
tremor patients in the nutritional domain. Physicians may monitor the diet of 
the essential tremor patients and record the progress of the disorder on its 
basis to manage the patients with essential tremor and provide better services.

Copyright © 2022, Ray et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.29168
PMCID: PMC9567235
PMID: 36258958

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.