1. Thorac Cancer. 2022 Dec;13(23):3431-3435. doi: 10.1111/1759-7714.14663. Epub 
2022 Oct 19.

A phase II, multicenter study of lazertinib as consolidation therapy in patients 
with locally advanced, unresectable, EGFR mutation-positive non-small cell lung 
cancer (stage III) who have not progressed following definitive, platinum-based, 
chemoradiation therapy (PLATINUM trial).

Choi J(1), Lee JE(2), Choi CM(3), Oh IJ(4), Lee KY(5), Jang TW(6), Lee SH(7), 
Kim EY(8), Park DW(9), Park SH(10), Lee SY(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Korea University Guro Hospital, Korea University College of 
Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Division of Pulmonology, Department of Internal Medicine, College of 
Medicine, Chungnam National University, Daejeon, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Asan Medical Center, 
University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Chonnam National University Medical School 
and Hwasun Hospital, Hwasun, Republic of Korea.
(5)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Konkuk University School of Medicine, 
Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, Kosin University Medical College, Pusan, 
Republic of Korea.
(7)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Kyung Hee University Medical Center, Kyung Hee University College of 
Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(8)Division of Pulmonology, Department of Internal Medicine, Severance Hospital, 
Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(9)Department of Internal Medicine Hanyang University Hospital, Hanyang 
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(10)Division of Pulmonology, Respiratory Center, Keimyung University Dongsan 
Hospital, Keimyung University School of Medicine, Daegu, Republic of Korea.

INTRODUCTION: The PACIFIC study demonstrated that durvalumab consolidation 
therapy significantly improved progression-free survival (PFS) and overall 
survival (OS) in patients with unresectable stage III non-small cell lung cancer 
(NSCLC) after concurrent chemoradiotherapy (CCRT). However, there was no 
clinical benefit in both PFS and OS in epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) 
mutation-positive patient groups in a post hoc exploratory analysis. Moreover, 
the clinical effects of immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) in EGFR 
mutation-positive stage IV NSCLC were demonstrated to be poor. Personalized 
treatment according to the mutation status is also required in stage III NSCLC. 
Lazertinib, a third-generation EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI), is newly 
developed and approved for use in Korea.
METHODS: This prospective, open, single-arm, multicenter, phase II clinical 
trial aims to evaluate the efficacy and safety of lazertinib as a consolidative 
therapy after CCRT treatment in unresectable, EGFR mutation-positive NSCLC stage 
III patients. The primary endpoint of this study is PFS, and the secondary 
endpoints are OS, objective response rate (ORR), duration of response (DoR), 
time to death or distant metastasis (TTDM), and safety profiles.
DISCUSSION: Our study may extend the indications for third-generation EGFR-TKIs 
to treat patients with stage III NSCLC. Moreover, using this drug to treat stage 
III NSCLC would emphasize the value of mutation analysis and personalized 
medicine.

© 2022 The Authors. Thoracic Cancer published by China Lung Oncology Group and 
John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1759-7714.14663
PMCID: PMC9715807
PMID: 36259253 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.