1. Cancer Cell Int. 2022 Oct 20;22(1):325. doi: 10.1186/s12935-022-02747-z.

A review on the role of cyclin dependent kinases in cancers.

Ghafouri-Fard S(1), Khoshbakht T(2), Hussen BM(3)(4), Dong P(5), Gassler N(6), 
Taheri M(7)(8), Baniahmad A(9), Dilmaghani NA(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Shahid Beheshti 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Men's Health and Reproductive Health Research Center, Shahid Beheshti 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Department of Pharmacognosy, College of Pharmacy, Hawler Medical University, 
Erbil, Kurdistan Region, Iraq.
(4)Center of Research and Strategic Studies, Lebanese French University, Erbil, 
Kurdistan Region, Iraq.
(5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Hokkaido University School of 
Medicine, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.
(6)Section of Pathology, Institute of Forensic Medicine, Jena University 
Hospital, Jena, Germany.
(7)Urology and Nephrology Research Center, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran. Mohammad.taheri@uni-jena.de.
(8)Institute of Human Genetics, Jena University Hospital, Jena, Germany. 
Mohammad.taheri@uni-jena.de.
(9)Institute of Human Genetics, Jena University Hospital, Jena, Germany. 
aria.baniahmad@med.uni-jena.de.
(10)Skull Base Research Center, Loghman Hakim Hospital, Shahid Beheshti 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. nadakbari@sbmu.ac.ir.

The Cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) class of serine/threonine kinases has crucial 
roles in the regulation of cell cycle transition and is mainly involved in the 
pathogenesis of cancers. The expression of CDKs is controlled by a complex 
regulatory network comprised of genetic and epigenetic mechanisms, which are 
dysregulated during the progression of cancer. The abnormal activation of CDKs 
results in uncontrolled cancer cell proliferation and the induction of cancer 
stem cell characteristics. The levels of CDKs can be utilized to predict the 
prognosis and treatment response of cancer patients, and further understanding 
of the function and underlying mechanisms of CDKs in human tumors would pave the 
way for future cancer therapies that effectively target CDKs. Defects in the 
regulation of cell cycle and mutations in the genes coding cell-cycle regulatory 
proteins lead to unrestrained proliferation of cells leading to formation of 
tumors. A number of treatment modalities have been designed to combat 
dysregulation of cell cycle through affecting expression or activity of CDKs. 
However, effective application of these methods in the clinical settings 
requires recognition of the role of CDKs in the progression of each type of 
cancer, their partners, their interactions with signaling pathways and the 
effects of suppression of these kinases on malignant features. Thus, we designed 
this literature search to summarize these findings at cellular level, as well as 
in vivo and clinical levels.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12935-022-02747-z
PMCID: PMC9583502
PMID: 36266723

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.