1. Brain Commun. 2022 Sep 26;4(5):fcac245. doi: 10.1093/braincomms/fcac245. 
eCollection 2022.

Blood-brain barrier leakage and perivascular inflammation in cerebral amyloid 
angiopathy.

Kozberg MG(1)(2), Yi I(3), Freeze WM(4)(5), Auger CA(1), Scherlek AA(1), 
Greenberg SM(2), van Veluw SJ(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)MassGeneral Institute for Neurodegenerative Disease, Massachusetts General 
Hospital/Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02129, USA.
(2)J. Philip Kistler Stroke Research Center, Massachusetts General 
Hospital/Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA.
(3)Department of Economics, Harvard College, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 
02138, USA.
(4)Department of Radiology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 2333 ZD, 
The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Neuropsychology and Psychiatry, Maastricht University, 
Maastricht, 6200 MD, The Netherlands.

Cerebral amyloid angiopathy is a small vessel disease associated with cortical 
microbleeds and lobar intracerebral haemorrhage due to amyloid-β deposition in 
the walls of leptomeningeal and cortical arterioles. The mechanisms of cerebral 
amyloid angiopathy-related haemorrhage remain largely unknown. Recent work has 
demonstrated that ruptured blood vessels have limited (or no) amyloid-β at the 
site of bleeding and evidence of local vascular remodelling. We hypothesized 
that blood-brain barrier leakage and perivascular inflammation may be involved 
in this remodelling process. This study examined cortical arterioles at various 
stages of cerebral amyloid angiopathy-related vascular pathology (without 
evidence of microhaemorrhage) in autopsy tissue from seven cases with definite 
cerebral amyloid angiopathy. We included temporo-occipital sections with 
microbleeds guided by ex vivo MRI from two cases with severe cerebral amyloid 
angiopathy and systematically sampled occipital sections from five consecutive 
cases with varying cerebral amyloid angiopathy severity. Haematoxylin and eosin 
stains and immunohistochemistry against amyloid-β, fibrin(ogen), smooth muscle 
actin, reactive astrocytes (glial fibrillary acidic protein) and activated 
microglia (cluster of differentiation 68) were performed. Arterioles were graded 
using a previously proposed scale of individual vessel cerebral amyloid 
angiopathy severity, and a blinded assessment for blood-brain barrier leakage, 
smooth muscle actin and perivascular inflammation was performed. Blood-brain 
barrier leakage and smooth muscle actin loss were observed in significantly more 
vessels with mild amyloid-β deposition (Grade 1 vessels; P = 0.044 and P = 
0.012, respectively) as compared to vessels with no amyloid-β (Grade 0), and 
blood-brain barrier leakage was observed in 100% of vessels with evidence of 
vessel remodelling (Grades 3 and 4). Perivascular inflammation in the form of 
reactive astrocytes and activated microglia was observed predominantly 
surrounding arterioles at later stages of vessel pathology (Grades 2-4) and 
consistently around vessels with the same morphological features as ruptured 
vessel segments (Grade 4). These findings suggest a role for blood-brain barrier 
leakage and perivascular inflammation leading to arteriolar remodelling and 
haemorrhage in cerebral amyloid angiopathy, with early blood-brain barrier 
leakage as a potential trigger for subsequent perivascular inflammation.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain.

DOI: 10.1093/braincomms/fcac245
PMCID: PMC9576155
PMID: 36267331