1. Front Pharmacol. 2022 Oct 5;13:826395. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2022.826395. 
eCollection 2022.

In vitro effects of European and Latin-American medicinal plants in CYP3A4 gene 
expression, glutathione levels, and P-glycoprotein activity.

Mazzari ALDA(1), Lacerda MG(2), Milton FA(2)(3), Mulin Montechiari Machado 
JA(3), Sinoti SBP(2), Toullec AS(1), Rodrigues PM(2), Neves FAR(2), Simeoni 
LA(2), Silveira D(2), Prieto JM(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmacy, University College London, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Faculdade de Ciências da Saúde, Universidade de Brasília, Brasília, Brazil.
(3)Instituto de Saúde de Nova Friburgo, Universidade Federal Fluminense, 
Niterói, Brazil.
(4)School of Pharmacy and Biomolecular Sciences, Liverpool John Moores 
University, Liverpool, United Kingdom.

Many medicinal plants species from European -such as Artemisia absinthium, 
Equisetum arvense, Lamium album, Malva sylvestris, Morus nigra, Passiflora 
incarnata, Frangula purshiana, and Salix alba- as well as Latin American 
traditions -such as Libidibia ferrea, Bidens pilosa, Casearia sylvestris, Costus 
spicatus, Monteverdia ilicifolia, Persea americana, Schinus terebinthifolia, 
Solidago chilensis, Syzygium cumini, Handroanthus impetiginosus, and 
Vernonanthura phosphorica- are shortlisted by the Brazilian National Health 
System for future clinical use. However, they lack many data on their action 
upon some key ADME targets. In this study, we assess non-toxic concentrations 
(up to100 μg/ml) of their infusions for in vitro ability to modulate CYP3A4 mRNA 
gene expression and intracellular glutathione levels in HepG2 cells, as well as 
P-glycoprotein (P-gp) activity in vincristine-resistant Caco-2 cells (Caco-2 
VCR). We further investigated the activation of human pregnane X receptor (hPXR) 
in transiently co-transfected HeLa cells and the inhibition of Gamma-glutamyl 
transferase (GGT) in HepG2 cells. Our results demonstrate L. ferrea, C. 
sylvestris , M. ilicifolia, P. americana, S. terebinthifolia, S. cumini, V. 
phosphorica, E. arvense, P. incarnata, F. purshiana, and S. alba can 
significantly increase CYP3A4 mRNA gene expression in HepG2 cells. Only F. 
purshiana shown to do so likely via hPXR activation. P-gp activity was affected 
by L. ferrea, F. purshiana, S. terebinthifolia, and S. cumini. Total 
intracellular glutathione levels were significantly depleted by exposure to all 
extracts except S. alba and S. cumini This was accompanied by a lower GGT 
activity in the case of C. spicatus, P. americana, S. alba, and S. 
terebinthifolia, whilst L. ferrea, P. incarnata and F. purshiana increased it. 
Surprisingly, S. cumini aqueous extract drastically decreased GGT activity 
(-48%, p < 0.01). In conclusion, this preclinical study shows that the 
administration of some of these herbal medicines causes in vitro disturbances to 
key drug metabolism mechanisms. We recommend active pharmacovigilance for 
Libidibia ferrea (Mart.) L. P. Queiroz, Frangula purshiana Cooper, Schinus 
terebinthifolia Raddi, and Salix alba L. which were able to alter all targets in 
our preclinical study.

Copyright © 2022 Mazzari, Lacerda, Milton, Mulin Montechiari Machado, Sinoti, 
Toullec, Rodrigues, Neves, Simeoni, Silveira and Prieto.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2022.826395
PMCID: PMC9579425
PMID: 36278236

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.