1. Front Immunol. 2022 Oct 7;13:988303. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.988303.
eCollection  2022.

Identification of microsatellite instability and immune-related prognostic 
biomarkers in colon adenocarcinoma.

Sun Z(1), Li G(2), Shang D(3), Zhang J(1), Ai L(1), Liu M(1).

Author information:
(1)Colorectal Cancer Surgery Department, The Second Affiliated Hospital of 
Harbin Medical University, Harbin, China.
(2)Department of General Surgery, The Fourth Affiliated Hospital of Harbin 
Medical University, Harbin, China.
(3)College of Bioinformatics Science and Technology, Harbin Medical University, 
Harbin, China.

BACKGROUND: Colon adenocarcinoma (COAD) is a prevalent malignancy that causes 
significant mortality. Microsatellite instability plays a pivotal function in 
COAD development and immunotherapy resistance. However, the detailed underlying 
mechanism requires further investigation. Consequently, identifying molecular 
biomarkers with prognostic significance and revealing the role of MSI in COAD is 
important for addressing key obstacles in the available treatments.
METHODS: CIBERSORT and ESTIMATE analyses were performed to evaluate immune 
infiltration in COAD samples, followed by correlation analysis for MSI and 
immune infiltration. Then, differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in MSI and 
microsatellite stability (MSS) samples were identified and subjected to weighted 
gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA). A prognostic model was established 
with univariate cox regression and LASSO analyses, then evaluated with 
Kaplan-Meier analysis. The correlation between the prognostic model and immune 
checkpoint inhibitor (ICI) response was also analyzed.
RESULTS: In total, 701 significant DEGs related to MSI status were identified, 
and WGCNA revealed two modules associated with the immune score. Then, a 
seven-gene prognostic model was constructed using LASSO and univariate cox 
regression analyses to predict survival and ICI response. The high-risk score 
patients in TCGA and GEO cohorts presented a poor prognosis, as well as a high 
immune checkpoint expression, so they are more likely to benefit from ICI 
treatment.
CONCLUSION: The seven-gene prognostic model constructed could predict the 
survival of COAD and ICI response and serve as a reference for immunotherapy 
decisions.

Copyright © 2022 Sun, Li, Shang, Zhang, Ai and Liu.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.988303
PMCID: PMC9585257
PMID: 36275690 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.