1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2022 Oct 6;10:1031007. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2022.1031007. 
eCollection 2022.

Plasma membrane and brain dysfunction of the old: Do we age from our membranes?

Martín MG(1), Dotti CG(2).

Author information:
(1)Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology Department, Instituto Ferreyra 
(INIMEC)-Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), 
Universidad Nacional de Córdoba (UNC), Córdoba, Argentina.
(2)Molecular Neuropathology Unit, Physiological and Pathological Processes 
Program, Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa, Consejo Superior de 
Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC), Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (UAM), 
Madrid, Spain.

One of the characteristics of aging is a gradual hypo-responsiveness of cells to 
extrinsic stimuli, mainly evident in the pathways that are under hormone 
control, both in the brain and in peripheral tissues. Age-related resistance, 
i.e., reduced response of receptors to their ligands, has been shown to Insulin 
and also to leptin, thyroid hormones and glucocorticoids. In addition, lower 
activity has been reported in aging for ß-adrenergic receptors, adenosine A2B 
receptor, and several other G-protein-coupled receptors. One of the mechanisms 
proposed to explain the loss of sensitivity to hormones and neurotransmitters 
with age is the loss of receptors, which has been observed in several tissues. 
Another mechanism that is finding more and more experimental support is related 
to the changes that occur with age in the lipid composition of the neuronal 
plasma membrane, which are responsible for changes in the receptors' coupling 
efficiency to ligands, signal attenuation and pathway desensitization. In fact, 
recent works have shown that altered membrane composition-as occurs during 
neuronal aging-underlies reduced response to glutamate, to the neurotrophin 
BDNF, and to insulin, all these leading to cognition decay and epigenetic 
alterations in the old. In this review we present evidence that altered 
functions of membrane receptors due to altered plasma membrane properties may be 
a triggering factor in physiological decline, decreased brain function, and 
increased vulnerability to neuropathology in aging.

Copyright © 2022 Martín and Dotti.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2022.1031007
PMCID: PMC9582647
PMID: 36274849

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.