1. Neuroradiology. 2023 Mar;65(3):559-568. doi: 10.1007/s00234-022-03072-y. Epub 
2022 Oct 27.

A multi-reader comparison of normal-appearing white matter normalization 
techniques for perfusion and diffusion MRI in brain tumors.

Cho NS(1)(2)(3)(4), Hagiwara A(1)(2)(5), Sanvito F(1)(2)(6), Ellingson 
BM(7)(8)(9)(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiological Sciences, David Geffen School of Medicine, 
University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(2)UCLA Brain Tumor Imaging Laboratory (BTIL), Center for Computer Vision and 
Imaging Biomarkers, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Bioengineering, Henry Samueli School of Engineering and Applied 
Science, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(4)Medical Scientist Training Program, David Geffen School of Medicine, 
University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(5)Department of Radiology, Juntendo University School of Medicine, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(6)Unit of Radiology, Department of Clinical, Surgical, Diagnostic, and 
Pediatric Sciences, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
(7)Department of Radiological Sciences, David Geffen School of Medicine, 
University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA. 
bellingson@mednet.ucla.edu.
(8)UCLA Brain Tumor Imaging Laboratory (BTIL), Center for Computer Vision and 
Imaging Biomarkers, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA. 
bellingson@mednet.ucla.edu.
(9)Department of Bioengineering, Henry Samueli School of Engineering and Applied 
Science, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA. 
bellingson@mednet.ucla.edu.
(10)Department of Neurosurgery, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA. bellingson@mednet.ucla.edu.
(11)Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, David Geffen School of 
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA. 
bellingson@mednet.ucla.edu.

PURPOSE: There remains no consensus normal-appearing white matter (NAWM) 
normalization method to compute normalized relative cerebral blood volume 
(nrCBV) and apparent diffusion coefficient (nADC) in brain tumors. This reader 
study explored nrCBV and nADC differences using different NAWM normalization 
methods.
METHODS: Thirty-five newly diagnosed glioma patients were studied. For each 
patient, two readers created four NAWM regions of interests: (1) a single plane 
in the centrum semiovale (CSOp), (2) 3 spheres in the centrum semiovale (CSOs), 
(3) a single plane in the slice of the tumor center (TUMp), and (4) 3 spheres in 
the slice of the tumor center (TUMs). Readers repeated NAWM segmentations 1 
month later. Differences in nrCBV and nADC of the FLAIR hyperintense tumor, 
inter-/intra-reader variability, and time to segment NAWM were assessed. As a 
validation step, the diagnostic performance of each method for IDH-status 
prediction was evaluated.
RESULTS: Both readers obtained significantly different nrCBV (P < .001), nADC (P 
< .001), and time to segment NAWM (P < .001) between the four normalization 
methods. nrCBV and nADC were significantly different between CSO and TUM 
methods, but not between planar and spherical methods in the same NAWM region. 
Broadly, CSO methods were quicker than TUM methods, and spherical methods were 
quicker than planar methods. For all normalization techniques, inter-reader 
reproducibility and intra-reader repeatability were excellent (intraclass 
correlation coefficient > 0.9), and the IDH-status predictive performance 
remained similar.
CONCLUSION: The selected NAWM region significantly impacts nrCBV and nADC 
values. CSO methods, particularly CSOs, may be preferred because of time 
reduction, similar reader variability, and similar diagnostic performance 
compared to TUM methods.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00234-022-03072-y
PMCID: PMC9905164
PMID: 36301349 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: BME, paid advisor and consultant for Medicenna, 
MedQIA, Neosoma, Servier Pharmaceuticals, Siemens, Janssen, Imaging Endpoints, 
Kazia, VBL, Oncoceutics/Chimerix, Sumitomo Dainippon Pharma Oncology, 
ImmunoGenesis, Ellipses Pharma, Monteris, Global Coalition for Adaptive Research 
(GCAR), Alpheus Medical, Inc., Curtana Pharma, and Sagimet Biosciences. Grant 
funding is from Siemens, Servier/Agios, Neosoma, and Janssen. The other authors 
declare no competing interests.