1. Front Bioeng Biotechnol. 2022 Oct 13;10:997877. doi:
10.3389/fbioe.2022.997877.  eCollection 2022.

Cervical subtotal discectomy prosthesis validated in non-human primate model: A 
novel artificial cervical disc replacement concept?

Liu Y(1), Wo J(1)(2), Zhu H(1), Huang Z(1)(2), Zhou P(1), Yang J(3), Zheng S(1), 
Zhou L(1)(2), Tan F(4), Sun G(1), Li Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopedics, First Affiliated Hospital and Fifth Affiliated 
Hospital, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Guangdong-Hongkong-Macau Institute of CNS Regeneration, Ministry of Education 
CNS Regeneration Collaborative Joint Laboratory, Jinan University, Guangzhou, 
China.
(3)Huizhou Third People's Hospital, Guangzhou Medical University, Huizhou, 
China.
(4)Orthopedics and Traumatology, Yantai Hospital of Traditional Chinese 
Medicine, Yantai, China.

Objective: To evaluate the biological function of cervical subtotal discectomy 
prosthesis (CSDP) implantation in a non-human primate model. Methods: A CSDP was 
tested for cytocompatibility and osseointegration capacity before implantation 
in non-human primates. Subsequently, the CSDP was improved based on 
three-dimensional CT measurements of the non-human primate cervical spine. Eight 
cynomolgus monkeys were selected for removal of the intervertebral disc and 
lower endplate of the C5/6 segment to complete the model construction for CSDP 
implantation. In 18-month follow-up, physiological indices, radiology, and 
kinematics were assessed to estimate the biological function of the CSDP in 
non-human primates, including biosafety, osseointegration, and biomechanics. 
Results: Co-cultured with the CSDP constituent titanium alloy (Ti6Al4V-AO), the 
mouse embryo osteoblast precursor cell MC3T3-E1 obtained extended adhesion, 
remarkable viability status, and cell proliferation. After implantation in the 
mouse femur for 28 days, the surface of Ti6Al4V-AO was covered by a large amount 
of new cancellous bone, which formed further connections with the femur cortical 
bone, and no toxicity was detected by blood physiology indices or 
histopathology. After completing implantation in primate models, no infection or 
osteolysis was observed, nor was any subsidence or displacement of the CSDP 
observed in CT scans in the 18-month follow-up. In particular, the interior of 
the cervical vertebra fixation structure was gradually filled with new 
trabecular bone, and the CSDP had achieved fixation and bony fusion in the 
vertebral body at 1 year post-operation. Meanwhile, no signs of inflammation, 
spinal cord compression, adjacent segment degeneration, or force line changes 
were observed in subsequent MRI observations. Moreover, there were no 
pathological changes of the joint trajectory, joint motion range, stride length, 
or the stance phase ratio revealed in the kinematics analysis at 3, 6, 12, or 
18 months after CSDP implantation. Conclusion: We successfully designed a new 
cervical subtotal discectomy prosthesis and constructed an excellent non-human 
primate implantation model for the evaluation of subtotal disc replacement 
arthroplasty. Furthermore, we demonstrated that CSDP had outstanding safety, 
osseointegration capacity, and biomechanical stability in a non-human primate 
model, which might be a new choice in the treatment of cervical disc diseases 
and potentially change future outcomes of degenerative cervical diseases.

Copyright © 2022 Liu, Wo, Zhu, Huang, Zhou, Yang, Zheng, Zhou, Tan, Sun and Li.

DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2022.997877
PMCID: PMC9606661
PMID: 36312530

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.