1. Cureus. 2022 Sep 28;14(9):e29700. doi: 10.7759/cureus.29700. eCollection 2022 
Sep.

High Respiratory Tract Infection Rate in Patients With Familial Mediterranean 
Fever.

Hangül M(1), Akman S(2), Koyun M(2), Akbas SH(3).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Pulmonology, Akdeniz University Faculty of Medicine, Antalya, TUR.
(2)Pediatric Nephrology, Akdeniz University Faculty of Medicine, Antalya, TUR.
(3)Biochemistry, Akdeniz University Faculty of Medicine, Antalya, TUR.

Background Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is a systemic autoinflammatory 
disease genetically transmitted with the autosomal recessive trait. Although the 
pathogenesis is not certain, it is known that there is a deficiency in the 
regulation of the natural immune system. In this study, we aimed to search 
whether patients with FMF are predisposed to respiratory tract infections and 
whether mannose-binding lectin (MBL), as a natural immune system member, 
contributes to it. Methods Fifty FMF patients and 20 control groups were 
enrolled in the study. First, the frequencies of upper respiratory tract 
infection (URTI) within the previous year of both patient and control groups 
were evaluated retrospectively. Then, both groups were followed up for URTI for 
one year after starting the study. The patient's immunoglobulin A (IgA), IgM, 
IgG, C-reactive protein (CRP), hemogram parameters, and mannose-binding lectin 
were evaluated. Results The median frequency of annual URTI with a retrospective 
evaluation of patients was higher than that of the control group. Also, the 
median frequency of URTI with the prospective evaluation of patients with FMF 
was higher than the control group. The rate of patients with low serum IgG 
levels was higher in the patient group than in the control group. However, serum 
IgG levels of FMF patients with frequent URTI were not different from those 
without. The median MBL levels of both groups were similar (1312 vs. 1534 
ng/ml for the patient and control group, respectively). The rate of patients 
having low serum MBL levels was also similar between the groups. Conclusions In 
the present study, we found that patients with FMF had more URTI than healthy 
controls. However, the underlying cause is not fully explained. There is a need 
for further studies with a higher number of patients evaluating URTI in patients 
with FMF.

Copyright © 2022, Hangül et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.29700
PMCID: PMC9616174
PMID: 36321013

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.