1. Hypertension. 2023 Jan;80(1):138-146. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.122.20140. 
Epub 2022 Nov 4.

The Assembled Genome of the Stroke-Prone Spontaneously Hypertensive Rat.

Kalbfleisch TS(1), Hussien AbouEl Ela NA(1), Li K(1), Brashear WA(2), Kochan 
KJ(2), Hillhouse AE(2), Zhu Y(3), Dhande IS(3), Kline EJ(4), Hudson EA(4), 
Murphy TD(5), Thibaud-Nissen F(5), Smith ML(#)(4), Doris PA(#)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Science, College of Agriculture, Food, and 
Environment, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY (T.S.K., N.A.H., K.L.).
(2)Texas A&M Institute for Genome Sciences and Society, Texas A&M University, 
College Station, TX (W.A.B., K.J.K., A.E.H.).
(3)Center for Human Genetics, Brown Foundation Institute of Molecular Medicine, 
University of Texas McGovern School of Medicine, Houston, TX (Y.Z., I.S.D., 
P.A.D.).
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Louisville, 
Louisville, KY (E.J.K., E.A.H, M.L.S.).
(5)National Center for Biotechnology Information, National Library of Medicine, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD (T.D.M., F.T.-N.).
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: We report the creation and evaluation of a de novo assembly of the 
genome of the spontaneously hypertensive rat, the most widely used model of 
human cardiovascular disease.
METHODS: The genome is assembled from long read sequencing (PacBio HiFi and 
continuous long read data [CLR]) and scaffolded with long-range structural 
information obtained from Bionano optical maps and proximity ligation sequencing 
proximity analysis of the genome. The genome assembly was polished with Illumina 
short reads. Completeness of the assembly was investigated using Benchmarking 
Universal Single Copy Orthologs analysis. The genome assembly was also evaluated 
with the rat reference gene set, using NCBI automated protocols. We also 
generated orthogonal single molecule transcript sequence reads (Iso-Seq) from 8 
tissues and used them to validate the coding assembly, to annotate the assembly 
with RNA transcripts representing unique full length transcript isoforms for 
each gene and to determine whether divergences between RefSeq sequences and the 
assembly were attributable to assembly errors or polymorphisms.
RESULTS: The assembly analysis indicates that this assembly is comparable in 
contiguity and completeness to the current rat reference assembly, while the use 
of HiFi sequencing yields an assembly that is more correct at the single base 
level. Synteny analysis was performed to uncover the extent of synteny and the 
presence and distribution of chromosomal rearrangements between the reference 
and this assembly.
CONCLUSION: The resulting genome assembly is reference quality and captures 
significant structural variation.

DOI: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.122.20140
PMCID: PMC9814308
PMID: 36330812 [Indexed for MEDLINE]