1. Front Public Health. 2022 Oct 20;10:1003013. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2022.1003013. 
eCollection 2022.

The application of metagenomic next-generation sequencing for Angiostrongylus 
eosinophilic meningitis in a pediatric patient: A case report.

Liu J(1), Tao J(1), Chen W(1), Wang T(2)(3), Chen X(4), Shen M(5), Ou Q(4), 
Zhang Y(6), Ding Y(6), Wu J(7), Cheng X(8), Lu G(1), Yan G(1).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Intensive Care Unit, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, 
National Center for Children's Health, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Research and Development, Nanjing Geneseeq Technology Inc., 
Nanjing, China.
(3)Department of Research and Development, Nanjing Dinfectome Technology Inc., 
Nanjing, China.
(4)Geneseeq Research Institute, Nanjing Geneseeq Technology Inc., Nanjing, 
China.
(5)Department of Medical, Nanjing Dinfectome Technology Inc., Nanjing, China.
(6)Department of Neurology, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, National 
Center for Children's Health, Shanghai, China.
(7)Institute of Antibiotics, Huashan Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai, 
China.
(8)Department of Medical Microbiology and Parasitology, School of Basic Medical 
Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: Angiostrongylus eosinophilic meningitis (AEM) is a rare yet emerging 
disease caused by Angiostrongylus cantonensis infection. Its atypical symptoms 
may delay the diagnosis and cause fatal outcomes, especially in the early stages 
of infection and among children.
CASE PRESENTATION: Here we reported the use of metagenomic next-generation 
sequencing (mNGS) to facilitate the diagnosis and treatment of an 8-year-old boy 
with severe A. cantonensis infection. The mNGS tests consistently identified the 
infection of A. cantonensis prior to the detection by the immunologic method and 
confirmed it as AEM. Owing to the multidisciplinary team (MDT)-administrated 
treatments and close disease monitoring based on regular clinical tests and 
sequential mNGS tests, the patients eventually fully recovered from severe 
infectious conditions.
CONCLUSION: This case demonstrated the advantages of mNGS for early diagnosis of 
AEM in pediatric patients, highlighting its application for pan-pathogen 
detection, as well as disease monitoring for severe A. cantonensis infection.

Copyright © 2022 Liu, Tao, Chen, Wang, Chen, Shen, Ou, Zhang, Ding, Wu, Cheng, 
Lu and Yan.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2022.1003013
PMCID: PMC9631770
PMID: 36339212 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors TW, XChen, and QO are employees of 
Nanjing Geneseeq Technology Inc., China. Authors TW and MS are employees of 
Nanjing Dinfectome Technology Inc., China. The remaining authors declare that 
the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial 
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.