1. Biology (Basel). 2022 Nov 8;11(11):1632. doi: 10.3390/biology11111632.

Molecular Characterization of Secreted Factors and Extracellular 
Vesicles-Embedded miRNAs from Bone Marrow-Derived Mesenchymal Stromal Cells in 
Presence of Synovial Fluid from Osteoarthritis Patients.

Ragni E(1), Perucca Orfei C(1), Valli F(2), Zagra L(3), de Girolamo L(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratorio di Biotecnologie applicate all'Ortopedia, IRCCS Istituto 
Ortopedico Galeazzi, Via R. Galeazzi 4, I-20161 Milan, Italy.
(2)Chirurgia Articolare Sostitutiva e Chirurgia Ortopedica (CASCO), IRCCS 
Istituto Ortopedico Galeazzi, Via R. Galeazzi 4, I-20161 Milan, Italy.
(3)Hip Department, IRCCS Istituto Ortopedico Galeazzi, Via R. Galeazzi 4, 
I-20161 Milan, Italy.

Bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stromal cells (BMSCs)-based therapies show a 
great potential to manage inflammation and tissue degeneration in osteoarthritis 
(OA) patients. Clinical trials showed the ability to manage pain and activation 
of immune cells and allowed restoration of damaged cartilage. To date, a 
molecular fingerprint of BMSC-secreted molecules in OA joint conditions able to 
support clinical outcomes is missing; the lack of that molecular bridge between 
BMSC activity and clinical results hampers clinical awareness and translation 
into practice. In this study, BMSCs were cultured in synovial fluid (SF) 
obtained from OA patients and, for the first time, a thorough characterization 
of soluble factors and extracellular vesicles (EVs)-embedded miRNAs was 
performed in this condition. Molecular data were sifted through the sieve of 
molecules and pathways characterizing the OA phenotype in immune cells and joint 
tissues. One-hundred and twenty-five secreted factors and one-hundred and 
ninety-two miRNAs were identified. The combined action of both types of 
molecules was shown to, first, foster BMSCs interaction with the most important 
OA immune cells, such as macrophages and T cells, driving their switch towards 
an anti-inflammatory phenotype and, second, promote cartilage homeostasis 
assisting chondrocyte proliferation and attenuating the imbalance between 
destructive and protective extracellular matrix-related players. Overall, 
molecular data give an understanding of the clinical results observed in OA 
patients and can enable a faster translation of BMSC-based products into 
everyday clinical practice.

DOI: 10.3390/biology11111632
PMCID: PMC9687557
PMID: 36358333

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.