1. Antibiotics (Basel). 2022 Oct 27;11(11):1487. doi:
10.3390/antibiotics11111487.

Aquatic Environments as Hotspots of Transferable Low-Level Quinolone Resistance 
and Their Potential Contribution to High-Level Quinolone Resistance.

Miranda CD(1), Concha C(1), Godoy FA(2), Lee MR(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratorio de Patobiología Acuática, Departamento de Acuicultura, 
Universidad Católica del Norte, Coquimbo 1780000, Chile.
(2)Centro i~mar, Universidad de Los Lagos, Puerto Montt 5480000, Chile.

The disposal of antibiotics in the aquatic environment favors the selection of 
bacteria exhibiting antibiotic resistance mechanisms. Quinolones are 
bactericidal antimicrobials extensively used in both human and animal medicine. 
Some of the quinolone-resistance mechanisms are encoded by different bacterial 
genes, whereas others are the result of mutations in the enzymes on which those 
antibiotics act. The worldwide occurrence of quinolone resistance genes in 
aquatic environments has been widely reported, particularly in areas impacted by 
urban discharges. The most commonly reported quinolone resistance gene, qnr, 
encodes for the Qnr proteins that protect DNA gyrase and topoisomerase IV from 
quinolone activity. It is important to note that low-level resistance usually 
constitutes the first step in the development of high-level resistance, because 
bacteria carrying these genes have an adaptive advantage compared to the highly 
susceptible bacterial population in environments with low concentrations of this 
antimicrobial group. In addition, these genes can act additively with 
chromosomal mutations in the sequences of the target proteins of quinolones 
leading to high-level quinolone resistance. The occurrence of qnr genes in 
aquatic environments is most probably caused by the release of bacteria carrying 
these genes through anthropogenic pollution and maintained by the selective 
activity of antimicrobial residues discharged into these environments. This 
increase in the levels of quinolone resistance has consequences both in clinical 
settings and the wider aquatic environment, where there is an increased exposure 
risk to the general population, representing a significant threat to the 
efficacy of quinolone-based human and animal therapies. In this review the 
potential role of aquatic environments as reservoirs of the qnr genes, their 
activity in reducing the susceptibility to various quinolones, and the possible 
ways these genes contribute to the acquisition and spread of high-level 
resistance to quinolones will be discussed.

DOI: 10.3390/antibiotics11111487
PMCID: PMC9687057
PMID: 36358142

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.