1. J Biol Chem. 2022 Dec;298(12):102695. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2022.102695. Epub
2022  Nov 12.

Structures of a constitutively active mutant of human IDH3 reveal new insights 
into the mechanisms of allosteric activation and the catalytic reaction.

Chen X(1), Sun P(1), Liu Y(2), Shen S(3), Ma T(1), Ding J(4).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Shanghai Institute of Biochemistry 
and Cell Biology, Center for Excellence in Molecular Cell Science, University of 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Shanghai Institute of Biochemistry 
and Cell Biology, Center for Excellence in Molecular Cell Science, University of 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China; 
School of Life Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Shanghai Institute of Biochemistry 
and Cell Biology, Center for Excellence in Molecular Cell Science, University of 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China; 
School of Life Sciences, Shanghai University, Shanghai, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Shanghai Institute of Biochemistry 
and Cell Biology, Center for Excellence in Molecular Cell Science, University of 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China; 
School of Life Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, China; 
School of Life Science, Hangzhou Institute for Advanced Study, University of 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hangzhou, China. Electronic address: 
jpding@sibcb.ac.cn.

Human NAD-dependent isocitrate dehydrogenase or IDH3 (HsIDH3) catalyzes the 
decarboxylation of isocitrate into α-ketoglutarate in the tricarboxylic acid 
cycle. It consists of three types of subunits (α, β, and γ) and exists and 
functions as the (αβαγ)2 heterooctamer. HsIDH3 is regulated allosterically 
and/or competitively by numerous metabolites including CIT, ADP, ATP, and NADH. 
Our previous studies have revealed the molecular basis for the activity and 
regulation of the αβ and αγ heterodimers. However, the molecular mechanism for 
the allosteric activation of the HsIDH3 holoenzyme remains elusive. In this 
work, we report the crystal structures of the αβ and αγ heterodimers and the 
(αβαγ)2 heterooctamer containing an α-Q139A mutation in the clasp domain, which 
renders all the heterodimers and the heterooctamer constitutively active in the 
absence of activators. Our structural analysis shows that the α-Q139A mutation 
alters the hydrogen-bonding network at the heterodimer-heterodimer interface in 
a manner similar to that in the activator-bound αγ heterodimer. This alteration 
not only stabilizes the active sites of both αQ139Aβ and αQ139Aγ heterodimers in 
active conformations but also induces conformational changes of the 
pseudo-allosteric site of the αQ139Aβ heterodimer enabling it to bind 
activators. In addition, the αQ139AICT+Ca+NADβNAD structure presents the first 
pseudo-Michaelis complex of HsIDH3, which allows us to identify the key residues 
involved in the binding of cofactor, substrate, and metal ion. Our structural 
and biochemical data together reveal new insights into the molecular mechanisms 
for allosteric regulation and the catalytic reaction of HsIDH3.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2022.102695
PMCID: PMC9731866
PMID: 36375638 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.