1. Pharmacol Res. 2022 Dec;186:106550. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2022.106550. Epub 2022
 Nov 11.

Glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor agonists and neuroinflammation: 
Implications for neurodegenerative disease treatment.

Kopp KO(1), Glotfelty EJ(2), Li Y(3), Greig NH(4).

Author information:
(1)Drug Design & Development Section, Translational Gerontology Branch, 
Intramural Research Program National Institute on Aging, NIH, Baltimore, MD 
21224, United States. Electronic address: katherine.kopp@nih.gov.
(2)Drug Design & Development Section, Translational Gerontology Branch, 
Intramural Research Program National Institute on Aging, NIH, Baltimore, MD 
21224, United States; Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Drug Design & Development Section, Translational Gerontology Branch, 
Intramural Research Program National Institute on Aging, NIH, Baltimore, MD 
21224, United States.
(4)Drug Design & Development Section, Translational Gerontology Branch, 
Intramural Research Program National Institute on Aging, NIH, Baltimore, MD 
21224, United States. Electronic address: Greign@grc.nia.nih.gov.

Chronic, excessive neuroinflammation is a key feature of neurodegenerative 
diseases such as Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD). However, 
neuroinflammatory pathways have yet to be effectively targeted in clinical 
treatments for such diseases. Interestingly, increased inflammation and 
neurodegenerative disease risk have been associated with type 2 diabetes 
mellitus (T2DM) and insulin resistance (IR), suggesting that treatments that 
mitigate T2DM pathology may be successful in treating neuroinflammatory and 
neurodegenerative pathology as well. Glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) is an 
incretin hormone that promotes healthy insulin signaling, regulates blood sugar 
levels, and suppresses appetite. Consequently, numerous GLP-1 receptor (GLP-1R) 
stimulating drugs have been developed and approved by the US Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) and related global regulatory authorities for the treatment 
of T2DM. Furthermore, GLP-1R stimulating drugs have been associated with 
anti-inflammatory, neurotrophic, and neuroprotective properties in 
neurodegenerative disorder preclinical models, and hence hold promise for 
repurposing as a treatment for neurodegenerative diseases. In this review, we 
discuss incretin signaling, neuroinflammatory pathways, and the intersections 
between neuroinflammation, brain IR, and neurodegenerative diseases, with a 
focus on AD and PD. We additionally overview current FDA-approved incretin 
receptor stimulating drugs and agents in development, including unimolecular 
single, dual, and triple receptor agonists, and highlight those in clinical 
trials for neurodegenerative disease treatment. We propose that repurposing 
already-approved GLP-1R agonists for the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases 
may be a safe, efficacious, and cost-effective strategy for ameliorating AD and 
PD pathology by quelling neuroinflammation.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.phrs.2022.106550
PMCID: PMC9712272
PMID: 36372278 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest NHG is an inventor on 
patents related to incretin mimetics and has assigned them in entirety to the 
National Institute on Aging, NIH, US Government, and hence has no personal 
rights to these patents. The National Institute on Aging, NIH, has a Cooperative 
Research and Development Agreement with Peptron Inc. (S. Korea) to support the 
evaluation of GLP-1R agonists in neurodegenerative disorders. All other authors 
declare no conflict of interest.