1. Exp Eye Res. 2023 Jan;226:109306. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2022.109306. Epub 2022
Nov  11.

A tamoxifen-inducible Cre knock-in mouse for lens-specific gene manipulation.

Wei Z(1), Hao C(1), Chen JK(1), Gan L(2), Fan X(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular Biology and Anatomy, Medical College of Georgia at 
Augusta University, Augusta, GA, USA.
(2)Department of Neuroscience & Regenerative Medicine, Medical College of 
Georgia at Augusta University, Augusta, GA, USA.
(3)Department of Cellular Biology and Anatomy, Medical College of Georgia at 
Augusta University, Augusta, GA, USA. Electronic address: xfan@augusta.edu.

Mouse models are valuable tools in studying lens biology and biochemistry, and 
the Cre-loxP system is the most used technology for gene targeting in the lens. 
However, numerous genes are indispensable in lens development. The conventional 
knockout method either prevents lens formation or causes simultaneous cataract 
formation, hindering the studies of their roles in lens structure, growth, 
metabolism, and cataractogenesis during lens aging. An inducible Cre-loxP mouse 
line is an excellent way to achieve such a purpose. We established a 
lens-specific Cre ERT2 knock-in mouse (LCEK), an inducible mouse model for 
lens-specific gene targeting in a spatiotemporal manner. LCEK mice were created 
by in-frame infusion of a P2A-CreERT2 at the C-terminus of the last coding exon 
of the gene alpha A crystallin (Cryaa). LCEK mice express tamoxifen-inducible 
Cre recombinase uniquely in the lens. Through ROSAmT/mG and two endogenous genes 
(Gclc and Rbpj) targeting, we found no Cre recombinase leakage in the lens 
epithelium, but 50-80% leakage was observed in the lens cortex and nucleus. 
Administration of tamoxifen almost completely abolished target gene expression 
in both lens epithelium and cortex but only mildly enhanced gene deletion in the 
lens nucleus. Notably, no overt leakage of Cre activity was detected in 
developing LCEK lens when bred with mice carrying loxP floxed genes that are 
essential for lens development. This newly generated LCEK line will be a 
powerful tool to target genes in the lens for gene functions study in lens 
aging, posterior capsule opacification (PCO), and other areas requiring 
precision gene targeting.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exer.2022.109306
PMCID: PMC9839650
PMID: 36372215 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest ZW, CH, JC, 
LG, and XF declare they have no conflict of interest.