1. Front Pharmacol. 2022 Oct 28;13:962549. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2022.962549. 
eCollection 2022.

Extract of Mallotus oppositifolius (Geiseler) Müll. Arg. increased prefrontal 
cortex dendritic spine density and serotonin and attenuated 
para-chlorophenylalanine-aggravated aggressive and depressive behaviors in mice.

Kukuia KKE(1), Appiah F(2), Dugbartey GJ(3), Takyi YF(1), Amoateng P(3), 
Amponsah SK(1), Adi-Dako O(4), Koomson AE(1), Ayertey F(5), Adutwum-Ofosu KK(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Pharmacology, University of Ghana Medical School, 
College of Health Sciences, University of Ghana, Accra, Ghana.
(2)Department of Community Health and Medicine, School of Food and Health 
Sciences, Anglican University College of Technology, Nkoranza, Ghana.
(3)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, School of Pharmacy, College of 
Health Sciences, University of Ghana, Accra, Ghana.
(4)Department of Pharmaceutics and Microbiology, School of Pharmacy, College of 
Health Sciences, University of Ghana, Accra, Ghana.
(5)Department of Phytochemistry, Center for Plant Medicine Research, 
Mampong-Akuapem, Ghana.
(6)Department of Anatomy, University of Ghana Medical School, College of Health 
Sciences, University of Ghana, Accra, Ghana.

Background/Aim: Depression-related aggression is linked to serotonin (5-HT) and 
dendritic spine alterations. Although Mallotus oppositifolius extract (MOE) has 
potential for reducing this effect, its specific role remains uncertain. Herein, 
we evaluated this potential and associated alterations in the brain. Methods: A 
standard resident-intruder model of para-chlorophenylalanine (pCPA)-induced 
depression-associated aggression in male ICR mice was used. The resident mice 
received pCPA (300 mg/kg, i. p.) for 3 consecutive days while saline-treated 
mice served as negative control. The pCPA aggressive mice were subsequently 
treated orally with either MOE (30, 100, 300 mg/kg), fluoxetine (20 mg/kg), 
tryptophan (20 mg/kg) or saline (untreated pCPA group) for 28 days. Locomotor 
activity was assessed using open field test. Serotonin (5-HT) levels in mice 
brain and phytochemical fingerprint of MOE were determined by high performance 
liquid chromatography (HPLC) while gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) 
was used to identify constituents of MOE. Dendritic spine density and morphology 
were evaluated using Golgi-Cox staining technique and analyzed with ImageJ and 
Reconstruct software. Results: Administration of pCPA induced aggressive 
behavior in mice, evidenced by increased attack behaviors (increased number and 
duration of attacks), which positively correlated with squeaking and tail 
rattling. MOE treatment significantly reduced these characteristics of 
aggression in comparison with vehicle (non-aggressive) and untreated pCPA groups 
(p < 0.001), and also reduced social exploration behavior. Although the 
behavioral effects of MOE were comparable to those of fluoxetine and tryptophan, 
these effects were quicker compared to fluoxetine and tryptophan. Additionally, 
MOE also markedly increased 5-HT concentration and dendritic spine density in 
the prefrontal cortex relative to vehicle and untreated pCPA groups (p < 0.05). 
Interestingly, these behavioral effects were produced without compromising 
locomotor activity. GC-MS analysis of the MOE identified 17 known compounds from 
different chemical classes with anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, neuroprotective 
and antidepressant activities, which may have contributed to its anti-aggressive 
effect. Conclusion: MOE decreased depression-associated aggressive behavior in 
mice via increased 5-HT concentration and dendritic spine density in the 
prefrontal cortex. The MOE-mediated effects were faster than those of fluoxetine 
and tryptophan. Our finding suggests that MOE may have clinical promise in 
decreasing aggressive and depressive behaviors.

Copyright © 2022 Kukuia, Appiah, Dugbartey, Takyi, Amoateng, Amponsah, Adi-Dako, 
Koomson, Ayertey and Adutwum-Ofosu.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2022.962549
PMCID: PMC9649488
PMID: 36386158

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.