1. Epigenomes. 2022 Nov 3;6(4):40. doi: 10.3390/epigenomes6040040.

Regulation of Polyhomeotic Condensates by Intrinsically Disordered Sequences 
That Affect Chromatin Binding.

Kapur I(1)(2), Boulier EL(1), Francis NJ(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal, 110 Avenue des Pins Ouest, 
Montréal, QC H2W 1R7, Canada.
(2)Division of Experimental Medicine, McGill University, 1001 Decarie Boulevard, 
Montreal, QC H4A 3J1, Canada.
(3)Département de Biochimie et Médecine Moléculaire, Université de Montréal, 
2900 Boulevard Edouard-Montpetit, Montréal, QC H3T 1J4, Canada.

The Polycomb group (PcG) complex PRC1 localizes in the nucleus in condensed 
structures called Polycomb bodies. The PRC1 subunit Polyhomeotic (Ph) contains 
an oligomerizing sterile alpha motif (SAM) that is implicated in both PcG body 
formation and chromatin organization in Drosophila and mammalian cells. A 
truncated version of Ph containing the SAM (mini-Ph) forms phase-separated 
condensates with DNA or chromatin in vitro, suggesting that PcG bodies may form 
through SAM-driven phase separation. In cells, Ph forms multiple small 
condensates, while mini-Ph typically forms a single large nuclear condensate. We 
therefore hypothesized that sequences outside of mini-Ph, which are predicted to 
be intrinsically disordered, are required for proper condensate formation. We 
identified three distinct low-complexity regions in Ph based on sequence 
composition. We systematically tested the role of each of these sequences in Ph 
condensates using live imaging of transfected Drosophila S2 cells. Each sequence 
uniquely affected Ph SAM-dependent condensate size, number, and morphology, but 
the most dramatic effects occurred when the central, glutamine-rich 
intrinsically disordered region (IDR) was removed, which resulted in large Ph 
condensates. Like mini-Ph condensates, condensates lacking the glutamine-rich 
IDR excluded chromatin. Chromatin fractionation experiments indicated that the 
removal of the glutamine-rich IDR reduced chromatin binding and that the removal 
of either of the other IDRs increased chromatin binding. Our data suggest that 
all three IDRs, and functional interactions among them, regulate Ph condensate 
size and number. Our results can be explained by a model in which tight 
chromatin binding by Ph IDRs antagonizes Ph SAM-driven phase separation. Our 
observations highlight the complexity of regulation of biological condensates 
housed in single proteins.

DOI: 10.3390/epigenomes6040040
PMCID: PMC9680516
PMID: 36412795

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.