1. BMJ Open. 2022 Nov 23;12(11):e067447. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2022-067447.

Integrated Module of Multidimensional Omics for Peripheral Biomarkers (iMORE) in 
patients with major depressive disorder: rationale and design of a prospective 
multicentre cohort study.

Zheng Y(1), Zhang L(1), He S(2), Xie Z(3), Zhang J(4), Ge C(4), Sun G(4), Huang 
J(5)(6), Li H(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Shanghai Mental Health Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of 
Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Shanghai Mental Health Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Drug Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.
(4)Shanghai Green Valley Pharmaceutical Co Ltd, Shanghai, China.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, Shanghai Mental Health Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China lhlh_5@163.com 
jjhuang_att@163.com.
(6)Clinical Research Center for Mental Health, Shanghai Mental Health Center, 
Shanghai, China.
(7)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Psychotic Disorders, Shanghai Mental Health 
Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

INTRODUCTION: Major depressive disorder (MDD) represents a worldwide burden on 
healthcare and the response to antidepressants remains limited. Systems biology 
approaches have been used to explore the precision therapy. However, no reliable 
biomarker clinically exists for prognostic prediction at present. The objectives 
of the Integrated Module of Multidimensional Omics for Peripheral Biomarkers 
(iMORE) study are to predict the efficacy of antidepressants by integrating 
multidimensional omics and performing validation in a real-world setting. As 
secondary aims, a series of potential biomarkers are explored for biological 
subtypes.
METHODS AND ANALYSIS: iMore is an observational cohort study in patients with 
MDD with a multistage design in China. The study is performed by three mental 
health centres comprising an observation phase and a validation phase. A total 
of 200 patients with MDD and 100 healthy controls were enrolled. The 
protocol-specified antidepressants are selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors 
and serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors. Clinical visits (baseline, 4 
and 8 weeks) include psychiatric rating scales for symptom assessment and 
biospecimen collection for multiomics analysis. Participants are divided into 
responders and non-responders based on treatment response (>50% reduction in 
Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale). Antidepressants' responses are 
predicted and biomarkers are explored using supervised learning approach by 
integration of metabolites, cytokines, gut microbiomes and immunophenotypic 
cells. The accuracy of the prediction models constructed is verified in an 
independent validation phase.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: The study was approved by the ethics committee of 
Shanghai Mental Health Center (approval number 2020-87). All participants need 
to sign a written consent for the study entry. Study findings will be published 
in peer-reviewed journals.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT04518592.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2022. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2022-067447
PMCID: PMC9685190
PMID: 36418119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.