1. Nanomaterials (Basel). 2022 Nov 19;12(22):4076. doi: 10.3390/nano12224076.

Application of Peptides in Construction of Nonviral Vectors for Gene Delivery.

Yang Y(1), Liu Z(1), Ma H(1), Cao M(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Heavy Oil Processing, Department of Biological and 
Energy Chemical Engineering, College of Chemical Engineering, China University 
of Petroleum (East China), 66 Changjiang West Road, Qingdao 266580, China.

Gene therapy, which aims to cure diseases by knocking out, editing, correcting 
or compensating abnormal genes, provides new strategies for the treatment of 
tumors, genetic diseases and other diseases that are closely related to human 
gene abnormalities. In order to deliver genes efficiently to abnormal sites in 
vivo to achieve therapeutic effects, a variety of gene vectors have been 
designed. Among them, peptide-based vectors show superior advantages because of 
their ease of design, perfect biocompatibility and safety. Rationally designed 
peptides can carry nucleic acids into cells to perform therapeutic effects by 
overcoming a series of biological barriers including cellular uptake, endosomal 
escape, nuclear entrance and so on. Moreover, peptides can also be incorporated 
into other delivery systems as functional segments. In this review, we referred 
to the biological barriers for gene delivery in vivo and discussed several kinds 
of peptide-based nonviral gene vectors developed for overcoming these barriers. 
These vectors can deliver different types of genetic materials into targeted 
cells/tissues individually or in combination by having specific 
structure-function relationships. Based on the general review of peptide-based 
gene delivery systems, the current challenges and future perspectives in 
development of peptidic nonviral vectors for clinical applications were also put 
forward, with the aim of providing guidance towards the rational design and 
development of such systems.

DOI: 10.3390/nano12224076
PMCID: PMC9693978
PMID: 36432361

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.