1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2022 Nov 14;13:1031019. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2022.1031019. eCollection 2022.

Tandem mass tag-based proteomic profiling revealed potential therapeutic targets 
and mechanisms of liraglutide for the treatment of impaired glucose tolerance.

Guo Q(1), Han C(2), Xu Y(3), Chen Q(1), Han X(1), Zhao S(4), Li J(4), Lu H(1).

Author information:
(1)Diabetes Institute, Department of Endocrinology, Shuguang Hospital Affiliated 
to Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(2)Nephropathy Department, Affiliated Hospital of Shandong University of 
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Jinan, China.
(3)Department of Endocrinology, Shandong Hospital of Integrated Traditional 
Chinese and Western Medicine, Jinan, China.
(4)Medical School, Shandong University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Jinan, 
China.

OBJECTIVE: Based on the tandem mass tag (TMT) technique, our study investigated 
the potential therapeutic targets of Liraglutide (LIRA) on streptozotocin (STZ) 
induced impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) in rats and discuss the biological 
mechanism of the drug against IGT.
METHODS: 10 rats were randomly selected from 31 male wistar rats of specific 
pathogen free (SPF) grade as control group and fed with conventional chow, 
offered the remaining rats a high fat and high sugar (HFSD) diet combined with 
an intraperitoneal injection of STZ to establish the IGT model, and excluded 2 
non-model rats. Specifically, the model rats were randomly divided into Model 
group (n=10) and LIRA group (n=9). In addition, the LIRA group was 
subcutaneously injected with 0.06 mg/kg LIRA, during which the metabolic 
parameters including body weight and fasting blood glucose were recorded. After 
8 weeks, samples were taken under anesthesia. Then, the cell morphology was 
observed using HE staining, and immunofluorescence was performed on the 
pancreatic tissues of the three groups of rats. Besides, the expression of 
differential proteins in pancreatic tissues of the three groups of rats was 
determined by the TMT proteomic labeling. Subsequently, Gene Ontology (GO) and 
Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) biological function analysis were 
performed on the intersection of Model and LIRA differential proteins.
RESULTS: LIRA could not only significantly reduce blood glucose levels but also 
improve islet cell morphology and function in IGT rats. Among the differential 
proteins between the model group and the blank group, 44 were reversed after 
LIRA treatment, of which 14 were up-regulated, while 30 were down-regulated, 
including PPIF, MPRIP, CYP51, TXNL1, BCL-2, etc. (FC>1.1 or<0.909, P<0.05). 
According to the GO and KEGG analysis results, it was related to biological 
processes such as fatty acid metabolism and adipocyte generation, which involved 
multiple signaling pathways regulating the function of islet cells, such as 
MAPK, PI, Ras, FcγR, and unsaturated fatty acids, and pyruvate metabolism.
CONCLUSION: To sum up, LIRA participated in anti-IGT therapy through regulation 
of multiple target proteins and biological functions. This study is of great 
reference for further exploring the mechanism of action of LIRA at the protein 
level of IGT.

Copyright © 2022 Guo, Han, Xu, Chen, Han, Zhao, Li and Lu.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2022.1031019
PMCID: PMC9701722
PMID: 36452319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.