1. Rheumatol Immunol Res. 2022 Jul 6;3(2):69-76. doi: 10.2478/rir-2022-0012. 
eCollection 2022 Jun.

Inflammatory Bowel Disease: Focus on Enteropathic Arthritis and Therapy.

Barkhodari A(1), Lee KE(2), Shen M(3), Shen B(2), Yao Q(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy and Immunology, Stony Brook University 
Renaissance School of Medicine, Stony Brook, NY, USA.
(2)Center for Inflammatory Bowel Diseases, New York-Presbyterian/Columbia 
University Irving Medical Center, New York, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Chinese Academy of 
Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Beijing, China.

Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a chronic inflammatory disease primarily 
affecting the gastrointestinal (GI) tract and other organs. In this article, we 
provide a comprehensive review of IBD, particularly in the context of 
enteropathic arthritis and its therapeutic advances. Patients with IBD present 
with intestinal and extraintestinal manifestations (EIMs). Enteropathic 
arthritis or arthritis associated with IBD (Crohn's disease [CD] and ulcerative 
colitis [UC]) is the most common EIM and can involve both peripheral and axial 
joints with some overlaps. Furthermore, peripheral arthritis can be divided into 
two subcategories. Due to its varied inflammatory presentations and association 
with NOD2 mutations, CD can mimic other autoimmune and autoinflammatory 
diseases. Differential diagnosis should be extended to include another 
NOD2-associated disease, Yao syndrome. Therapy for IBD entails a myriad of 
medications and procedures, including various biologics targeting different 
pathways and Janus kinase (JAK) inhibitors. A better understanding of the 
therapeutic efficacy and mechanism of each drug aids in proper selection of more 
effective treatment for IBD and its associated inflammatory arthritis.

© 2022 Amir Barkhodari et al., published by Sciendo.

DOI: 10.2478/rir-2022-0012
PMCID: PMC9524814
PMID: 36465324

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Qingping Yao is an 
Editorial Board Member of the journal. The article was subject to the journal's 
standard procedures, with peer review handled independently of this editor and 
the related research groups.