1. Microbiol Spectr. 2023 Feb 14;11(1):e0343722. doi: 10.1128/spectrum.03437-22. 
Epub 2022 Dec 7.

A Novel and Efficient Platform for Discovering Noncanonical Quorum-Quenching 
Proteins.

Liao J(1), Li Z(1), Xiong D(1), Shen D(1), Wang L(2), Shao X(1), Li T(3), Qian 
G(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Plant Protection, Laboratory of Plant Immunity, Key Laboratory of 
Integrated Management of Crop Diseases and Pests, Nanjing Agricultural 
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, People's Republic of China.
(2)Medical College, China Three Gorges University, Yichang, People's Republic of 
China.
(3)Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural 
Sciences, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.

Quorum sensing (QS) is a well-known chemical signaling system responsible for 
intercellular communication that is widespread in bacteria. Acyl-homoserine 
lactone (AHL) is the most-studied QS signal. Previously, bacterially encoded 
AHL-degrading enzymes were considered to be canonical quorum-quenching proteins 
that have been widely used to control pathogenic infections. Here, we report a 
novel platform that enabled the efficient discovery of noncanonical AHL 
quorum-quenching proteins. This platform initially asked bacteriologists to 
carry out comparative genomic analyses between phylogenetically related 
AHL-producing and non-AHL-producing members to identify genes that are 
conservatively shared by non-AHL-producing members but absent in AHL-producing 
species. These candidate genes were then introduced into recombinant 
AHL-producing E. coli to screen for target proteins with the ability to block 
AHL production. Via this platform, we found that non-AHL-producing Lysobacter 
containing numerous environmentally ubiquitous members encoded a conserved 
glycosyltransferase-like protein Le4759, which was experimentally shown to be a 
noncanonical AHL-quenching protein. Le4759 could not directly degrade exogenous 
AHL but rather recognized and altered the activities of multiple AHL synthases 
through protein-protein interactions. This versatile capability enabled Le4759 
to block specific AHL synthase such as CarI from Pectobacterium carotovorum to 
reduce its protein abundance to suppress AHL synthesis, thereby impairing 
bacterial infection. Thus, this study provided bacteriologists with a unique 
platform to discover noncanonical quorum-quenching proteins that could be 
developed as promising next-generation drug candidates to overcome emerging 
bacterial antibiotic resistance. IMPORTANCE Targeting and blocking bacterial 
quorum sensing (QS), the process known as quorum quenching (QQ) is an effective 
mean to control bacterial infection and overcome the emerging antibiotic 
resistance. Previously, diverse QS signal-degradation enzymes are identified as 
canonical QQ proteins. Here, we provided a novel and universal platform that 
enabled to discover previously unidentified noncanonical QQ proteins that were 
unable to degrade acyl-homoserine lactone (AHL) but could block AHL generation 
by recognizing multiple AHL synthases via direct protein-protein interactions. 
Our findings are believed to trigger broad interest for bacteriologists to 
identify potentially widely distributed noncanonical QQ proteins that have great 
potential for developing next-generation anti-infectious drugs.

DOI: 10.1128/spectrum.03437-22
PMCID: PMC9927378
PMID: 36475880 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.