1. Front Genet. 2022 Nov 22;13:1069112. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.1069112. 
eCollection 2022.

Improving the prediction for the response to radiotherapy of clinical tumor 
samples by using combinatorial model of MicroRNA expression.

Tang C(1), Qi J(1), Wu Y(1), Luo L(1), Wang Y(1), Wu Y(1), Shi X(1).

Author information:
(1)Radiation and Cancer Biology Laboratory, Radiation Oncology Center, Chongqing 
Key Laboratory of Translational Research for Cancer Metastasis and 
Individualized Treatment, Chongqing Cancer Hospital, Chongqing University Cancer 
Hospital and Chongqing Cancer Institution, Chongqing, China.

Purpose: Radiation therapy (RT) is one of the main treatments for cancer. The 
response to radiotherapy varies widely between individuals and some patients 
have poor response to RT treatment due to tumor radioresistance. Stratifying 
patients according to molecular signatures of individual tumor characteristics 
can improve clinical treatment. In here, we aimed to use clinical and genomic 
databases to develop miRNA signatures that can predict response to radiotherapy 
in various cancer types. Methods: We analyzed the miRNAs profiles using tumor 
samples treated with RT across eight types of human cancers from TCGA database. 
These samples were divided into response group (S, n = 224) and progressive 
disease group (R, n = 134) based on RT response of tumors. To enhance the 
discrimination for S and R samples, the predictive models based on binary 
logistic regression were developed to identify the best combinations of multiple 
miRNAs. Results: The miRNAs differentially expressed between the groups S and R 
in each caner type were identified. Total 47 miRNAs were identified in eight 
cancer types (p values <0.05, t-test), including several miRNAs previously 
reported to be associated with radiotherapy sensitivity. Functional enrichment 
analysis revealed that epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), stem cell, 
NF-κB signal, immune response, cell death, cell cycle, and DNA damage response 
and DNA damage repair processes were significantly enriched. The 
cancer-type-specific miRNA signatures were identified, which consist of 2-13 of 
miRNAs in each caner type. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analyses 
showed that the most of individual miRNAs were effective in distinguishing 
responsive and non-responsive patients (the area under the curve (AUC) ranging 
from 0.606 to 0.889). The patient stratification was further improved by 
applying the combinatorial model of miRNA expression (AUC ranging from 0.711 to 
0.992). Also, five miRNAs that were significantly associated with overall 
survival were identified as prognostic miRNAs. Conclusion: These mRNA signatures 
could be used as potential biomarkers selecting patients who will benefit from 
radiotherapy. Our study identified a series of miRNA that were differentially 
expressed between RT good responders and poor responders, providing useful clues 
for further functional assays to demonstrate a possible regulatory role in 
radioresistance.

Copyright © 2022 Tang, Qi, Wu, Luo, Wang, Wu and Shi.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2022.1069112
PMCID: PMC9723130
PMID: 36482894

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.