1. Front Nutr. 2022 Nov 24;9:1068388. doi: 10.3389/fnut.2022.1068388. eCollection
 2022.

Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitory peptides and isoflavonoids from soybean 
[Glycine max (L.) Merr.].

Ramlal A(1), Nautiyal A(2), Baweja P(3), Kumar V(4), Mehta S(5), Mahto RK(1)(6), 
Tripathi S(7)(8), Shanmugam A(9), Pujari Mallikarjuna B(10), Raman P(11), Lal 
SK(1), Raju D(12), Rajendran A(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Genetics, Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR)-Indian 
Agricultural Research Institute (IARI), New Delhi, India.
(2)Department of Botany, Deshbandhu College, University of Delhi, New Delhi, 
India.
(3)Department of Botany, Maitreyi College, University of Delhi, New Delhi, 
India.
(4)Faculty of Agricultural Sciences, Institute of Applied Sciences and 
Humanities, GLA University, Mathura, Uttar Pradesh, India.
(5)Department of Botany, Hansraj College, University of Delhi, New Delhi, India.
(6)School of Biotechnology, Institute of Science, Banaras Hindu University 
(BHU), Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India.
(7)Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR)-National Institute for Plant 
Biotechnology (NIPB), New Delhi, India.
(8)Department of Botany, Institute of Science, Banaras Hindu University (BHU), 
Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India.
(9)Centre for Plant Breeding and Genetics, Tamil Nadu Agricultural University, 
Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, India.
(10)Division of Genetics, Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR)-Indian 
Agricultural Research Institute (IARI), Regional Research Centre, Dharwad, 
Karnataka, India.
(11)Department of Plant Breeding and Genetics, Tamil Nadu Rice Research 
Institute, Tamil Nadu Agricultural University, Aduthurai, Tamil Nadu, India.
(12)Division of Plant Physiology, Indian Council of Agricultural Research 
(ICAR)-Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi, India.

Angiotensin-converting enzyme I (ACE I) is a zinc-containing metallopeptidase 
involved in the renin-angiotensin system (RAAS) that helps in the regulation of 
hypertension and maintains fluid balance otherwise, which results in 
cardiovascular diseases (CVDs). One of the leading reasons of global deaths is 
due to CVDs. RAAS also plays a central role in maintaining homeostasis of the CV 
system. The commercial drugs available to treat CVDs possess several fatal side 
effects. Hence, phytochemicals like peptides having plant-based origin should be 
explored and utilized as alternative therapies. Soybean is an important 
leguminous crop that simultaneously possesses medicinal properties. Soybean 
extracts are used in many drug formulations for treating diabetes and other 
disorders and ailments. Soy proteins and its edible products such as tofu have 
shown potential inhibitory activity against ACE. Thus, this review briefly 
describes various soy proteins and products that can be used to inhibit ACE 
thereby providing new scope for the identification of potential candidates that 
can help in the design of safer and natural treatments for CVDs.

Copyright © 2022 Ramlal, Nautiyal, Baweja, Kumar, Mehta, Mahto, Tripathi, 
Shanmugam, Pujari Mallikarjuna, Raman, Lal, Raju and Rajendran.

DOI: 10.3389/fnut.2022.1068388
PMCID: PMC9730416
PMID: 36505231

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.