1. mSphere. 2023 Feb 21;8(1):e0046922. doi: 10.1128/msphere.00469-22. Epub 2022
Dec  12.

Genomic Characterization of Skin and Soft Tissue Streptococcus pyogenes Isolates 
from a Low-Income and a High-Income Setting.

Bah SY(1)(2), Keeley AJ(3), Armitage EP(2), Khalid H(1), Chaudhuri RR(1), 
Senghore E(2), Manneh J(2), Tilley L(4), Marks M(5)(6), Darboe S(2), Sesay 
AK(2), de Silva TI(3)(2), Turner CE(1); MRCG Strep A Study Group.

Author information:
(1)School of Biosciences, The Florey Institute, University of Sheffield, 
Sheffield, United Kingdom.
(2)The Medical Research Council, The Gambia, London School of Hygiene and 
Tropical Medicine, Serekunda, The Gambia.
(3)Department of Infection, Immunity & Cardiovascular Disease, The Florey 
Institute, University of Sheffield Medical School, Sheffield, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Sheffield Teaching Hospitals NHS Foundation 
Trust, Sheffield, United Kingdom.
(5)Clinical Research Department, Faculty of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, 
London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
(6)Hospital for Tropical Diseases, London, United Kingdom.

Streptococcus pyogenes is a leading cause of human morbidity and mortality, 
especially in resource-limited settings. The development of a vaccine against S. 
pyogenes is a global health priority to reduce the burden of postinfection 
rheumatic heart disease. To support this, molecular characterization of 
circulating S. pyogenes isolates is needed. We performed whole-genome analyses 
of S. pyogenes isolates from skin and soft tissue infections in Sukuta, The 
Gambia, a low-income country (LIC) in West Africa where there is a high burden 
of such infections. To act as a comparator to these LIC isolates, skin infection 
isolates from Sheffield, United Kingdom (a high-income country [HIC]), were also 
sequenced. The LIC isolates from The Gambia were genetically more diverse (46 
emm types in 107 isolates) than the HIC isolates from Sheffield (23 emm types in 
142 isolates), with only 7 overlapping emm types. Other molecular markers were 
shared, including a high prevalence of the skin infection-associated emm pattern 
D and the variable fibronectin-collagen-T antigen (FCT) types FCT-3 and FCT-4. 
Fewer of the Gambian LIC isolates carried prophage-associated superantigens 
(64%) and DNases (26%) than did the Sheffield HIC isolates (99% and 95%, 
respectively). We also identified streptococcin genes unique to 36% of the 
Gambian LIC isolates and a higher prevalence (48%) of glucuronic acid 
utilization pathway genes in the Gambian LIC isolates than in the Sheffield HIC 
isolates (26%). Comparison to a wider collection of HIC and LIC isolate genomes 
supported our findings of differing emm diversity and prevalence of bacterial 
factors. Our study provides insight into the genetics of LIC isolates and how 
they compare to HIC isolates. IMPORTANCE The global burden of rheumatic heart 
disease (RHD) has triggered a World Health Organization response to drive 
forward development of a vaccine against the causative human pathogen 
Streptococcus pyogenes. This burden stems primarily from low- and middle-income 
settings where there are high levels of S. pyogenes skin and soft tissue 
infections, which can lead to RHD. Our study provides much needed 
whole-genome-based molecular characterization of isolates causing skin 
infections in Sukuta, The Gambia, a low-income country (LIC) in West Africa 
where infection and RHD rates are high. Although we identified a greater level 
of diversity in these LIC isolates than in isolates from Sheffield, United 
Kingdom (a high-income country), there were some shared features. There were 
also some features that differed by geographical region, warranting further 
investigation into their contribution to infection. Our study has also 
contributed data essential for the development of a vaccine that would target 
geographically relevant strains.

DOI: 10.1128/msphere.00469-22
PMCID: PMC9942559
PMID: 36507654 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.