1. Cureus. 2022 Dec 9;14(12):e32361. doi: 10.7759/cureus.32361. eCollection 2022 
Dec.

Mitogen Activated Protein Kinase (MAPK) Activation, p53, and Autophagy 
Inhibition Characterize the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 
(SARS-CoV-2) Spike Protein Induced Neurotoxicity.

Kyriakopoulos AM(1), Nigh G(2), McCullough PA(3), Seneff S(4).

Author information:
(1)Infectious Disease, Nasco AD Biotechnology Laboratory, Piraeus, GRC.
(2)Naturopathy, Immersion Health, Portland, USA.
(3)Cardiology, Truth for Health Foundation, Tucson, USA.
(4)Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, USA.

The severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) spike protein 
and prions use common pathogenic pathways to induce toxicity in neurons. 
Infectious prions rapidly activate the p38 mitogen activated protein kinase 
(MAPK) pathway, and SARS-CoV-2 spike proteins rapidly activate both the p38 MAPK 
and c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase (JNK) pathways through toll-like receptor 
signaling, indicating the potential for similar neurotoxicity, causing prion and 
prion-like disease. In this review, we analyze the roles of autophagy 
inhibition, molecular mimicry, elevated intracellular p53 levels and reduced 
Wild-type p53-induced phosphatase 1 (Wip1) and dual-specificity phosphatase 
(DUSP) expression in neurons in the disease process. The pathways induced by the 
spike protein via toll-like receptor activation induce both the upregulation of 
PrPC (the normal isoform of the prion protein, PrP) and the expression of β 
amyloid. Through the spike-protein-dependent elevation of p53 levels via β 
amyloid metabolism, increased PrPC expression can lead to PrP misfolding and 
impaired autophagy, generating prion disease. We conclude that, according to the 
age of the spike protein-exposed patient and the state of their cellular 
autophagy activity, excess sustained activity of p53 in neurons may be a 
catalytic factor in neurodegeneration. An autoimmune reaction via molecular 
mimicry likely also contributes to neurological symptoms. Overall results 
suggest that neurodegeneration is in part due to the intensity and duration of 
spike protein exposure, patient advanced age, cellular autophagy activity, and 
activation, function and regulation of p53. Finally, the neurologically damaging 
effects can be cumulatively spike-protein dependent, whether exposure is by 
natural infection or, more substantially, by repeated mRNA vaccination.

Copyright © 2022, Kyriakopoulos et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.32361
PMCID: PMC9733976
PMID: 36514706

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.