1. Clin Chim Acta. 2023 Jan 15;539:170-174. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2022.12.011. Epub 
2022 Dec 16.

Newborn screening for Cerebrotendinous Xanthomatosis: A retrospective biomarker 
study using both flow-injection and UPLC-MS/MS analysis in 20,000 newborns.

Vaz FM(1), Jamal Y(2), Barto R(2), Gelb MH(3), DeBarber AE(4), Wevers RA(5), 
Nelen MR(6), Verrips A(7), Bootsma AH(2), Bouva MJ(8), Kleise N(9), van der Zee 
W(9), He T(9), Salomons GS(10), Huidekoper HH(11).

Author information:
(1)Amsterdam UMC Location University of Amsterdam, Departments of Clinical 
Chemistry and Pediatrics, Laboratory Genetic Metabolic Diseases, Emma Children's 
Hospital, Meibergdreef 9, Amsterdam, the Netherlands; Amsterdam Gastroenterology 
Endocrinology Metabolism, Inborn Errors of Metabolism, Amsterdam, the 
Netherlands; Core Facility Metabolomics, Amsterdam UMC Location University of 
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands; United for Metabolic Diseases, the 
Netherlands. Electronic address: f.m.vaz@amsterdamumc.nl.
(2)Amsterdam UMC Location University of Amsterdam, Departments of Clinical 
Chemistry and Pediatrics, Laboratory Genetic Metabolic Diseases, Emma Children's 
Hospital, Meibergdreef 9, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(3)Department of Chemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(4)University Shared Resource and Department of Chemical Physiology and 
Biochemistry, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, OR, USA.
(5)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Translational Metabolic Laboratory, 
Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(6)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, 6500 HB 
Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(7)Department of Neurology, Canisius Wilhelmina Hospital, Nijmegen, the 
Netherlands.
(8)Center for Health Protection, National Institute for Public Health and the 
Environment, Bilthoven, the Netherlands.
(9)PerkinElmer / Wallac Oy, Mustionkatu 6, 20750 Turku, Finland.
(10)Amsterdam UMC Location University of Amsterdam, Departments of Clinical 
Chemistry and Pediatrics, Laboratory Genetic Metabolic Diseases, Emma Children's 
Hospital, Meibergdreef 9, Amsterdam, the Netherlands; Amsterdam Gastroenterology 
Endocrinology Metabolism, Inborn Errors of Metabolism, Amsterdam, the 
Netherlands; Core Facility Metabolomics, Amsterdam UMC Location University of 
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands; United for Metabolic Diseases, the 
Netherlands.
(11)Department of Pediatrics, Center for Lysosomal and Metabolic Diseases, 
Erasmus MC University Medical Center, Rotterdam, the Netherlands; United for 
Metabolic Diseases, the Netherlands.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Cerebrotendinous Xanthomatosis (CTX) is a treatable 
disorder of bile acid synthesis caused by deficiency of 27-sterol hydroxylase 
-encoded by CYP27A1- leading to gastrointestinal and progressive 
neuropsychiatric symptoms. Biochemically, CTX is characterized by accumulation 
of the bile alcohol cholestanetetrol glucuronide (GlcA-tetrol) and the 
deficiency of tauro-chenodeoxycholic acid (t-CDCA) and 
tauro-trihydroxycholestanoic acid (t-THCA).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: To ascertain the feasibility of CTX newborn screening 
(NBS) we performed a study with deidentified Dutch dried blood spots using 
reagents and equipment that is frequently used in NBS laboratories. 20,076 
deidentified newborn blood spots were subjected to flow-injection (FIA)-MS/MS 
and UPLC-MS/MS analysis to determine the concentration of GlcA-tetrol and 
calculate the GlcA-tetrol/t-CDCA and t-THCA/GlcA-tetrol ratios.
RESULTS: Using UPLC-MS/MS analysis both GlcA-tetrol concentration and/or 
metabolite ratios GlcA-tetrol/t-CDCA proved to be informative biomarkers; 
newborn DBS results did not overlap with those of the CTX patients. For 
FIA-MS/MS, GlcA-tetrol also was an excellent marker but when using the 
combination of the GlcA-tetrol/t-CDCA and t-THCA/GlcA-tetrol ratios also did not 
yield any screen positives.
CONCLUSION: Newborn screening for CTX using only metabolite ratios following the 
measurement of three CTX biomarkers is possible using either FIA-MS/MS or 
UPLC-MS/MS, which paves the way for introduction of CTX NBS.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cca.2022.12.011
PMCID: PMC10387442
PMID: 36529270 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.