1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2022 Nov 30;12:1063407. doi: 
10.3389/fcimb.2022.1063407. eCollection 2022.

Targeting malaria parasites with novel derivatives of azithromycin.

Burns AL(1)(2), Sleebs BE(3)(4), Gancheva M(1), McLean KT(1), Siddiqui G(5), 
Venter H(6), Beeson JG(7)(8)(9)(10), O'Handley R(11)(12), Creek DJ(5), Ma S(13), 
Frölich S(1), Goodman CD(14), McFadden GI(14), Wilson DW(1)(7)(12).

Author information:
(1)Research Centre for Infectious Diseases, School of Biological Sciences, the 
University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, Australia.
(2)School of Science and Technology, the University of New England, Armidale, 
NSW, Australia.
(3)ACRF Chemical Biology Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical 
Research, Parkville, VIC, Australia.
(4)Department of Medical Biology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, 
Australia.
(5)Drug Delivery Disposition and Dynamics, Monash University, Parkville, VIC, 
Australia.
(6)Health and Biomedical Innovation, Clinical and Health Sciences, University of 
South Australia, Adelaide, SA, Australia.
(7)Healthy Mothers, Healthy Babies Program, Burnet Institute, Melbourne, VIC, 
Australia.
(8)Department of Medicine, University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, Australia.
(9)Central Clinical School, Monash University, Melbourne, Vic, Australia.
(10)Department of Microbiology, Monash University, Melbourne, Vic, Australia.
(11)School of Animal and Veterinary Science, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, 
SA, Australia.
(12)Australian Centre for Antimicrobial Resistance Ecology, The University of 
Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, Australia.
(13)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Key Laboratory of Chemical Biology, 
Ministry of Education, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Shandong University, 
Jinan, China.
(14)School of BioSciences, University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, Australia.

INTRODUCTION: The spread of artemisinin resistant Plasmodium falciparum 
parasites is of global concern and highlights the need to identify new 
antimalarials for future treatments. Azithromycin, a macrolide antibiotic used 
clinically against malaria, kills parasites via two mechanisms: 'delayed death' 
by inhibiting the bacterium-like ribosomes of the apicoplast, and 
'quick-killing' that kills rapidly across the entire blood stage development.
METHODS: Here, 22 azithromycin analogues were explored for delayed death and 
quick-killing activities against P. falciparum (the most virulent human malaria) 
and P. knowlesi (a monkey parasite that frequently infects humans).
RESULTS: Seventeen analogues showed improved quick-killing against both 
Plasmodium species, with up to 38 to 20-fold higher potency over azithromycin 
after less than 48 or 28 hours of treatment for P. falciparum and P. knowlesi, 
respectively. Quick-killing analogues maintained activity throughout the blood 
stage lifecycle, including ring stages of P. falciparum parasites (<12 hrs 
treatment) and were >5-fold more selective against P. falciparum than human 
cells. Isopentenyl pyrophosphate supplemented parasites that lacked an 
apicoplast were equally sensitive to quick-killing analogues, confirming that 
the quick killing activity of these drugs was not directed at the apicoplast. 
Further, activity against the related apicoplast containing parasite Toxoplasma 
gondii and the gram-positive bacterium Streptococcus pneumoniae did not show 
improvement over azithromycin, highlighting the specific improvement in 
antimalarial quick-killing activity. Metabolomic profiling of parasites 
subjected to the most potent compound showed a build-up of non-haemoglobin 
derived peptides that was similar to chloroquine, while also exhibiting 
accumulation of haemoglobin-derived peptides that was absent for chloroquine 
treatment.
DISCUSSION: The azithromycin analogues characterised in this study expand the 
structural diversity over previously reported quick-killing compounds and 
provide new starting points to develop azithromycin analogues with quick-killing 
antimalarial activity.

Copyright © 2022 Burns, Sleebs, Gancheva, McLean, Siddiqui, Venter, Beeson, 
O’Handley, Creek, Ma, Frölich, Goodman, McFadden and Wilson.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2022.1063407
PMCID: PMC9748569
PMID: 36530422 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.