1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Dec 14;23(24):15866. doi: 10.3390/ijms232415866.

Exacerbation of Cisplatin Cellular Toxicity by Regulation of the Human Organic 
Cation Transporter 2 through Angiotensin II.

Kantauskaite M(1)(2), Hucke A(1)(3), Snieder B(1), Ciarimboli G(1).

Author information:
(1)Experimental Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine D, University 
Hospital Münster, 48149 Münster, Germany.
(2)Department of Nephrology, Medical Faculty, University Hospital Düsseldorf, 
Heinrich-Heine-University Düsseldorf, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany.
(3)Institute of Physiology II, University of Münster, 48149 Münster, Germany.

Cisplatin (CDDP) is an efficient chemotherapeutic drug, whose use is associated 
with the development of serious undesired toxicities, such as nephrotoxicity. 
The human organic cation transporter 2 (hOCT2), which is highly expressed in the 
basolateral membrane domain of renal proximal tubules seems to play an important 
role in the development of CDDP nephrotoxicity. The role of angiotensin II (AII) 
signaling by binding to the AII receptor type 1 (AT1R) in the development and/or 
progression of CDDP nephrotoxicity is debated. Therefore, in this work, the 
regulation of hOCT2 activity by AII and its role in the development of CDDP 
cellular toxicity was investigated. To do this, hOCT2 was overexpressed by viral 
transduction in Madin-Darby Canine Kidney (MDCK) cells which were cultivated on 
a filter. This approach allows the separation of an apical and a basolateral 
membrane domain, which are easily accessible for experimentation. In this 
system, hOCT2 was mainly localized on the basolateral plasma membrane domain of 
the cells. The transporter was functional since a specific uptake of the 
fluorescent organic cation 4-(4-(dimethylamino)styryl)-N-methylpyridinium (ASP+) 
with an affinity (Km) of 35 µM was only detectable by the addition of ASP+ to 
the basolateral compartment of hOCT2 expressing MDCK (hOCT2-MDCK) cells. 
Similarly, CDDP toxicity was evident mainly by CDDP addition to the basolateral 
compartment of hOCT2-MDCK cells cultivated on a filter. The addition of 1 nM AII 
stimulated hOCT2 function via PKC activation and worsened CDDP cytotoxicity via 
binding to AT1R. Therefore, the AII signaling pathway may be implicated in the 
development and/or progression of CDDP nephrotoxicity. This signaling pathway 
may be a target for protective interventions for example by blocking AT1R in the 
kidneys. However, it should be further investigated whether these findings 
obtained in a cell culture system may have translational relevance for the 
clinical situation. For toxicity experiments, a 100 µM CDDP concentration was 
used, which is high but allows us to identify clearly toxic effects due to 
hOCT2. In summary, down-regulation of hOCT2 activity by the inhibition of the 
AII signaling pathway may protect against CDDP nephrotoxicity.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms232415866
PMCID: PMC9779897
PMID: 36555515 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.