1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2022 Dec 16;101(50):e32132. doi: 
10.1097/MD.0000000000032132.

Analyzing network pharmacology and molecular docking to clarify Duhuo Jisheng 
decoction potential mechanism of osteoarthritis mitigation.

Cui Z(1), Zhang W(1), Le X(2), Song K(1), Zhang C(1), Zhao W(3), Sha L(2).

Author information:
(1)Changchun University of Chinese Medicine, Changchun, Jilin, China.
(2)The Third Affiliated Hospital of the Changchun University of Chinese 
Medicine, Changchun, Jilin, China.
(3)Affiliated Hospital of the Changchun University of Chinese Medicine, 
Changchun, Jilin, China.

As a classic remedy for treating Osteoarthritis (OA), Duhuo Jisheng decoction 
has successfully treated countless patients. Nevertheless, its specific 
mechanism is unknown. This study explored the active constituents of Duhuo 
Jisheng decoction and the potential molecular mechanisms for treating OA using a 
Network Pharmacology approaches. Screening active components and corresponding 
targets of Duhuo parasite decoction by traditional Chinese medicine systems 
pharmacology database and analysis platform database. Combining the following 
databases yielded OA disease targets: GeneCards, DrugBank, PharmGkb, Online 
Mendelian Inheritance in Man, and therapeutic target database. The interaction 
analysis of the herb-active ingredient-core target network and protein-protein 
interaction protein network was constructed by STRING platform and Cytoscape 
software. Gene ontology functional enrichment analysis and Kyoto Encyclopedia of 
Genes and Genomes pathway enrichment analysis were carried out. PyMOL and other 
software were used to verify the molecular docking between the essential active 
components and the core target. 262 active ingredients were screened, and their 
main components were quercetin, kaempferol, wogonin, baicalein, and 
beta-carotene. 108 intersection targets of disease and drug were identified, and 
their main components were RELA, FOS, STAT3, MAPK14, MAPK1, JUN, and ESR1. Gene 
ontology analysis showed that the key targets were mainly involved in biological 
processes such as response to lipopolysaccharide, response to xenobiotic 
stimulus, and response to nutrient levels. The results of Kyoto Encyclopedia of 
Genes and Genomes analysis show that the signal pathways include the AGE - RAGE 
signaling pathway, IL - 17 signaling pathway, TNF signaling pathway, and 
Toll - like receptor signaling pathway. Molecular docking showed that the main 
active components of Duhuo parasitic decoction had a good bonding activity with 
the key targets in treating OA. Duhuo Jisheng decoction can reduce the 
immune-inflammatory reaction, inhibit apoptosis of chondrocytes, strengthen 
proliferation and repair of chondrocytes and reduce the inflammatory response in 
a multi-component-multi-target-multi-pathway way to play a role in the treatment 
of OA.

Copyright © 2022 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000032132
PMCID: PMC9771196
PMID: 36550856 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.