1. J Clin Exp Hematop. 2022;62(4):253-257. doi: 10.3960/jslrt.22024.

Combined use of pathological and genomic alteration analyses for the diagnosis 
of gray zone lymphoma.

Nishimura K(1), Miyazaki K(1), Suzuki K(1), Hachiya K(1)(2), Tono Y(1), Tamaru 
S(1), Imai H(3), Miyoshi H(4), Ohshima K(4), Okugawa Y(5), Tawara I(1), 
Yamaguchi M(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Mie University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Tsu, Japan.
(2)Department of Hematology, Matsusaka Chuo General Hospital, Matsusaka, Japan.
(3)Pathology Division, Mie University Hospital, Tsu, Japan.
(4)Department of Pathology, Kurume University School of Medicine, Kurume, Japan.
(5)Department of Genomic Medicine, Mie University Hospital, Tsu, Japan.
(6)Department of Hematological Malignancies, Mie University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Tsu, Japan.

Histiocytic sarcoma (HS) is a rare malignancy showing morphologic and 
immunophenotypic features of histiocytes. HS has morphologic overlap with many 
other diseases, including various kinds of lymphomas. Gray zone lymphoma (GZL) 
is a rare B-cell lymphoma subtype characterized by overlapping features between 
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and classic Hodgkin lymphoma. The histologic 
overlap with other diverse diseases of HS and the pathological diversity of GZL 
make it difficult to render a diagnosis. A 44-year-old woman who was initially 
diagnosed with HS was diagnosed with GZL after reexamination, including a 
genetic alteration test. After 6 cycles of brentuximab vedotin, doxorubicin, 
vinblastine, and dacarbazine, she achieved a complete response. Genomic 
alteration assessment may be useful for the accurate diagnosis of malignant 
lymphomas, which are difficult to diagnose, such as GZL.

DOI: 10.3960/jslrt.22024
PMCID: PMC9898712
PMID: 36575002 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST Komei Nishimura, Kazutaka 
Suzuki, Kensuke Hachiya, and Yasutaka Tono received research grants from Asahi 
Kasei Pharma, Astellas Pharma, Chugai Pharma, Daiichi Sankyo, Eisai, Pfizer, 
Kyowa Kirin, MSD, Nippon Shinyaku, Nippon Kayaku, Otsuka Pharmaceutical, 
Sumitomo Dainippon Pharma, Takeda Pharmaceutical, and Teijin Pharma. Kana 
Miyazaki received research grants from Asahi Kasei Pharma, Astellas Pharma, 
Chugai Pharma, Daiichi Sankyo, Eisai, Pfizer, Kyowa Kirin, MSD, Nippon Shinyaku, 
Nippon Kayaku, Otsuka Pharmaceutical, Sumitomo Dainippon Pharma, Takeda 
Pharmaceutical, Teijin Pharma, and Zenyaku, and received honoraria from Eisai, 
Chugai Pharma, Celgene, Janssen, Nippon Shinyaku, Takeda Pharmaceutical, Kyowa 
Kirin, SymBio, AstraZeneca, Bristol Myers Squibb, Meiji Seika Pharma, and 
AbbVie. Motoko Yamaguchi received research grants from Chugai Pharma, Genmab, 
AstraZeneca, Kyowa Kirin, Eisai, Nippon Shinyaku, Takeda Pharmaceutical, Otsuka 
Pharmaceutical, Astellas Parma, Daiichi Sankyo, Pfizer, Teijin, MSD, Sumitomo 
Dainippon, and Nippon Kayaku, and received honoraria from Chugai Pharma, Ono 
Pharmaceutical, Takeda Pharmaceutical, Eisai, MSD, Kyowa Kirin, Celgene, Otsuka 
Pharmaceutical, Janssen, and Sumitomo Dainippon. Isao Tawara received research 
grants from Asahi Kasei Pharma, Astellas Pharma, Chugai Pharma, Daiichi Sankyo, 
Eisai, Pfizer, Kyowa Kirin, MSD, Nippon Shinyaku, Nippon Kayaku, Otsuka 
Pharmaceutical, Sumitomo Dainippon Pharma, Takeda Pharmaceutical, and Teijin 
Pharma, and received honoraria from AbbVie, Alexion Pharmaceutical, Asahi Kasei 
Pharma, Astellas Pharma, AstraZeneca, Bristol Myers Squibb, Chugai Pharma, CSL 
Behring, Eisai, Janssen, Kyowa Kirin, Nippon Shinyaku, Novartis, Novo Nordisk 
Pharma, Otsuka Pharmaceutical, Pfizer, Sanofi, Sumitomo Dainippon Pharma, 
SymBio, and Takeda Pharmaceutical. Satoshi Tamaru, Hiroshi Imai, Hiroaki 
Miyoshi, Koichi Ohshima, and Yoshinaga Okugawa have no conflict of interest.