1. Front Behav Neurosci. 2022 Dec 8;16:1022713. doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2022.1022713. 
eCollection 2022.

Temporal scaling and computing time in neural circuits: Should we stop watching 
the clock and look for its gears?

De Corte BJ(1)(2), Akdoğan B(1)(2), Balsam PD(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Columbia University, New York, NY, United States.
(2)Division of Developmental Neuroscience, New York State Psychiatric Institute, 
New York, NY, United States.
(3)Department of Neuroscience and Behavior, Barnard College, New York, NY, 
United States.

Timing underlies a variety of functions, from walking to perceiving causality. 
Neural timing models typically fall into one of two categories-"ramping" and 
"population-clock" theories. According to ramping models, individual neurons 
track time by gradually increasing or decreasing their activity as an event 
approaches. To time different intervals, ramping neurons adjust their slopes, 
ramping steeply for short intervals and vice versa. In contrast, according to 
"population-clock" models, multiple neurons track time as a group, and each 
neuron can fire nonlinearly. As each neuron changes its rate at each point in 
time, a distinct pattern of activity emerges across the population. To time 
different intervals, the brain learns the population patterns that coincide with 
key events. Both model categories have empirical support. However, they often 
differ in plausibility when applied to certain behavioral effects. Specifically, 
behavioral data indicate that the timing system has a rich computational 
capacity, allowing observers to spontaneously compute novel intervals from 
previously learned ones. In population-clock theories, population patterns map 
to time arbitrarily, making it difficult to explain how different patterns can 
be computationally combined. Ramping models are viewed as more plausible, 
assuming upstream circuits can set the slope of ramping neurons according to a 
given computation. Critically, recent studies suggest that neurons with 
nonlinear firing profiles often scale to time different intervals-compressing 
for shorter intervals and stretching for longer ones. This "temporal scaling" 
effect has led to a hybrid-theory where, like a population-clock model, 
population patterns encode time, yet like a ramping neuron adjusting its slope, 
the speed of each neuron's firing adapts to different intervals. Here, we argue 
that these "relative" population-clock models are as computationally plausible 
as ramping theories, viewing population-speed and ramp-slope adjustments as 
equivalent. Therefore, we view identifying these "speed-control" circuits as a 
key direction for evaluating how the timing system performs computations. 
Furthermore, temporal scaling highlights that a key distinction between 
different neural models is whether they propose an absolute or relative 
time-representation. However, we note that several behavioral studies suggest 
the brain processes both scales, cautioning against a dichotomy.

Copyright © 2022 De Corte, Akdoğan and Balsam.

DOI: 10.3389/fnbeh.2022.1022713
PMCID: PMC9773401
PMID: 36570701

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.