1. Redox Biol. 2023 Feb;59:102591. doi: 10.1016/j.redox.2022.102591. Epub 2022
Dec  24.

Itaconate promotes a wound resolving phenotype in pro-inflammatory macrophages.

Maassen S(1), Coenen B(1), Ioannidis M(1), Harber K(2), Grijpstra P(1), Van den 
Bossche J(2), van den Bogaart G(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Immunology, Groningen Biomolecular Sciences and 
Biotechnology, University of Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(2)Department of Molecular Cell Biology and Immunology, Amsterdam Cardiovascular 
Sciences, Amsterdam Gastroenterology Endocrinology Metabolism, Amsterdam 
Institute for Infection and Immunity, Cancer Centre Amsterdam, Amsterdam UMC, 
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(3)Department of Molecular Immunology, Groningen Biomolecular Sciences and 
Biotechnology, University of Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands; Department 
of Medical Biology and Pathology, University Medical Center Groningen, 
Groningen, the Netherlands. Electronic address: G.van.den.bogaart@rug.nl.

Pathological conditions associated with dysfunctional wound healing are 
characterized by impaired remodelling of extracellular matrix (ECM), increased 
macrophage infiltration, and chronic inflammation. Macrophages also play an 
important role in wound healing as they drive wound closure by secretion of 
molecules like transforming growth factor beta-1 (TGF-β). As the functions of 
macrophages are regulated by their metabolism, local administration of small 
molecules that alter this might be a novel approach for treatment of 
wound-healing disorders. Itaconate is a tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle-derived 
metabolite that has been associated with resolution of macrophage-mediated 
inflammation. However, its effects on macrophage wound healing functions are 
unknown. In this study, we investigated the effects of the membrane-permeable 
4-octyl itaconate (4-OI) derivative on ECM scavenging by cultured human blood 
monocyte-derived macrophages (hMDM). We found that 4-OI reduced signalling of 
p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) induced by the canonical immune 
stimulus lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Likely as a consequence of this, the 
production of the inflammatory mediators like tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α and 
cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 were also reduced. On the transcriptional level, 4-OI 
increased expression of the gene coding for TGF-β (TGFB1), whereas expression of 
the collagenase matrix metalloprotease-8 (MMP8) was reduced. Furthermore, 
surface levels of the anti-inflammatory marker CD36, but not CD206 and CD11c, 
were increased in these cells. To directly investigate the effect of 4-OI on 
scavenging of ECM by macrophages, we developed an assay to measure uptake of 
fibrous collagen. We observed that LPS promoted collagen uptake and that this 
was reversed by 4-OI-induced signaling of nuclear factor erythroid 2-related 
factor 2 (NRF2), a regulator of cellular resistance to oxidative stress and the 
reduced glycolytic capacity of the macrophage. These results indicate that 4-OI 
lowers macrophage inflammation, likely promoting a more wound-resolving 
phenotype.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.redox.2022.102591
PMCID: PMC9800195
PMID: 36574745 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest All authors 
declare that they have no conflicts of interest.