1. PLoS Genet. 2022 Dec 27;18(12):e1010557. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1010557. 
eCollection 2022 Dec.

Leveraging pleiotropy to discover and interpret GWAS results for 
sleep-associated traits.

Chun S(1)(2)(3)(4), Akle S(1)(3)(5), Teodosiadis A(3), Cade BE(6)(7)(8), Wang 
H(6)(7)(8), Sofer T(6)(9), Evans DS(10), Stone KL(10), Gharib SA(11)(12), 
Mukherjee S(13)(14), Palmer LJ(15), Hillman D(16)(17), Rotter JI(18), Hanis 
CL(19), Stamatoyannopoulos JA(3)(20), Redline S(6)(7)(21), Cotsapas 
C(3)(8)(22)(23), Sunyaev SR(1)(3)(24).

Author information:
(1)Division of Genetics, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, 
United States of America.
(2)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts, United States of America.
(3)Altius Institute for Biomedical Sciences, Seattle, Washington, United States 
of America.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, 
United States of America.
(5)Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(6)Division of Sleep and Circadian Disorders, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(7)Division of Sleep Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, 
United States of America.
(8)Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States 
of America.
(9)Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United 
States of America.
(10)California Pacific Medical Center Research Institute, San Francisco, 
California, United States of America.
(11)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, University of 
Washington, Seattle, Washington, United States of America.
(12)Computational Medicine Core at Center for Lung Biology, University of 
Washington, Seattle, Washington, United States of America.
(13)Respiratory and Sleep Services, Southern Adelaide Local Health Network, 
Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.
(14)Adelaide Institute for Sleep Health, Flinders University, Adelaide, South 
Australia, Australia.
(15)School of Public Health, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, 
Australia.
(16)Centre for Sleep Science, University of Western Australia, Perth, Australia.
(17)Department of Pulmonary Physiology and Sleep Medicine, Sir Charles Gairdner 
Hospital, Perth, Australia.
(18)The Institute for Translational Genomics and Population Sciences, Department 
of Pediatrics, The Lundquist Institute for Biomedical Innovation at Harbor-UCLA 
Medical Center, Torrance, California, United States of America.
(19)Department of Epidemiology, Human Genetics and Environmental Sciences, 
School of Public Health, University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, 
Houston, Texas, United States of America.
(20)Departments of Medicine and Genome Sciences, University of Washington, 
Seattle, Washington, United States of America.
(21)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, Beth Israel 
Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(22)Department of Neurology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, 
United States of America.
(23)Department of Genetics, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, 
United States of America.
(24)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts, United States of America.

Genetic association studies of many heritable traits resulting from 
physiological testing often have modest sample sizes due to the cost and burden 
of the required phenotyping. This reduces statistical power and limits discovery 
of multiple genetic associations. We present a strategy to leverage pleiotropy 
between traits to both discover new loci and to provide mechanistic hypotheses 
of the underlying pathophysiology. Specifically, we combine a colocalization 
test with a locus-level test of pleiotropy. In simulations, we show that this 
approach is highly selective for identifying true pleiotropy driven by the same 
causative variant, thereby improves the chance to replicate the associations in 
underpowered validation cohorts and leads to higher interpretability. Here, as 
an exemplar, we use Obstructive Sleep Apnea (OSA), a common disorder diagnosed 
using overnight multi-channel physiological testing. We leverage pleiotropy with 
relevant cellular and cardio-metabolic phenotypes and gene expression traits to 
map new risk loci in an underpowered OSA GWAS. We identify several pleiotropic 
loci harboring suggestive associations to OSA and genome-wide significant 
associations to other traits, and show that their OSA association replicates in 
independent cohorts of diverse ancestries. By investigating pleiotropic loci, 
our strategy allows proposing new hypotheses about OSA pathobiology across many 
physiological layers. For example, we identify and replicate the pleiotropy 
across the plateletcrit, OSA and an eQTL of DNA primase subunit 1 (PRIM1) in 
immune cells. We find suggestive links between OSA, a measure of lung function 
(FEV1/FVC), and an eQTL of matrix metallopeptidase 15 (MMP15) in lung tissue. We 
also link a previously known genome-wide significant peak for OSA in the 
hexokinase 1 (HK1) locus to hematocrit and other red blood cell related traits. 
Thus, the analysis of pleiotropic associations has the potential to assemble 
diverse phenotypes into a chain of mechanistic hypotheses that provide insight 
into the pathogenesis of complex human diseases.

Copyright: © 2022 Chun et al. This is an open access article distributed under 
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1010557
PMCID: PMC9829185
PMID: 36574455 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.