1. BMJ Open. 2022 Sep 1;12(9):e063071. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2022-063071.

Multicentre single-arm phase II trial evaluating the safety and effiCacy of 
Panitumumab and iRinOtecan in NeoRAS Wild-type mEtaStatic colorectal cancer 
patientS (C-PROWESS trial): study protocol.

Osumi H(1), Ishizuka N(2), Takashima A(3), Kumekawa Y(4), Nakano D(5), Shiozawa 
M(6), Denda T(7), Sawada R(8), Ouchi K(9), Wakatsuki T(1), Narikazu B(10), Kato 
K(3), Yamaguchi K(1), Shinozaki E(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Cancer Institute Hospital Gastroenterology 
Center, Koto-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Clinical Trial Planning and Management, Cancer Institute 
Hospital Gastroenterology Center, Koto-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Gastrointestinal Medical Oncology, National Cancer Center 
Hospital, Chuo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Divison of Gastrointestinal Oncology, Saitama Cancer Center, Saitama, Japan.
(5)Department of Surgery, Tokyo Metropolitan Cancer and Infectious Diseases 
Center Komagome Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Department of Surgery, Kanagawa Cancer Center, Kanagawa, Japan.
(7)Division of Gastroenterology, Chiba Cancer Center, Chiba, Japan.
(8)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Jikei University Hospital, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(9)Department of Medical Oncology, Tohoku University Hospital, Miyagi, Japan.
(10)Department of Medical Oncology and General Medicine, The University of 
Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(11)Department of Gastroenterology, Cancer Institute Hospital Gastroenterology 
Center, Koto-ku, Tokyo, Japan eiji.shinozaki@jfcr.or.jp.

INTRODUCTION: A new concept of 'NeoRAS wild-type (WT)', which means conversion 
of RAS status from RAS mutant to RAS WT after treatment, has been reported. 
Previous observational and proof-of-concept studies have demonstrated the 
efficacy of epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitors in patients with NeoRAS 
WT metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC). Moreover, posthoc biomarker analyses of 
these studies have suggested that not only the RAS status in the circulating 
tumour DNA (ctDNA) but also other gene mutational status may be useful as 
biomarkers of epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitors for NeoRAS WT mCRC.
METHODS AND ANALYSIS: This trial is a multicentre, single-arm, phase II trial to 
assess the efficacy and safety of panitumumab plus irinotecan therapy for 
patients with NeoRAS mCRC. The key eligibility criteria include RAS mutant mCRC 
initially proven in tumour tissue refractory or intolerant to fluoropyrimidine, 
oxaliplatin and irinotecan; RAS WT in ctDNA (defined as plasma mutant allele 
frequencies of all RAS ≤0.1%) within 28 days before enrolment and Eastern 
Cooperative Oncology Group performance status ≤2. The primary endpoint is the 
response rate. The target sample size is 30 patients. Biomarker analyses are 
planned to be performed using next-generation sequencing-based ctDNA analysis.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: This study was approved by the certified review board 
of National Cancer Center Hospital. The main results of the trial will be 
presented in international meetings and in medical journals.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: s031210565.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2022. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2022-063071
PMCID: PMC9438189
PMID: 36581973 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: KY has received honoraria 
from Daiichi-Sankyo.