1. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2022 Dec 16;9:1067760. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2022.1067760. 
eCollection 2022.

Myocardial strain analysis of echocardiography based on deep learning.

Deng Y(1)(2), Cai P(3), Zhang L(1), Cao X(1)(2), Chen Y(1), Jiang S(1), Zhuang 
Z(4), Wang B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Shantou University 
Medical College, Shantou, China.
(2)Department of Preventive Medicine, Shantou University Medical College, 
Shantou, China.
(3)Ultrasound Division, The First Affiliated Hospital of Shantou University 
Medical College, Shantou, China.
(4)Department of Electronic Information Engineering, College of Engineering, 
Shantou University, Shantou, China.

BACKGROUND: Strain analysis provides more thorough spatiotemporal signatures for 
myocardial contraction, which is helpful for early detection of cardiac 
insufficiency. The use of deep learning (DL) to automatically measure myocardial 
strain from echocardiogram videos has garnered recent attention. However, the 
development of key techniques including segmentation and motion estimation 
remains a challenge. In this work, we developed a novel DL-based framework for 
myocardial segmentation and motion estimation to generate strain measures from 
echocardiogram videos.
METHODS: Three-dimensional (3D) Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) was developed 
for myocardial segmentation and optical flow network for motion estimation. The 
segmentation network was used to define the region of interest (ROI), and the 
optical flow network was used to estimate the pixel motion in the ROI. We 
performed a model architecture search to identify the optimal base architecture 
for motion estimation. The final workflow design and associated hyperparameters 
are the result of a careful implementation. In addition, we compared the DL 
model with a traditional speck tracking algorithm on an independent, external 
clinical data. Each video was double-blind measured by an ultrasound expert and 
a DL expert using speck tracking echocardiography (STE) and DL method, 
respectively.
RESULTS: The DL method successfully performed automatic segmentation, motion 
estimation, and global longitudinal strain (GLS) measurements in all 
examinations. The 3D segmentation has better spatio-temporal smoothness, average 
dice correlation reaches 0.82, and the effect of target frame is better than 
that of previous 2D networks. The best motion estimation network achieved an 
average end-point error of 0.05 ± 0.03 mm per frame, better than previously 
reported state-of-the-art. The DL method showed no significant difference 
relative to the traditional method in GLS measurement, Spearman correlation of 
0.90 (p < 0.001) and mean bias -1.2 ± 1.5%.
CONCLUSION: In conclusion, our method exhibits better segmentation and motion 
estimation performance and demonstrates the feasibility of DL method for 
automatic strain analysis. The DL approach helps reduce time consumption and 
human effort, which holds great promise for translational research and precision 
medicine efforts.

Copyright © 2022 Deng, Cai, Zhang, Cao, Chen, Jiang, Zhuang and Wang.

DOI: 10.3389/fcvm.2022.1067760
PMCID: PMC9800889
PMID: 36588559

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.