1. Mol Genet Genomic Med. 2023 Apr;11(4):e2131. doi: 10.1002/mgg3.2131. Epub 2023
 Jan 6.

Bi-allelic loss of function variant in the NRCAM gene is associated with 
motor-predominant axonal polyneuropathy; the second report.

Elahi Z(1)(2), Soveyzi M(1), Nafissi S(3)(4), Nilipour Y(5), Goleyjani Moghadam 
M(1), Keshavarz E(6), Kariminejad A(2), Najmabadi H(1)(2), Fattahi Z(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Neuromuscular Research Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, 
Iran.
(4)Department of Neurology, Shariati Hospital, Tehran University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(5)Pediatric Pathology Research Center, Research Institute for Children's 
Health, Mofid Children Hospital, School of Medicine, Shahid Beheshti University 
of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(6)Department of Radiology, Mahdiyeh Hospital, Shahid Beheshti University of 
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

BACKGROUND: The role of biallelic variants in the NRCAM gene underlying a 
neurodevelopmental disorder has been defined recently. The phenotype is mainly 
recognized by varying severity of global developmental delay/intellectual 
disability, hypotonia, spasticity, and peripheral neuropathy.
METHODS: Here, we describe a patient with an initial diagnosis of 
motor-predominant axonal polyneuropathy or a form of distal SMA. Whole-exome 
sequencing (WES), in parallel with WES-based CNV detection and assessment of 
homozygosity runs, was performed to identify this patient's possible genetic 
cause.
RESULTS: Whole exome sequencing revealed a homozygous variant, c.73C > T 
(p.Gln25*), in the NRCAM gene, while the patient manifests a mild range of 
phenotypes compared to NRCAM-related disorder. He presented only 
motor-predominant axonal polyneuropathy with no other signs of central nervous 
system involvement.
CONCLUSIONS: This study is the second report of an association between biallelic 
NRCAM gene variants and a Mendelian disorder. The obtained clinical data, 
together with the molecular findings in this patient, expands the clinical and 
molecular spectrum of NRCAM-related disorder and highlights its phenotypic 
complexity. Although patients with loss of function variants in this gene have 
previously presented severe clinical features, we show that type of the 
pathogenic variant does not necessarily determine the severity of this 
phenotype.

© 2023 The Authors. Molecular Genetics & Genomic Medicine published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/mgg3.2131
PMCID: PMC10094081
PMID: 36606341 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: We have no conflict of interest to declare.