1. Mult Scler Relat Disord. 2023 Feb;70:104494. doi: 10.1016/j.msard.2022.104494.
 Epub 2022 Dec 30.

CD19+ B cell values predict the increase of anti-SARS CoV2 antibodies in 
fingolimod-treated and COVID-19-vaccinated patients with multiple sclerosis.

Schiavetti I(1), Barcellini L(2), Lapucci C(3), Tazza F(2), Cellerino M(2), 
Capello E(3), Franciotta D(3), Inglese M(4), Sormani MP(5), Uccelli A(4), Laroni 
A(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Sciences, Section of Biostatistics, University of 
Genova, Genova 16132, Italy.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Genetics, Maternal 
and Child University of Genova, Largo Daneo 3, Genova, Italy.
(3)IRCCS Ospedale Policlinico San Martino, Largo Rosanna Benzi, Genova, Italy.
(4)Department of Neuroscience, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Genetics, Maternal 
and Child University of Genova, Largo Daneo 3, Genova, Italy; IRCCS Ospedale 
Policlinico San Martino, Largo Rosanna Benzi, Genova, Italy.
(5)Department of Health Sciences, Section of Biostatistics, University of 
Genova, Genova 16132, Italy; IRCCS Ospedale Policlinico San Martino, Largo 
Rosanna Benzi, Genova, Italy.
(6)Department of Neuroscience, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Genetics, Maternal 
and Child University of Genova, Largo Daneo 3, Genova, Italy; IRCCS Ospedale 
Policlinico San Martino, Largo Rosanna Benzi, Genova, Italy. Electronic address: 
alice.laroni@unige.it.

BACKGROUND: Treatment with fingolimod for multiple sclerosis (MS) reduces the 
efficacy of COVID-19 vaccination. The aim of this exploratory study was to 
evaluate whether main lymphocyte subsets and demographic features correlated to 
the subsequent increase in anti-SARS-CoV2 antibodies following the third dose of 
COVID-19 vaccination in fingolimod-treated MS patients.
METHODS: This was a prospective single-center observational exploratory study 
including a subgroup of adult patients with MS (pwMS) in treatment with 
fingolimod who underwent COVID-19 vaccination. The association of anti-SARS-CoV2 
antibody levels (reported as the Log10 of the difference between the post and 
pre third dose levels) with the total number and percentage of CD3+ T and CD19+ 
B was assessed by a linear regression model adjusted for age and sex.
RESULTS: We found that peripheral blood CD19+ B lymphocytes before the third 
dose of vaccination in pwMS treated with fingolimod predict the subsequent 
increase of anti-SARS-CoV2 antibodies.
CONCLUSION: This work suggests that evaluating the percentage of CD19+ B cells 
may be important to identify patients at risk of not producing SARS-CoV-2 
antibodies, with possible reduced protection from COVID-19.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.msard.2022.104494
PMCID: PMC9800324
PMID: 36603292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest I. Schiavetti 
has acted as a paid consultant to Associazione Commissione Difesa Vista, Eye 
Pharma, Hippocrates Research, and D.M.G Italia. L. Barcellini: no disclosures. 
C. Lapucci has received Travel grant from Novartis, Roche and Merck. F. Tazza(:) 
no disclosures. M. Cellerino reports no disclosures. E. Capello reports no 
disclosures. D. Franciotta received personal honoraria from Merck, Biogen, 
Sanofi-Genzyme, Roche. M. Inglese received grants NIH, NMSS, FISM; received fees 
for consultation from Roche, Genzyme, Merck, Biogen and Novartis. M. P. Sormani, 
received consulting fees from Merck, Biogen, Novartis, Sanofi, Roche, Geneuro, 
GSK, Medday, and Immunic. A. Uccelli, received grants (to his Institution) from 
FISM, Biogen, Roche, Alexion, Merck Serono; participated on a Data Safety 
Monitoring Board or Advisory Board (to his Institution) for BD, Biogen, Iqvia, 
Sanofi, Roche, Alexion, Bristol Myers Squibb. A. Laroni received fees for 
consultation from Roche, Genzyme, Merck, Biogen, Novartis, Bristol-Myers Squibb.