1. Front Immunol. 2022 Dec 20;13:1056477. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.1056477. 
eCollection 2022.

Explaining the polarized macrophage pool during murine allergic lung 
inflammation.

Draijer C(1), Florez-Sampedro L(1)(2)(3), Reker-Smit C(4), Post E(4), van Dijk 
F(1)(3), Melgert BN(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)GRIAC- Groningen Research Institute for Asthma and COPD, University Medical 
Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands.
(2)Department of Chemical and Pharmaceutical Biology, University of Groningen, 
Groningen, Netherlands.
(3)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, University of Groningen, Groningen, 
Netherlands.
(4)Department of Pharmacokinetics, Toxicology and Targeting, University of 
Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands.

INTRODUCTION: Differentially polarized macrophages, especially YM1+ and MHCII+ 
macrophages, play an important role in asthma development. The origin of these 
polarized macrophages has not been elucidated yet. We therefore aimed to 
investigate how proliferation, monocyte recruitment, and/or switching of 
polarization states contribute to this specific pool of polarized interstitial 
and alveolar macrophages during development of house dust mite (HDM)-induced 
allergic lung inflammation in mice.
METHODS: Male and female mice were first treated intranasally with PKH26 to 
label lung-resident macrophages and were then exposed to either HDM or 
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) for two weeks. Different myeloid immune cell 
types were quantified in lung tissue and blood using flow cytometry.
RESULTS: We found that macrophage polarization only starts up in the second week 
of HDM exposures. Before this happened, unpolarized alveolar and interstitial 
macrophages transiently increased in HDM-exposed mice. This transient increase 
was mostly local proliferation of alveolar macrophages, while interstitial 
macrophages also contained unlabeled macrophages suggesting monocyte 
contribution. After two weeks of exposures, the number of interstitial and 
alveolar macrophages was similar between HDM and PBS-exposed mice, but the 
distribution of polarization states was remarkably different. HDM-exposed mice 
selectively developed YM1+ alveolar macrophages and MHCII-hi interstitial 
macrophages while nonpolarized macrophages were lost compared to PBS-exposed 
mice.
DISCUSSION: In this HDM model we have shown that development of a polarized 
macrophage pool during allergic inflammation is first dependent on proliferation 
of nonpolarized tissue-resident macrophages with some help of infiltrating 
unlabeled cells, presumably circulating monocytes. These nonpolarized 
macrophages then acquire their polarized phenotype by upregulating YM1 on 
alveolar macrophages and MHCII on interstitial macrophages. This novel 
information will help us to better understand the role of macrophages in asthma 
and designing therapeutic strategies targeting macrophage functions.

Copyright © 2022 Draijer, Florez-Sampedro, Reker-Smit, Post, van Dijk and 
Melgert.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.1056477
PMCID: PMC9807907
PMID: 36605195 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.