1. Cancers (Basel). 2022 Dec 31;15(1):287. doi: 10.3390/cancers15010287.

Circulating Tumor Cells as Biomarkers for Renal Cell Carcinoma: Ready for Prime 
Time?

Couto-Cunha A(1), Jerónimo C(2)(3), Henrique R(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Integrated Master in Medicine, School of Medicine & Biomedical Sciences, 
University of Porto (ICBAS-UP), Rua Jorge Viterbo Ferreira 228, 4050-313 Porto, 
Portugal.
(2)Department of Pathology and Molecular Immunology, School of Medicine & 
Biomedical Sciences, University of Porto (ICBAS-UP), Rua Jorge Viterbo Ferreira 
228, 4050-313 Porto, Portugal.
(3)Department of Pathology & Cancer Biology & Epigenetics Group-Research Center 
of IPO Porto (CI-IPOP)/RISE@CI-IPOP (Health Research Network), Portuguese 
Oncology Institute of Porto (IPO-Porto)/Porto Comprehensive Cancer Centre Raquel 
Seruca (P.CCC Raquel Seruca), Rua Dr. António Bernardino de Almeida, 4200-072 
Porto, Portugal.

Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is among the 15 most common cancers worldwide, with 
rising incidence. In most cases, this is a silent disease until it reaches 
advance stages, demanding new effective biomarkers in all domains, from 
detection to post-therapy monitoring. Circulating tumor cells (CTC) have the 
potential to provide minimally invasive information to guide assessment of the 
disease's aggressiveness and therapeutic strategy, representing a special pool 
of neoplastic cells which bear metastatic potential. In some tumor models, CTCs' 
enumeration has been associated with prognosis, but there is a largely 
unexplored potential for clinical applicability encompassing screening, 
diagnosis, early detection of metastases, prognosis, response to therapy and 
monitoring. Nonetheless, lack of standardization and high cost hinder the 
translation into clinical practice. Thus, new methods for collection and 
analysis (genomic, proteomic, transcriptomic, epigenomic and metabolomic) are 
needed to ascertain the role of CTC as a RCC biomarker. Herein, we provide a 
critical overview of the most recently published data on the role and clinical 
potential of CTCs in RCC, addressing their biology and the molecular 
characterization of this remarkable set of tumor cells. Furthermore, we 
highlight the existing and emerging techniques for CTC enrichment and detection, 
exploring clinical applications in RCC. Notwithstanding the notable progress in 
recent years, the use of CTCs in a routine clinical scenario of RCC patients 
requires further research and technological development, enabling multimodal 
analysis to take advantage of the wealth of information they provide.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers15010287
PMCID: PMC9818240
PMID: 36612281

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.