1. ESMO Open. 2023 Feb;8(1):100773. doi: 10.1016/j.esmoop.2022.100773. Epub 2023 
Jan 10.

Twelve ESMO Congress 2022 breakthroughs: practicing oncologists' perceptions and 
potential application on presented data.

van Halteren HK(1), Bennouna J(2), Brasiuniene B(3), Tomas AJC(4), Trinidad 
AMG(5), Indini A(6), Liposits G(7), Pellegrino B(8), Popovic L(9), Tan A(10), 
Vidra R(11), Strijbos M(12); Practising Oncologists Working Group.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Adrz Hospital, Goes, The Netherlands. 
Electronic address: hk.vanhalteren@adrz.nl.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, Hospital Foch, Suresnes, France.
(3)Department of Medical Oncology, National Cancer Institute of Lithuania, 
Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology, General University Hospital of Valencia, 
Valencia, Spain; Medical Oncology Unit, General Hospital of Requena, Valencia, 
Spain.
(5)Section of Medical Oncology, Dagupan Doctors Villaflor Memorial Hospital, 
Dagupan City, The Philippines.
(6)Unit of Medical Oncology, Department of Oncology, Ospedale di Circolo e 
Fondazione Macchi, ASST Settelaghi, Varese, Italy.
(7)Department of Clinical Research, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, 
Denmark.
(8)Medical Oncology and Breast Unit, University Hospital of Parma, Parma; 
Department of Medical Oncology, University of Parma, Parma, Italy.
(9)Oncology Institute of Vojvodina, Faculty of Medicine, University of Novi Sad, 
Novi Sad, Serbia.
(10)Department of Medical Oncology, Waikato Hospital, Hamilton, New Zealand.
(11)Department of Medical Oncology, Regional Institute of Gastroenterology and 
Hepatology "Prof. Dr. Octavian Fodor", Cluj-Napoca, Romania; UBBMed, 
Babes-Bolyai University, Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
(12)Department of Medical Oncology, GZA Hospitals, Wilrijk, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: During the European Society for Medical Oncology (ESMO) Congress 
2022, outcome data of a great number of clinical trials were presented. For the 
attending medical oncologist, it is important to structure these data in a way 
that facilitates a trade-off between treatment burden and benefit.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: To illustrate this, we carried out a narrative 
non-systematic review of 12 selected oral presentations with potential impact on 
future daily practice, focusing on trial methodology, possible study flaws, 
reported clinical benefit and implementability.
RESULTS: The selected presentations encompassed 10 phase III trials, 1 
randomized phase II trial and 1 phase II trial. In 7 out of 12 trials, quality 
of life and/or patient-reported outcomes had been evaluated. None of the trials, 
which reported progression-free survival (PFS) data, provided information, which 
could exclude informative censoring bias. In none of the trials reporting 
overall survival (OS) data, potential flaws due to undesirable crossover and 
imbalance between study groups regarding post-progression treatments were 
addressed. For the 11 reviewed randomized trials, the ESMO-Magnitude of Clinical 
Benefit Scale (MCBS) grade achieved with the new intervention was calculated 
based on the presented data. The MCBS grade varied from 1 to 5.
CONCLUSIONS: Our review confirms the high-quality standard of current cancer 
research and the clinical relevance of the research questions answered. However, 
during presentation of PFS and/or OS data, factors known to affect PFS and OS 
analysis should be structurally addressed. In order to keep cancer care 
affordable and sustainable, it could be considered to include an ESMO-MCBS 
threshold in the drug appraisal process of regulatory authorities.

Copyright © 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.esmoop.2022.100773
PMCID: PMC9843205
PMID: 36634532 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure JB reports honorarium for advisory 
boards and educational symposium: AMGEN, AstraZeneca, Bristol-Myers Squibb, 
Daiichi Sankyo, Roche Ltd, MSD, Servier. BB invited speaker, expert honoraria: 
Lilly, AstraZeneca; non-financial interest: member of scientific committee of 
NSGO-CTU, gynecological cancer group of EORTC. AJCT reports honorarium for 
speaker engagement and writing engagement: BMS, Fundacion ECO, Pierre-Fabre, 
Sanofi; meeting expenses: MSD, Novartis, Sanofi. AI declares honoraria for 
lectures and travel accommodations: BMS, MSD, Novartis, Pierre Fabre Pharma, 
AstraZeneca, Sanofi. BP received honoraria from Novartis, Lilly and BMS. LP 
reports honorarium for advisory boards, speaker engagement and writing 
engagement: Amgen, Astellas, BMS, Janssen, Merck, MSD, Novartis, Pfizer, Roche, 
Sandoz, Sanofi Genzyme, Takeda; local PI: G1 Therapeutics, Infinity 
Pharmaceuticals, Karyopharm, MEI Pharma, MSD, Pfizer, Roche, Seattle Genetics; 
trial chair: Roche; consultant: ClinQuestAdria. RV reports honorarium for 
advisory boards and speaker engagement: Accord, BMS, Egis, Eli Lilly, Pfizer, 
Roche, Sandoz, Servier Pharma; local PI: Amgen; coordinating PI: BMS, Merck. MS 
reports speaker’s fee: Ipsen, Janssen; advisory role: Janssen, Merck, Roche; 
travel grants: Ipsen. All other authors have declared no conflicts of interest.