1. J Virol. 2023 Jan 31;97(1):e0145522. doi: 10.1128/jvi.01455-22. Epub 2023 Jan 
12.

Isolation and Characterization of Distinct Rotavirus A in Bat and Rodent Hosts.

Kishimoto M(1), Kajihara M(2), Tabata K(1), Itakura Y(1), Toba S(1)(3), Ozono 
S(4), Sato Y(4), Suzuki T(4), Ito N(5), Changula K(6), Qiu Y(7), Mori-Kajihara 
A(2), Eto Y(2), Harima H(7)(8), Mwizabi D(9), Hang'ombe BM(6)(10), Hall 
WW(11)(12)(13), Takada A(2)(12)(14)(15), Orba Y(1)(12), Sawa 
H(1)(7)(12)(13)(15)(16), Sasaki M(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular Pathobiology, International Institute for Zoonosis 
Control, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.
(2)Division of Global Epidemiology, International Institute for Zoonosis 
Control, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.
(3)Drug Discovery and Disease Research Laboratory, Shionogi & Co., Ltd., Osaka, 
Japan.
(4)Department of Pathology, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(5)Joint Graduate School of Veterinary Sciences, Gifu University, Gifu, Japan.
(6)Department of Para-clinical Studies, School of Veterinary and Medicine, 
University of Zambia, Lusaka, Zambia.
(7)Division of International Research Promotion, International Institute for 
Zoonosis Control, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.
(8)Laboratory of Veterinary Public Health, Faculty of Agriculture, Tokyo 
University of Agriculture and Technology, Tokyo, Japan.
(9)Department of National Parks and Wildlife, the Ministry of Tourism and Arts, 
Lusaka, Zambia.
(10)Africa Center of Excellence for Infectious Diseases of Humans and Animals, 
University of Zambia, Lusaka, Zambia.
(11)National Virus Reference Laboratory, School of Medicine, University College 
Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.
(12)International Collaboration Unit, International Institute for Zoonosis 
Control, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.
(13)Global Virus Network, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(14)Department of Disease Control, School of Veterinary Medicine, the University 
of Zambia, Lusaka, Zambia.
(15)One Health Research Center, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.
(16)Institute for Vaccine Research and Development (HU-IVReD), Hokkaido 
University, Sapporo, Japan.

Rotavirus A (RVA) causes diarrheal disease in humans and various animals. Recent 
studies have identified bat and rodent RVAs with evidence of zoonotic 
transmission and genome reassortment. However, the virological properties of bat 
and rodent RVAs with currently identified genotypes still need to be better 
clarified. Here, we performed virus isolation-based screening for RVA in animal 
specimens and isolated RVAs (representative strains: 16-06 and MpR12) from 
Egyptian fruit bat and Natal multimammate mouse collected in Zambia. 
Whole-genome sequencing and phylogenetic analysis revealed that the genotypes of 
bat RVA 16-06 were identical to that of RVA BATp39 strain from the Kenyan fruit 
bat, which has not yet been characterized. Moreover, all segments of rodent RVA 
MpR12 were highly divergent and assigned to novel genotypes, but RVA MpR12 was 
phylogenetically closer to bat RVAs than to other rodent RVAs, indicating a 
unique evolutionary history. We further investigated the virological properties 
of the isolated RVAs. In brief, we found that 16-06 entered cells by binding to 
sialic acids on the cell surface, while MpR12 entered in a sialic 
acid-independent manner. Experimental inoculation of suckling mice with 16-06 
and MpR12 revealed that these RVAs are causative agents of diarrhea. Moreover, 
16-06 and MpR12 demonstrated an ability to infect and replicate in a 
3D-reconstructed primary human intestinal epithelium with comparable efficiency 
to the human RVA. Taken together, our results detail the unique genetic and 
virological features of bat and rodent RVAs and demonstrate the need for further 
investigation of their zoonotic potential. IMPORTANCE Recent advances in 
nucleotide sequence detection methods have enabled the detection of RVA genomes 
from various animals. These studies have discovered multiple divergent RVAs and 
have resulted in proposals for the genetic classification of novel genotypes. 
However, most of these RVAs have been identified via dsRNA viral genomes and not 
from infectious viruses, and their virological properties, such as cell/host 
tropisms, transmissibility, and pathogenicity, are unclear and remain to be 
clarified. Here, we successfully isolated RVAs with novel genome constellations 
from three bats and one rodent in Zambia. In addition to whole-genome 
sequencing, the isolated RVAs were characterized by glycan-binding affinity, 
pathogenicity in mice, and infectivity to the human gut using a 3D culture of 
primary intestinal epithelium. Our study reveals the first virological 
properties of bat and rodent RVAs with high genetic diversity and unique 
evolutional history and provides basic knowledge to begin estimating the 
potential of zoonotic transmission.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.01455-22
PMCID: PMC9888233
PMID: 36633410 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare a conflict of interest. 
Shinsuke Toba is an employee of Shionogi & Co., Ltd. Other authors declare no 
competing interests.