1. ACS Biomater Sci Eng. 2023 Feb 13;9(2):877-888. doi: 
10.1021/acsbiomaterials.2c01148. Epub 2023 Jan 11.

Fibrin-Enriched Cardiac Extracellular Matrix Hydrogel Promotes In Vitro 
Angiogenesis.

Shaik R(1), Xu J(2), Wang Y(3), Hong Y(2), Zhang G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, The University of Akron, Akron, Ohio 
44325, United States.
(2)Department of Bioengineering, University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, 
Texas 76019, United States.
(3)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Pennsylvania State University, State 
College, University Park, Pennsylvania 16801, United States.

Angiogenesis is essential for cardiac repair after myocardial infarction. 
Promoting angiogenesis has been demonstrated as an effective approach for 
myocardial infarction treatment. Several different strategies for inducing 
myocardial angiogenesis have been explored, including exogenous delivery of 
angiogenic genes, proteins, microRNAs, cells, and extracellular vesicles. 
Various types of injectable hydrogels have been investigated for cardiac tissue 
repair. One of the most promising injectable hydrogels in cardiac regeneration 
is a cardiac extracellular matrix hydrogel that is derived from decellularized 
porcine myocardium. It can be delivered minimally invasively via 
transendocardial delivery. The safety and efficacy of cardiac extracellular 
matrix hydrogels have been shown in small and large animal myocardial infarction 
models as well as clinical trials. The main mechanisms underlying the 
therapeutic benefits of cardiac extracellular matrix hydrogels have been 
elucidated and involved in the modulation of the immune response, downregulation 
of pathways related to heart failure progression and fibrosis, upregulation of 
genes important for cardiac muscle contraction, and enhancing cardiomyocyte 
differentiation and maturation from stem cells. However, no potent capillary 
network formation induced by cardiac extracellular matrix hydrogels has been 
reported. In this study, we tested the feasibility of incorporating a fibrin 
matrix into cardiac extracellular matrix hydrogels to improve the angiogenic 
properties of the hydrogel. Our in vitro results demonstrate that 
fibrin-enriched cardiac extracellular matrix hydrogels can induce robust 
endothelial cell tube formation from human umbilical vein endothelial cells and 
promote the sprouting of human mesenchymal stem cell spheroids. The obtained 
information from this study is very critical toward the future in vivo 
evaluation of fibrin-enriched cardiac extracellular matrix hydrogels in 
promoting myocardial angiogenesis.

DOI: 10.1021/acsbiomaterials.2c01148
PMCID: PMC10064974
PMID: 36630688 [Indexed for MEDLINE]