1. J Pathol Transl Med. 2023 Jan;57(1):1-27. doi: 10.4132/jptm.2022.12.23. Epub 
2023 Jan 15.

A standardized pathology report for gastric cancer: 2nd edition.

Park YS(1), Kook MC(2), Kim BH(3), Lee HS(4), Kang DW(5), Gu MJ(6), Shin OR(7), 
Choi Y(8), Lee W(9), Kim H(10), Song IH(1), Kim KM(11), Kim HS(12), Kang G(13), 
Park DY(14), Jin SY(15), Kim JM(16), Choi YJ(17), Chang HK(18), Ahn S(11), Chang 
MS(19), Han SH(20), Kwak Y(4), Seo AN(21), Cho MY(22).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of 
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Center for Gastric Cancer, National Cancer Center, Goyang, Korea.
(3)Department of Pathology, Korea University Guro Hospital, Seoul, Korea.
(4)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul National 
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(5)Department of Pathology, Chungnam National University Sejong Hospital, 
Chungnam National University School of Medicine, Sejong, Korea.
(6)Department of Pathology, Yeungnam University College of Medicine, Daegu, 
Korea.
(7)Department of Hospital Pathology, Uijeongbu St. Mary's Hospital, College of 
Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Uijeongbu, Korea.
(8)Department of Pathology, Hallym University Dongtan Sacred Heart Hospital, 
Hwaseong, Korea.
(9)Department of Pathology, Dankook University College of Medicine, Cheonan, 
Korea.
(10)Department of Pathology, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, 
Korea.
(11)Department of Pathology and Translational Genomics, Samsung Medical Center, 
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(12)Department of Pathology, Chung-Ang University Hospital, Chung-Ang University 
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(13)LabGenomics Clinical Laboratories, Seongnam, Korea.
(14)St. Maria Pathology Laboratory, Busan, Korea.
(15)Department of Pathology, Soonchunhyang University Seoul Hospital, Seoul, 
Korea.
(16)Department of Pathology, Inha University School of Medicine, Incheon, Korea.
(17)Department of Pathology, Yongin Severance Hospital, Yonsei University 
College of Medicine, Yongin, Korea.
(18)Department of Pathology, Kosin University Gospel Hospital, Kosin University 
College of Medicine, Busan, Korea.
(19)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University Boramae Hospital, Seoul 
National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(20)Department of Pathology, Dong-A University College of Medicine, Busan, 
Korea.
(21)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Kyungpook National University, 
Kyungpook National University Chilgok Hospital, Daegu, Korea.
(22)Department of Pathology, Wonju Severance Christian Hospital, Yonsei 
University Wonju College of Medicine, Wonju, Korea.

The first edition of 'A Standardized Pathology Report for Gastric Cancer' was 
initiated by the Gastrointestinal Pathology Study Group of the Korean Society of 
Pathologists and published 17 years ago. Since then, significant advances have 
been made in the pathologic diagnosis, molecular genetics, and management of 
gastric cancer (GC). To reflect those changes, a committee for publishing a 
second edition of the report was formed within the Gastrointestinal Pathology 
Study Group of the Korean Society of Pathologists. This second edition consists 
of two parts: standard data elements and conditional data elements. The standard 
data elements contain the basic pathologic findings and items necessary to 
predict the prognosis of GC patients, and they are adequate for routine surgical 
pathology service. Other diagnostic and prognostic factors relevant to adjuvant 
therapy, including molecular biomarkers, are classified as conditional data 
elements to allow each pathologist to selectively choose items appropriate to 
the environment in their institution. We trust that the standardized pathology 
report will be helpful for GC diagnosis and facilitate large-scale 
multidisciplinary collaborative studies.

DOI: 10.4132/jptm.2022.12.23
PMCID: PMC9846007
PMID: 36647283

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest S.H.L., a contributing 
editor of the Journal of Pathology and Translational Medicine, was not involved 
in the editorial evaluation or decision to publish this article. All remaining 
authors have declared no conflicts of interest.