1. Viruses. 2022 Dec 22;15(1):40. doi: 10.3390/v15010040.

A Customized Monkeypox Virus Genomic Database (MPXV DB v1.0) for Rapid Sequence 
Analysis and Phylogenomic Discoveries in CLC Microbial Genomics.

Shen-Gunther J(1), Cai H(2)(3), Wang Y(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Investigation, Gynecologic Oncology & Clinical 
Investigation, Brooke Army Medical Center, Fort Sam Houston, TX 78234, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas at 
San Antonio, San Antonio, TX 78249, USA.
(3)South Texas Center for Emerging Infectious Diseases, University of Texas at 
San Antonio, San Antonio, TX 78249, USA.

Monkeypox has been a neglected, zoonotic tropical disease for over 50 years. 
Since the 2022 global outbreak, hundreds of human clinical samples have been 
subjected to next-generation sequencing (NGS) worldwide with raw data deposited 
in public repositories. However, sequence analysis for in-depth investigation of 
viral evolution remains hindered by the lack of a curated, whole genome 
Monkeypox virus (MPXV) database (DB) and efficient bioinformatics pipelines. To 
address this, we developed a customized MPXV DB for integration with 
"ready-to-use" workflows in the CLC Microbial Genomics Module for whole genomic 
and metagenomic analysis. After database construction (218 MPXV genomes), whole 
genome alignment, pairwise comparison, and evolutionary analysis of all genomes 
were analyzed to autogenerate tabular outputs and visual displays (collective 
runtime: 16 min). The clinical utility of the MPXV DB was demonstrated by using 
a Chimpanzee fecal, hybrid-capture NGS dataset (publicly available) for 
metagenomic, phylogenomic, and viral/host integration analysis. The clinically 
relevant MPXV DB embedded in CLC workflows proved to be a rapid method of 
sequence analysis useful for phylogenomic exploration and a wide range of 
applications in translational science.

DOI: 10.3390/v15010040
PMCID: PMC9861985
PMID: 36680080 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The Defense Health Agency (DHA) of the U.S. 
Department of Defense has licensed the customized MPXV v1.0 and MOCVA v1.0 
databases described herein to QIAGEN Digital Insights. The inventor of the 
customized taxonomy is J.SG. No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed 
by the other authors. The funders had no role in the design of the study; in the 
collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the 
manuscript, or in the decision to publish the results. This paper has undergone 
PAO review at Brooke Army Medical Center and was cleared for publication. The 
view(s) expressed herein are those of the authors and do not reflect the 
official policy or position of Brooke Army Medical Center, the United States 
Army Medical Department, the United States Army Office of the Surgeon General, 
the Department of the Army, the Defense Health Agency, the Department of Defense 
or the United States Government.