1. Front Pharmacol. 2023 Jan 9;13:1038802. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2022.1038802. 
eCollection 2022.

Malvidin alleviates mitochondrial dysfunction and ROS accumulation through 
activating AMPK-α/UCP2 axis, thereby resisting inflammation and apoptosis in SAE 
mice.

Zhao P(1), Li X(2), Yang Q(3)(1), Lu Y(2), Wang G(3)(1), Yang H(3)(1), Dong 
J(3), Zhang H(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, Department of Vascular Surgery, The First People's 
Hospital of Lianyungang, Lianyungang, China.
(2)Department of Oncology, The Second People's Hospital of Lianyungang City, 
Lianyungang, China.
(3)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Marine Bioresources and Environment, Co-Innovation 
Center of Jiangsu Marine Bio-industry Technology, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of 
Marine Pharmaceutical Compound Screening, College of Pharmacy, Jiangsu Ocean 
University, Lianyungang, China.

This study aimed to explore the protective roles of malvidin in life-threatened 
sepsis-associated encephalopathy (SAE) and illustrate the underlying mechanism. 
SAE mice models were developed and treated with malvidin for subsequently 
protective effects evaluation. Malvidin restored neurobehavioral retardation, 
declined serum S100β and NSE levels, sustained cerebrum morphological structure, 
improved blood-brain barrier integrity with elevated tight junction proteins, 
and decreased evans blue leakage, and finally protect SAE mice from brain 
injury. Mechanistically, malvidin prevented cerebrum from mitochondrial 
dysfunction with enhanced JC-1 aggregates and ATP levels, and ROS accumulation 
with decreased lipid peroxidation and increased antioxidant enzymes. UCP2 
protein levels were found to be decreased after LPS stimulation in the cerebrum 
and BV-2 cells, and malvidin recovered its levels in a ROS dependent manner. In 
vivo inhibition of UCP2 with genipin or in vitro interference with siRNA UCP2 
both disrupted the mitochondrial membrane potential, decreased ATP levels and 
intensified DCF signals, being a key target for malvidin. Moreover, dorsomorphin 
block assays verified that malvidin upregulated UCP2 expression through 
phosphorylating AMPK in SAE models. Also, malvidin alleviated SAE progression 
through inhibition of ROS-dependent NLRP3 inflammasome activation mediated serum 
pro-inflammatory cytokines secretion and mitochondrial pathway mediated 
apoptosis with weakened apoptosis body formation and tunel positive signals, and 
decreased Bax, cytochrome C, caspase-3 and increased Bcl-2 protein levels. 
Overall, this study illustrated that malvidin targeted AMPK-α/UCP2 axis to 
restore LPS-induced mitochondrial dysfunction and alleviate ROS accumulation, 
which further inhibits NLRP3 inflammasome activation and mitochondrial apoptosis 
in a ROS dependent way, and ultimately protected SAE mice, providing a reference 
for the targeted development of SAE prophylactic approach.

Copyright © 2023 Zhao, Li, Yang, Lu, Wang, Yang, Dong and Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2022.1038802
PMCID: PMC9868257
PMID: 36699054

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.