1. Front Oncol. 2023 Jan 10;12:1091767. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2022.1091767.
eCollection  2022.

Efficient feature extraction from highly sparse binary genotype data for cancer 
prognosis prediction using an auto-encoder.

Shen J(1)(2), Li H(1)(2), Yu X(2)(3), Bai L(1)(2), Dong Y(1)(2), Cao J(4), Lu 
K(5), Tang Z(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Medical College of 
Soochow University, Suzhou, China.
(2)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Preventive and Translational Medicine for Geriatric 
Diseases, Medical College of Soochow University, Suzhou, China.
(3)Center for Genetic Epidemiology and Genomics, School of Public Health, 
Medical College of Soochow University, Suzhou, China.
(4)School of Radiation Medicine and Protection and Collaborative Innovation 
Center of Radiation Medicine of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions, Soochow 
University, Suzhou, China.
(5)Department of Orthopedics, Affiliated Kunshan Hospital of Jiangsu University, 
Suzhou, China.

Genomics involving tens of thousands of genes is a complex system determining 
phenotype. An interesting and vital issue is how to integrate highly sparse 
genetic genomics data with a mass of minor effects into a prediction model for 
improving prediction power. We find that the deep learning method can work well 
to extract features by transforming highly sparse dichotomous data to 
lower-dimensional continuous data in a non-linear way. This may provide benefits 
in risk prediction-associated genotype data. We developed a multi-stage strategy 
to extract information from highly sparse binary genotype data and applied it 
for cancer prognosis. Specifically, we first reduced the size of binary 
biomarkers via a univariable regression model to a moderate size. Then, a 
trainable auto-encoder was used to learn compact features from the reduced data. 
Next, we performed a LASSO problem process to select the optimal combination of 
extracted features. Lastly, we applied such feature combination to real cancer 
prognostic models and evaluated the raw predictive effect of the models. The 
results indicated that these compressed transformation features could better 
improve the model's original predictive performance and might avoid an 
overfitting problem. This idea may be enlightening for everyone involved in 
cancer research, risk reduction, treatment, and patient care via integrating 
genomics data.

Copyright © 2023 Shen, Li, Yu, Bai, Dong, Cao, Lu and Tang.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2022.1091767
PMCID: PMC9872139
PMID: 36703783

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.