1. J Biol Chem. 2023 Mar;299(3):102941. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2023.102941. Epub 2023
 Jan 23.

Multiple oxidative post-translational modifications of human glutamine 
synthetase mediate peroxynitrite-dependent enzyme inactivation and aggregation.

Campolo N(1), Mastrogiovanni M(1), Mariotti M(2), Issoglio FM(3), Estrin D(4), 
Hägglund P(2), Grune T(5), Davies MJ(2), Bartesaghi S(1), Radi R(6).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica and Centro de Investigaciones Biomédicas 
(CEINBIO), Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de la República, Montevideo, 
Uruguay.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Panum Institute, University of Copenhagen, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)CONICET-Universidad de Buenos Aires, Instituto de Química Biológica de la 
Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales (IQUIBICEN), Buenos Aires, Argentina; 
Instituto de Tecnologia Química e Biológica António Xavier, Universidade Nova de 
Lisboa (ITQB NOVA), Oeiras, Portugal.
(4)CONICET-Universidad de Buenos Aires, Instituto de Química Física de los 
Materiales, Medio Ambiente y Energía (INQUIMAE), Buenos Aires, Argentina; 
Departamento de Química Inorgánica, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, 
Universidad de Buenos Aires, Analítica y Química Física, Buenos Aires, 
Argentina.
(5)Department of Molecular Toxicology, German Institute of Human Nutrition, 
Potsdam-Rehbrücke, Nuthetal, Germany; German Center for Cardiovascular Research 
(DZHK), Berlin, Germany; Department of Physiological Chemistry, Faculty of 
Chemistry, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(6)Departamento de Bioquímica and Centro de Investigaciones Biomédicas 
(CEINBIO), Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de la República, Montevideo, 
Uruguay. Electronic address: rradi@fmed.edu.uy.

Glutamine synthetase (GS), which catalyzes the ATP-dependent synthesis of 
L-glutamine from L-glutamate and ammonia, is a ubiquitous and conserved enzyme 
that plays a pivotal role in nitrogen metabolism across all life domains. In 
vertebrates, GS is highly expressed in astrocytes, where its activity sustains 
the glutamate-glutamine cycle at glutamatergic synapses and is thus essential 
for maintaining brain homeostasis. In fact, decreased GS levels or activity have 
been associated with neurodegenerative diseases, with these alterations 
attributed to oxidative post-translational modifications of the protein, in 
particular tyrosine nitration. In this study, we expressed and purified human GS 
(HsGS) and performed an in-depth analysis of its oxidative inactivation by 
peroxynitrite (ONOO-) in vitro. We found that ONOO- exposure led to a 
dose-dependent loss of HsGS activity, the oxidation of cysteine, methionine, and 
tyrosine residues and also the nitration of tryptophan and tyrosine residues. 
Peptide mapping by LC-MS/MS through combined H216O/H218O trypsin digestion 
identified up to 10 tyrosine nitration sites and five types of dityrosine 
cross-links; these modifications were further scrutinized by structural 
analysis. Tyrosine residues 171, 185, 269, 283, and 336 were the main nitration 
targets; however, tyrosine-to-phenylalanine HsGS mutants revealed that their 
sole nitration was not responsible for enzyme inactivation. In addition, we 
observed that ONOO- induced HsGS aggregation and activity loss. Thiol oxidation 
was a key modification to elicit aggregation, as it was also induced by hydrogen 
peroxide treatment. Taken together, our results indicate that multiple oxidative 
events at various sites are responsible for the inactivation and aggregation of 
human GS.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2023.102941
PMCID: PMC10011836
PMID: 36702251 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the content of this article.