1. Front Microbiol. 2023 Jan 11;13:1074741. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.1074741. 
eCollection 2022.

Synonymous mutations in the phosphoglycerate kinase 1 gene induce an altered 
response to protein misfolding in Schizosaccharomyces pombe.

Moreira-Ramos S(1), Arias L(1), Flores R(1), Katz A(1), Levicán G(2), Orellana 
O(1).

Author information:
(1)Programa de Biología Celular y Molecular, Instituto de Ciencias Biomédicas, 
Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile.
(2)Departamento de Biología, Facultad de Química y Biología, Universidad de 
Santiago de Chile (USACH), Santiago, Chile.

BACKGROUND: Proteostasis refers to the processes that regulate the biogenesis, 
folding, trafficking, and degradation of proteins. Any alteration in these 
processes can lead to cell malfunction. Protein synthesis, a key proteostatic 
process, is highly-regulated at multiple levels to ensure adequate adaptation to 
environmental and physiological challenges such as different stressors, 
proteotoxic conditions and aging, among other factors. Because alterations in 
protein translation can lead to protein misfolding, examining how protein 
translation is regulated may also help to elucidate in part how proteostasis is 
controlled. Codon usage bias has been implicated in the fine-tuning of 
translation rate, as more-frequent codons might be read faster than their 
less-frequent counterparts. Thus, alterations in codon usage due to synonymous 
mutations may alter translation kinetics and thereby affect the folding of the 
nascent polypeptide, without altering its primary structure. To date, it has 
been difficult to predict the effect of synonymous mutations on protein folding 
and cellular fitness due to a scarcity of relevant data. Thus, the purpose of 
this work was to assess the effect of synonymous mutations in discrete regions 
of the gene that encodes the highly-expressed enzyme 3-phosphoglycerate kinase 1 
(pgk1) in the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe.
RESULTS: By means of systematic replacement of synonymous codons along pgk1, we 
found slightly-altered protein folding and activity in a region-specific manner. 
However, alterations in protein aggregation, heat stress as well as changes in 
proteasome activity occurred independently of the mutated region. Concomitantly, 
reduced mRNA levels of the chaperones Hsp9 and Hsp16 were observed.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, these data suggest that codon usage bias of the gene 
encoding this highly-expressed protein is an important regulator of protein 
function and proteostasis.

Copyright © 2023 Moreira-Ramos, Arias, Flores, Katz, Levicán and Orellana.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.1074741
PMCID: PMC9875302
PMID: 36713198

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.