1. PeerJ. 2023 Jan 27;11:e14780. doi: 10.7717/peerj.14780. eCollection 2023.

Targeting super enhancers for liver disease: a review.

Yang Z(1), Liu Y(1), Cheng Q(1), Chen T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Disease, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, China.

BACKGROUND: Super enhancers (SEs) refer to the ultralong regions of a gene 
accompanied by multiple transcription factors and cofactors and strongly drive 
the expression of cell-type-related genes. Recent studies have demonstrated that 
SEs play crucial roles in regulating gene expression related to cell cycle 
progression and transcription. Aberrant activation of SEs is closely related to 
the occurrence and development of liver disease. Liver disease, especially liver 
failure and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), constitutes a major class of 
diseases that seriously endanger human health. Currently, therapeutic strategies 
targeting SEs can dramatically prevent disease progression and improve the 
prognosis of animal models. The associated new approaches to the treatment of 
related liver disease are relatively new and need systematic elaboration.
OBJECTIVES: In this review, we elaborate on the features of SEs and discuss 
their function in liver disease. Additionally, we review their application 
prospects in clinical practice in the future. The article would be of interest 
to hepatologists, molecular biologists, clinicians, and all those concerned with 
targeted therapy and prognosis of liver disease.
METHODOLOGY: We searched three bibliographic databases (Web of Science Core 
Collection, Embase, PubMed) from 01/1981 to 06/2022 for peer-reviewed scientific 
publications focused on (1) gene treatment of liver disease; (2) current status 
of SE research; and (3) targeting SEs for liver disease. We included English 
language original studies only.
RESULTS: The number of published studies considering the role of enhancers in 
liver disease is considerable. Since SEs were just defined in 2013, the 
corresponding data on SEs are scarce: approximately 50 papers found in 
bibliographic databases on the correlation between enhancers (or SEs) and liver 
disease. Remarkably, half of these papers were published in the past three 
years, indicating the growing interest of the scientific community in this 
issue. Studies have shown that treatments targeting components of SEs can 
improve outcomes in liver disease in animal and clinical trials.
CONCLUSIONS: The treatment of liver disease is facing a bottleneck, and new 
treatments are needed. Therapeutic regimens targeting SEs have an important role 
in the treatment of liver disease. However, given the off-target effect of gene 
therapy and the lack of clinical trials, the available experimental data are 
still fragmented and controversial.

©2023 Yang et al.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.14780
PMCID: PMC9885865
PMID: 36726725 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare there are no competing 
interests.