1. J Virol. 2023 Feb 28;97(2):e0160022. doi: 10.1128/jvi.01600-22. Epub 2023 Feb
9.

Immunization of Mice with Virus-Like Vesicles of Kaposi Sarcoma-Associated 
Herpesvirus Reveals a Role for Antibodies Targeting ORF4 in Activating 
Complement-Mediated Neutralization.

Lam AK(1), Roshan R(#)(2), Miley W(#)(2), Labo N(#)(2), Zhen J(3), Kurland 
AP(4), Cheng C(1), Huang H(1), Teng PL(1), Harelson C(1), Gong D(1), Tam YK(5), 
Radu CG(1), Epeldegui M(6), Johnson JR(4), Zhou ZH(3), Whitby D(2), Wu TT(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology, David Geffen School of 
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(2)AIDS and Cancer Virus Program, Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer 
Research, Frederick, Maryland, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Molecular Genetics, David Geffen 
School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, New York, USA.
(5)Acuitas Therapeutics, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(6)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, David Geffen School of Medicine, 
University of California, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Infection by Kaposi sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) can cause severe 
consequences, such as cancers and lymphoproliferative diseases. Whole 
inactivated viruses (WIV) with chemically destroyed genetic materials have been 
used as antigens in several licensed vaccines. During KSHV productive 
replication, virus-like vesicles (VLVs) that lack capsids and viral genomes are 
generated along with virions. Here, we investigated the immunogenicity of KSHV 
VLVs produced from a viral mutant that was defective in capsid formation and DNA 
packaging. Mice immunized with adjuvanted VLVs generated KSHV-specific T cell 
and antibody responses. Neutralization of KSHV infection by the VLV immune serum 
was low but was markedly enhanced in the presence of the complement system. 
Complement-enhanced neutralization and complement deposition on KSHV-infected 
cells was dependent on antibodies targeting viral open reading frame 4 (ORF4). 
However, limited complement-mediated enhancement was detected in the sera of a 
small cohort of KSHV-infected humans which contained few neutralizing 
antibodies. Therefore, vaccination that induces antibody effector functions can 
potentially improve infection-induced humoral immunity. Overall, our study 
highlights a potential benefit of engaging complement-mediated antibody 
functions in future KSHV vaccine development. IMPORTANCE KSHV is a virus that 
can lead to cancer after infection. A vaccine that prevents KSHV infection or 
transmission would be helpful in preventing the development of these cancers. We 
investigated KSHV VLV as an immunogen for vaccination. We determined that 
antibodies targeting the viral protein ORF4 induced by VLV immunization could 
engage the complement system and neutralize viral infection. However, 
ORF4-specific antibodies were seldom detected in the sera of KSHV-infected 
humans. Moreover, these human sera did not potently trigger complement-mediated 
neutralization, indicating an improvement that immunization can confer. Our 
study suggests a new antibody-mediated mechanism to control KSHV infection and 
underscores the benefit of activating the complement system in a future KSHV 
vaccine.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.01600-22
PMCID: PMC9972917
PMID: 36757205 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare a conflict of interest. 
Y.K.T. is an employee of and holds equity in Acuitas Therapeutics, a producer of 
lipid nanoparticle technology. A provisional patent application has been 
submitted describing the use of VLVs and ORF4 as a vaccine target is in 
preparation with A.K.L., C.G.R., and T.W. listed as inventors. All other authors 
declare no conflicts of interest.