1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Jan 31;24(3):2674. doi: 10.3390/ijms24032674.

Thermo-L-Asparaginases: From the Role in the Viability of Thermophiles and 
Hyperthermophiles at High Temperatures to a Molecular Understanding of Their 
Thermoactivity and Thermostability.

Dumina M(1), Zhgun A(1).

Author information:
(1)Group of Fungal Genetic Engineering, Federal Research Center "Fundamentals of 
Biotechnology of the Russian Academy of Sciences", 117312 Moscow, Russia.

L-asparaginase (L-ASNase) is a vital enzyme with a broad range of applications 
in medicine, food industry, and diagnostics. Among various organisms expressing 
L-ASNases, thermophiles and hyperthermophiles produce enzymes with superior 
performances-stable and heat resistant thermo-ASNases. This review is an attempt 
to take a broader view on the thermo-ASNases. Here we discuss the position of 
thermo-ASNases in the large family of L-ASNases, their role in the 
heat-tolerance cellular system of thermophiles and hyperthermophiles, and 
molecular aspects of their thermoactivity and thermostability. Different types 
of thermo-ASNases exhibit specific L-asparaginase activity and additional 
secondary activities. All products of these enzymatic reactions are associated 
with diverse metabolic pathways and are important for mitigating heat stress. 
Thermo-ASNases are quite distinct from typical mesophilic L-ASNases based on 
structural properties, kinetic and activity profiles. Here we attempt to 
summarize the current understanding of the molecular mechanisms of 
thermo-ASNases' thermoactivity and thermostability, from amino acid composition 
to structural-functional relationships. Research of these enzymes has 
fundamental and biotechnological significance. Thermo-ASNases and their improved 
variants, cloned and expressed in mesophilic hosts, can form a large pool of 
enzymes with valuable characteristics for biotechnological application.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24032674
PMCID: PMC9916696
PMID: 36768996 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.