1. Diabetes Metab Syndr Obes. 2023 Jan 11;16:15-29. doi: 10.2147/DMSO.S390999. 
eCollection 2023.

Metabolic Characteristics of Gestational Diabetes Mellitus and the Effects on 
Pregnancy Outcomes.

Luo P(1), Fan Y(2), Xiong Y(2), Zhang C(1), Yang Z(1), Sun F(1), Mei B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Jingzhou Hospital Affiliated to Yangtze 
University, Jingzhou, People's Republic of China.
(2)Gongan County Maternal and Child Health Care Hospital, Jingzhou, People's 
Republic of China.

OBJECTIVE: To describe the metabolic characteristics of gestational diabetes 
mellitus (GDM) and assess their effects on perinatal outcomes.
METHODS: A two-center nested case‒control study was designed, including 192 
pregnant women with GDM and 191 pregnant women with normal glucose tolerance 
(NGT). Serum glucose and insulin concentrations based upon the 75 g oral glucose 
tolerance test (OGTT) were measured. Several indices were calculated to describe 
the metabolic characteristics of the subjects. The relationship between glucose 
metabolism parameters and pregnancy outcomes was evaluated using stepwise linear 
regression and binary logistic regression.
RESULTS: Compared with the NGT group, the GDM group showed significantly higher 
fasting and postprandial glucose parameters but significantly lower fasting and 
postprandial insulin responses. Meanwhile, the GDM group had significantly lower 
HOMA-β, DI and ISIMatsuda but comparable HOMA-IR. The IFG subgroup showed 
significantly lower FINS/FPG only, while the IGT and IFSG subgroups showed 
deficiency in both fasting and postprandial insulin response. The IFSG subgroup 
had the highest glucose parameters and the lowest insulin parameters, as well as 
significantly lower ISIMatsuda and HOMA-β than the NGT group. FPG had a 
significant effect on infants' birth weight, and 1hPG and FINS/FPG had a 
significant effect on delivery gestational age. AUC-INS, IGI60 and DI were 
related to premature delivery risk after adjusting for confounders. The IFG 
subgroup of GDM was 2.319 times more likely to be subject to cesarean section 
than the NGT group. FPG, FINS/FPG, AUC-GLU, AUC-INS/AUC-GLU and HOMA-β were 
related to macrosomia risk.
CONCLUSION: Beta cell dysfunction rather than insulin resistance determines the 
occurrence of GDM in the central Chinese population. Women with predominant 
insulin secretion defects had a similar risk of adverse perinatal outcomes to 
women with NGT. Our study provided a basis for the selection of glucose 
metabolism monitoring indicators useful for the prevention of adverse perinatal 
outcomes.

© 2023 Luo et al.

DOI: 10.2147/DMSO.S390999
PMCID: PMC9843504
PMID: 36760593

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare no conflicts of interest.