1. Open Vet J. 2023 Jan;13(1):48-63. doi: 10.5455/OVJ.2023.v13.i1.6. Epub 2023
Jan  11.

Methanol extract of Black soldier fly (Hermetia illucens) prepupae against 
Aeromonas and Staphylococcus aureus bacteria in vitro and in silico.

Qosimah D(1)(2), Santoso S(3), Maftuch M(4), Khotimah H(5), Fitri LE(6), 
Aulanni'am A(7), Suwanti LT(8).

Author information:
(1)Doctoral Study Program in Medical Science, Faculty of Medicine, Universitas 
Brawijaya, Malang, Indonesia.
(2)Laboratory Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, 
Universitas Brawijaya, Malang, Indonesia.
(3)Laboratory of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Universitas Brawijaya, 
Malang, Indonesia.
(4)Laboratory of Fish Diseases, Faculty of Fisheries and Marine Science, 
Universitas Brawijaya, Malang, Indonesia.
(5)Laboratory of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, Universitas Brawijaya, 
Malang, Indonesia.
(6)Laboratory of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, Universitas Brawijaya, 
Malang, Indonesia.
(7)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Sciences, Universitas Brawijaya, Malang, 
Indonesia.
(8)Veterinary Parasitology Department, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Airlangga 
University, Surabaya, Indonesia.

BACKGROUND: Staphylococcus and Aeromonas bacteria are pathogens in humans and 
animals. The therapy disrupts the virulence structure of the bacteria, resulting 
in bacterial death. Currently, chemical drugs have resulted in many resistant 
bacteria, so it is necessary to find alternative natural materials that are not 
toxic and do not quickly induce resistance.
AIMS: This study aimed to analyze the potential of methanol extract from Black 
soldier fly (BSF) prepupae as an antibacterial agent against Staphylococcus 
aureus and Aeromonas through in silico and in vitro tests.
METHODS: The BSF prepupae methanol extract was analyzed for protein and fatty 
acid contents. Disc diffusion method, minimal inhibitory concentration, and 
minimum bactericidal concentration test were used for in vitro tests against 
Staphylococcis and Aeromonas. Molecular docking of the active ingredients 
(defensin, chitin, and chitosan as well as fatty acids) in BSF was downloaded 
from the NCBI database and docked by the Hex Cuda version 8.0 program with 
Correlation type parameters Shape + Electro and Grid Dimension version 0.6. 
Docking results were analyzed using the Discovery Studio program version 21.1.1.
RESULTS: The highest fatty acid contents in the extract were palmitic acid and 
myristic acid. Methanol extract from BSF prepupae acted as a bactericidal agent 
against S. aureus at a concentration of 320 mg/ml, in contrast to Aeromonas, 
which still showed bacterial growth. The results of the in silico test showed 
that defensin-aerolysin and defensin-hemolysin was bound to the same active site 
area. However, the amount of binding energy produced by 69-Defensin-83-aerolysin 
was higher than all defensin types in BSF against Aeromonas. Chitin and chitosan 
showed a bond on the active site of aerolysin and hemolysin, but chitosan had a 
stronger bond than chitin. In silico study also showed the strongest binding 
affinity of BSF fatty acids to isoleucyl-tRNA synthetase of S. aureus.
CONCLUSION: The study showed that methanol extract from BSF prepupae had 
potential capability as an antibacterial agent against S. aureus than Aeromonas 
in vitro and in silico.

DOI: 10.5455/OVJ.2023.v13.i1.6
PMCID: PMC9897505
PMID: 36777443 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest.