1. Plants (Basel). 2023 Jan 21;12(3):499. doi: 10.3390/plants12030499.

Physiological Plasticity as a Strategy to Cope with Harsh Climatic Conditions: 
Ecophysiological Meta-Analysis of the Cosmopolitan Moss Ceratodon purpureus in 
the Southern Hemisphere.

Beltrán-Sanz N(1), Raggio J(1), Pintado A(1), Dal Grande F(2), García Sancho 
L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Pharmacognosy and Botany, Complutense University 
of Madrid, 28040 Madrid, Spain.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Padova, 35121 Padova, Italy.

Determining the physiological tolerance ranges of species is necessary to 
comprehend the limits of their responsiveness under strong abiotic pressures. 
For this purpose, the cosmopolitan moss Ceratodon purpureus (Hedw.) Brid. is a 
good model due to its wide geographical distribution throughout different biomes 
and habitats. In order to disentangle how this species copes with stresses such 
as extreme temperatures and high radiation, we designed a meta-analysis by 
including the main photosynthetic traits obtained by gas exchange measurements 
in three contrasting habitats from the Southern Hemisphere. Our findings 
highlight that traits such as respiration homeostasis, modulation of the 
photosynthetic efficiency, adjustment of the optimal temperature, and switching 
between shade and sun-adapted forms, which are crucial in determining the 
responsiveness of this species. In fact, these ecophysiological traits are in 
concordance with the climatic particularities of each habitat. Furthermore, the 
photosynthetic trends found in our study point out how different Livingston 
Island (Maritime Antarctica) and Granite Harbour (Continental Antarctica) are 
for plant life, while the population from the Succulent Karoo Desert (South 
Africa) shares traits with both Antarctic regions. Altogether, the study 
highlights the high resilience of C. purpureus under abrupt climate changes and 
opens new perspectives about the wide spectrum of physiological responses of 
cryptogams to cope with climate change scenarios.

DOI: 10.3390/plants12030499
PMCID: PMC9919500
PMID: 36771584

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.