1. J Anim Sci Biotechnol. 2023 Feb 14;14(1):18. doi: 10.1186/s40104-022-00825-w.

Sirtuin 3 regulation: a target to alleviate β-hydroxybutyric acid-induced 
mitochondrial dysfunction in bovine granulosa cells.

Zhao S(#)(1), Gong J(#)(1), Wang Y(1), Heng N(1), Wang H(1), Hu Z(1), Wang H(1), 
Zhang H(1), Zhu H(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Animal Nutrition, Key Laboratory of Animal Genetics, 
Breeding and Reproduction of Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, 
Institute of Animal Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, 
China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Animal Nutrition, Key Laboratory of Animal Genetics, 
Breeding and Reproduction of Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, 
Institute of Animal Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, 
China. zhuhuabin@caas.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: During the transition period, the insufficient dry matter intake and 
a sharply increased in energy consumption to produce large quantities of milk, 
high yielding cows would enter a negative energy balance (NEB) that causes an 
increase in ketone bodies (KBs) and decrease in reproduction efficiency. The 
excess concentrations of circulating KBs, represented by β-hydroxybutyric acid 
(BHBA), could lead to oxidative damage, which potentially cause injury to 
follicular granulosa cells (fGCs) and delayed follicular development. Sirtuin 3 
(Sirt3) regulates mitochondria reactive oxygen species (mitoROS) homeostasis in 
a beneficial manner; however, the molecular mechanisms underlying its 
involvement in the BHBA-induced injury of fGCs is poorly understood. The aim of 
this study was to explore the protection effects and underlying mechanisms of 
Sirt3 against BHBA overload-induced damage of fGCs.
RESULTS: Our findings demonstrated that 2.4 mmol/L of BHBA stress increased the 
levels of mitoROS in bovine fGCs. Further investigations identified the 
subsequent mitochondrial dysfunction, including an increased abnormal rate of 
mitochondrial architecture, mitochondrial permeability transition pore (MPTP) 
opening, reductions in mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) and Ca2+ release; 
these dysfunctions then triggered the caspase cascade reaction of apoptosis in 
fGCs. Notably, the overexpression of Sirt3 prior to treatment enhanced 
mitochondrial autophagy by increasing the expression levels of Beclin-1, thus 
preventing BHBA-induced mitochondrial oxidative stress and mitochondrial 
dysfunction in fGCs. Furthermore, our data suggested that the AMPK-mTOR-Beclin-1 
pathway may be involved in the protective mechanism of Sirt3 against cellular 
injury triggered by BHBA stimulation.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings indicate that Sirt3 protects fGCs from 
BHBA-triggered injury by enhancing autophagy, attenuating oxidative stress and 
mitochondrial damage. This study provides new strategies to mitigate the fGCs 
injury caused by excessive BHBA stress in dairy cows with ketosis.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40104-022-00825-w
PMCID: PMC9926763
PMID: 36788581

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.