1. World J Clin Cases. 2023 Jan 26;11(3):545-555. doi: 10.12998/wjcc.v11.i3.545.

Could there be an interplay between periodontal changes and pancreatic 
malignancies?

Ungureanu BS(1), Gheorghe DN(2), Nicolae FM(3), Râmboiu S(4), Radu PA(5), Șurlin 
VM(4), Strâmbu VDE(5), Gheonea DI(1), Roman A(6), Șurlin P(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, University of Medicine and Pharmacy of 
Craiova, Craiova 200349, Romania.
(2)Department of Periodontology, Research Center of Periodontal-Systemic 
Implications, University of Medicine and Pharmacy of Craiova, Craiova 200349, 
Romania.
(3)Department of Periodontology, Research Center of Periodontal-Systemic 
Implications, University of Medicine and Pharmacy of Craiova, Craiova 200349, 
Romania. flavia.nicolae23@yahoo.com.
(4)Department 1 of Surgery, University of Medicine and Pharmacy of Craiova, 
Craiova 200349, Romania.
(5)Department of General Surgery, "Carol Davila" University of Medicine and 
Pharmacy, Bucharest 020021, Romania.
(6)Department of Periodontology, "Iuliu Hațieganu" University of Medicine and 
Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca 400012, Romania.

The term "periodontal disease" refers to a group of chronic inflammatory 
illnesses caused by specific microorganisms from subgingival biofilm, that 
affect the tooth-supporting tissues. Recent research has also shown that 
periodontal infection plays a role in aggravating systemic disease states at 
distal sites, reinforcing the significance of the oral cavity for general 
health. Additionally, it has been suggested that gastroenterological 
malignancies may be promoted by hematogenous, enteral or lymphatic translocation 
of periopathogens. In the past 25 years, the global burden of pancreatic cancer 
(PC) has more than doubled, making it one of the major causes of cancer-related 
mortality. Periodontitis has been linked to at least 50% increased risk of PC 
and it could be considered a risk factor for this malignancy. A recent study 
performed on 59000 African American women with a follow up of 21 years showed 
that participants who had poor dental health had higher chances of PC. The 
findings, according to researchers, might be related to the inflammation that 
some oral bacteria trigger. Regarding the mortality of PC, periodontitis 
considerably raises the chance of dying from PC. Microbiome alterations in the 
gut, oral cavity and pancreatic tissues of PC patients occur when compared to 
healthy flora, demonstrating a link between PC and microecology. Inflammation 
may also contribute to PC development, although the underlying pathway is not 
yet known. The function of the microbiome in PC risk has drawn more focus over 
the last decade. Future risk of PC has been linked to the oral microbiome, 
specifically increased levels of Porphyromonas gingivalis and Aggregatibacter 
actinomycetemcomitans and decreased relative abundance of Leptotrichia and 
Fusobacteria, suggesting that it may have an impact on the inflammatory 
condition by expanding, altering, and regulating the commensal microbiome. 
Patients who received periodontal treatment had significantly decreased 
incidence rate ratios for PC. By analyzing patterns in the microbiome 
composition throughout PC development and establishing strategies to enhance the 
cancer-associated microbial system, we can increase the efficacy of therapy and 
eventually find an application for the microbial system. The development of 
immunogenomics and gut micro-genomics in the life sciences will result in a 
significant advancement in our understanding of how microbial systems and 
immunotherapy interact, and it may also have intriguing therapeutic implications 
for extending the lifetime of PC patients.

©The Author(s) 2023. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.12998/wjcc.v11.i3.545
PMCID: PMC9923858
PMID: 36793639

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: All the authors 
report no relevant conflicts of interest for this article.