1. Cell Rep. 2023 Feb 28;42(2):112131. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2023.112131. Epub
2023  Feb 18.

Platelet-instructed SPP1(+) macrophages drive myofibroblast activation in 
fibrosis in a CXCL4-dependent manner.

Hoeft K(1), Schaefer GJL(1), Kim H(2), Schumacher D(3), Bleckwehl T(2), Long 
Q(2), Klinkhammer BM(4), Peisker F(2), Koch L(1), Nagai J(5), Halder M(2), 
Ziegler S(2), Liehn E(6), Kuppe C(1), Kranz J(7), Menzel S(2), Costa I(5), 
Wahida A(8), Boor P(9), Schneider RK(10), Hayat S(2), Kramann R(11).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology and Clinical Immunology, RWTH Aachen University, 
Aachen, Germany; Institute of Experimental Medicine and Systems Biology, RWTH 
Aachen University, Aachen, Germany.
(2)Institute of Experimental Medicine and Systems Biology, RWTH Aachen 
University, Aachen, Germany.
(3)Institute of Experimental Medicine and Systems Biology, RWTH Aachen 
University, Aachen, Germany; Department of Anesthesiology, RWTH Aachen 
University, Aachen, Germany.
(4)Department of Pathology, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany.
(5)Institute for Computational Genomics, RWTH Aachen University Hospital, 
Aachen, Germany; Joint Research Center for Computational Biomedicine, RWTH 
Aachen University Hospital, Aachen, Germany.
(6)Institute for Molecular Medicine, University of South Denmark, Odense, 
Denmark.
(7)Institute of Experimental Medicine and Systems Biology, RWTH Aachen 
University, Aachen, Germany; Department of Urology, RWTH Aachen University, 
Aachen, Germany; Department of Urology and Kidney Transplantation, 
Martin-Luther-University, Halle (Saale), Germany.
(8)Institute of Metabolism and Cell Death, Helmholtz Zentrum München, 
Neuherberg, Germany; Division of Gynecological Oncology, National Center for 
Tumor Diseases (NCT), Heidelberg, Germany.
(9)Division of Nephrology and Clinical Immunology, RWTH Aachen University, 
Aachen, Germany; Department of Pathology, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, 
Germany.
(10)Department of Hematology, Erasmus MC Cancer Institute, Rotterdam, the 
Netherlands; Department of Cell Biology, Institute for Biomedical Technologies, 
RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany.
(11)Division of Nephrology and Clinical Immunology, RWTH Aachen University, 
Aachen, Germany; Institute of Experimental Medicine and Systems Biology, RWTH 
Aachen University, Aachen, Germany; Department of Internal Medicine, Nephrology 
and Transplantation, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, the Netherlands. 
Electronic address: rkramann@gmx.net.

Fibrosis represents the common end stage of chronic organ injury independent of 
the initial insult, destroying tissue architecture and driving organ failure. 
Here we discover a population of profibrotic macrophages marked by expression of 
Spp1, Fn1, and Arg1 (termed Spp1 macrophages), which expands after organ injury. 
Using an unbiased approach, we identify the chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 4 
(CXCL4) to be among the top upregulated genes during profibrotic Spp1 macrophage 
differentiation. In vitro and in vivo studies show that loss of Cxcl4 abrogates 
profibrotic Spp1 macrophage differentiation and ameliorates fibrosis after both 
heart and kidney injury. Moreover, we find that platelets, the most abundant 
source of CXCL4 in vivo, drive profibrotic Spp1 macrophage differentiation. 
Single nuclear RNA sequencing with ligand-receptor interaction analysis reveals 
that macrophages orchestrate fibroblast activation via Spp1, Fn1, and Sema3 
crosstalk. Finally, we confirm that Spp1 macrophages expand in both human 
chronic kidney disease and heart failure.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2023.112131
PMCID: PMC9992450
PMID: 36807143 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.