1. Plant Commun. 2023 Jul 10;4(4):100563. doi: 10.1016/j.xplc.2023.100563. Epub 
2023 Feb 21.

Genomic analysis, trajectory tracking, and field surveys reveal sources and 
long-distance dispersal routes of wheat stripe rust pathogen in China.

Li Y(1), Dai J(1), Zhang T(1), Wang B(1), Zhang S(1), Wang C(1), Zhang J(1), Yao 
Q(2), Li M(3), Li C(4), Peng Y(5), Cao S(6), Zhan G(1), Tao F(7), Gao H(8), 
Huang W(9), Feng X(10), Bai Y(11), Qucuo Z(5), Shang H(1), Huang C(12), Liu 
W(12), Zhan J(13), Xu X(14), Chen X(15), Kang Z(16), Hu X(17).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Crop Stress Biology for Arid Areas and College of 
Plant Protection, Northwest A&F University, Taicheng Road 3, Yangling, Shaanxi, 
China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Agricultural Integrated Pest Management, Qinghai Province, 
Academy of Agriculture and Forestry Science, Qinghai University, Xining, 
Qinghai, China.
(3)Yunnan Key Laboratory of Green Prevention and Control of Agricultural 
Transboundary Pests, Agricultural Environment and Resource Institute, Yunnan 
Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Bio-resources in 
Yunnan, Yunnan Agricultural University, Kunming, Yunnan, China.
(5)Department of Plant Pathology, Tibet Agricultural and Animal Husbandry 
College, Linzhi, Tibet, China.
(6)Wheat Research Institute, Gansu Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou, 
Gansu, China.
(7)Biocontrol Engineering Laboratory of Crop Diseases and Pests of Gansu 
Province, College of Plant Protection, Gansu Agricultural University, Lanzhou, 
Gansu, China.
(8)Institute of Plant Protection, Xinjiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences, 
Urumqi, Xinjiang, China.
(9)Xi'an Huang's Bio-technology Company Ltd, Xi'an, Shaanxi, China.
(10)Shaanxi Plant Protection Extension Station, Xi'an, Shaanxi, China.
(11)Baoji Plant Protection Extension Station, Baoji, Shaanxi, China.
(12)National Agricultural Technology Extension and Service Center, Ministry of 
Agriculture, Beijing, China.
(13)Department of Forest Mycology and Plant Pathology, Swedish University of 
Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden.
(14)Pest & Pathogen Ecology, NIAB EMR, East Malling, West Malling, Kent, UK.
(15)Agricultural Research Service, United States Department of Agriculture and 
Department of Plant Pathology, Washington State University, Pullman, WA, USA.
(16)State Key Laboratory of Crop Stress Biology for Arid Areas and College of 
Plant Protection, Northwest A&F University, Taicheng Road 3, Yangling, Shaanxi, 
China. Electronic address: kangzs@nwsuaf.edu.cn.
(17)State Key Laboratory of Crop Stress Biology for Arid Areas and College of 
Plant Protection, Northwest A&F University, Taicheng Road 3, Yangling, Shaanxi, 
China. Electronic address: xphu@nwsuaf.edu.cn.

Identifying sources of phytopathogen inoculum and determining their 
contributions to disease outbreaks are essential for predicting disease 
development and establishing control strategies. Puccinia striiformis f. sp. 
tritici (Pst), the causal agent of wheat stripe rust, is an airborne fungal 
pathogen with rapid virulence variation that threatens wheat production through 
its long-distance migration. Because of wide variation in geographic features, 
climatic conditions, and wheat production systems, Pst sources and related 
dispersal routes in China are largely unclear. In the present study, we 
performed genomic analyses of 154 Pst isolates from all major wheat-growing 
regions in China to determine Pst population structure and diversity. Through 
trajectory tracking, historical migration studies, genetic introgression 
analyses, and field surveys, we investigated Pst sources and their contributions 
to wheat stripe rust epidemics. We identified Longnan, the Himalayan region, and 
the Guizhou Plateau, which contain the highest population genetic diversities, 
as the Pst sources in China. Pst from Longnan disseminates mainly to eastern 
Liupan Mountain, the Sichuan Basin, and eastern Qinghai; that from the Himalayan 
region spreads mainly to the Sichuan Basin and eastern Qinghai; and that from 
the Guizhou Plateau migrates mainly to the Sichuan Basin and the Central Plain. 
These findings improve our current understanding of wheat stripe rust epidemics 
in China and emphasize the need for managing stripe rust on a national scale.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.xplc.2023.100563
PMCID: PMC10363508
PMID: 36809881 [Indexed for MEDLINE]