1. mBio. 2023 Apr 25;14(2):e0012723. doi: 10.1128/mbio.00127-23. Epub 2023 Feb
21.

Genome-Scale CRISPR Screening Reveals Host Factors Required for Ribosome 
Formation and Viral Replication.

Ohlson MB(1), Eitson JL(1), Wells AI(1), Kumar A(2), Jang S(3), Ni C(3), Xing 
C(2)(4)(5), Buszczak M(3), Schoggins JW(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, Texas, USA.
(2)Eugene McDermott Center for Human Growth and Development, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, Texas, USA.
(4)Department of Bioinformatics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, Texas, USA.
(5)Department of Population and Data Sciences, University of Texas Southwestern 
Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA.

Viruses are known to co-opt host machinery for translation initiation, but less 
is known about which host factors are required for the formation of ribosomes 
used to synthesize viral proteins. Using a loss-of-function CRISPR screen, we 
show that synthesis of a flavivirus-encoded fluorescent reporter depends on 
multiple host factors, including several 60S ribosome biogenesis proteins. Viral 
phenotyping revealed that two of these factors, SBDS, a known ribosome 
biogenesis factor, and the relatively uncharacterized protein SPATA5, were 
broadly required for replication of flaviviruses, coronaviruses, alphaviruses, 
paramyxoviruses, an enterovirus, and a poxvirus. Mechanistic studies revealed 
that loss of SPATA5 caused defects in rRNA processing and ribosome assembly, 
suggesting that this human protein may be a functional ortholog of yeast Drg1. 
These studies implicate specific ribosome biogenesis proteins as viral host 
dependency factors that are required for synthesis of virally encoded protein 
and accordingly, optimal viral replication. IMPORTANCE Viruses are well known 
for their ability to co-opt host ribosomes to synthesize viral proteins. The 
specific factors involved in translation of viral RNAs are not fully described. 
In this study, we implemented a unique genome-scale CRISPR screen to identify 
previously uncharacterized host factors that are important for the synthesis of 
virally encoded protein. We found that multiple genes involved in 60S ribosome 
biogenesis were required for viral RNA translation. Loss of these factors 
severely impaired viral replication. Mechanistic studies on the AAA ATPase 
SPATA5 indicate that this host factor is required for a late step in ribosome 
formation. These findings reveal insight into the identity and function of 
specific ribosome biogenesis proteins that are critical for viral infections.

DOI: 10.1128/mbio.00127-23
PMCID: PMC10128003
PMID: 36809113 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.