1. Front Neuroanat. 2023 Feb 2;17:1058370. doi: 10.3389/fnana.2023.1058370. 
eCollection 2023.

Development of parvalbumin-immunoreactive neurons in the postnatal human 
hippocampal formation.

Ábrahám H(1)(2)(3), Kojima H(1), Götzer K(1), Molnár A(1), Tornóczky T(4), 
Seress L(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biology and Central Electron Microscopic Laboratory, 
University of Pécs Medical School, Pécs, Hungary.
(2)Center for Neuroscience, University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary.
(3)Institute for the Psychology of Special Needs, Bárczi Gusztáv Faculty of 
Special Needs Education, Eötvös Loránd University, Budapest, Hungary.
(4)Department of Pathology, University of Pécs Medical School, Pécs, Hungary.

Introduction: Parvalbumin (PV) is a calcium-binding protein present in 
fast-spiking GABAergic neurons, such as basket and axo-axonic cells. Previous 
studies in non-human primates reported prenatal expression of PV in the temporal 
archicortex including entorhinal cortex and hippocampal formation. In contrast, 
PV-immunoreactivity was observed only postnatally in the human entorhinal 
cortex. Regarding PV expression in the human hippocampal formation, no 
information is available. Methods: In this study, the neurochemical maturation 
of PV-immunoreactive interneurons was studied in the postnatal developing human 
hippocampal formation. Results: Before birth, no PV-immunoreactive neurons could 
be detected in the human hippocampus. At birth, only a few PV-immunoreactive 
neurons were visible in Ammon's horn. The first PV-immunoreactive cells in the 
hilus of the dentate gyrus appeared at the age of 1 month. Even at the age of 5 
months, only a few PV-immunopositive cells were present in the dentate hilus. 
The number of cells and their dendritic and axonal arborization in Ammon's horn 
and in the dentate gyrus gradually increased with age. Even at the age of 2 
years, dendritic tree and axons of PV-immunoreactive neurons were less complex 
than can be seen in 8 and 11 years old children. Discussion: Our results showed 
that long-lasting maturation of PV-immunoreactive interneurons follows the 
developmental sequence of the subfields of the human hippocampal formation and 
provides further morphological evidence for the long-lasting functional 
maturation of the human cortex.

Copyright © 2023 Ábrahám, Kojima, Götzer, Molnár, Tornóczky and Seress.

DOI: 10.3389/fnana.2023.1058370
PMCID: PMC9932602
PMID: 36816519

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.