1. Trop Med Infect Dis. 2023 Jan 28;8(2):89. doi: 10.3390/tropicalmed8020089.

Challenges and the Way forward in Diagnosis and Treatment of Tuberculosis 
Infection.

Chin KL(1)(2), Anibarro L(3)(4), Sarmiento ME(5), Acosta A(5).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Universiti Malaysia Sabah, Kota 
Kinabalu 88400, Malaysia.
(2)Borneo Medical and Health Research Centre, Faculty of Medicine and Health 
Sciences, Universiti Malaysia Sabah, Kota Kinabalu 88400, Malaysia.
(3)Tuberculosis Unit, Infectious Diseases and Internal Medicine Department, 
Complexo Hospitalario Universitario de Pontevedra, 36071 Pontevedra, Spain.
(4)Immunology Research Group, Galicia Sur Health Research Institute (IIS-GS), 
36312 Vigo, Spain.
(5)School of Health Sciences, Universiti Sains Malaysia, Health Campus, Kubang 
Kerian 16150, Malaysia.

Globally, it is estimated that one-quarter of the world's population is latently 
infected with Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb), also known as latent 
tuberculosis infection (LTBI). Recently, this condition has been referred to as 
tuberculosis infection (TBI), considering the dynamic spectrum of the infection, 
as 5-10% of the latently infected population will develop active TB (ATB). The 
chances of TBI development increase due to close contact with index TB patients. 
The emergence of multidrug-resistant TB (MDR-TB) and the risk of development of 
latent MDR-TB has further complicated the situation. Detection of TBI is 
challenging as the infected individual does not present symptoms. Currently, 
there is no gold standard for TBI diagnosis, and the only screening tests are 
tuberculin skin test (TST) and interferon gamma release assays (IGRAs). However, 
these tests have several limitations, including the inability to differentiate 
between ATB and TBI, false-positive results in BCG-vaccinated individuals (only 
for TST), false-negative results in children, elderly, and immunocompromised 
patients, and the inability to predict the progression to ATB, among others. 
Thus, new host markers and Mtb-specific antigens are being tested to develop new 
diagnostic methods. Besides screening, TBI therapy is a key intervention for TB 
control. However, the long-course treatment and associated side effects result 
in non-adherence to the treatment. Additionally, the latent MDR strains are not 
susceptible to the current TBI treatments, which add an additional challenge. 
This review discusses the current situation of TBI, as well as the challenges 
and efforts involved in its control.

DOI: 10.3390/tropicalmed8020089
PMCID: PMC9960903
PMID: 36828505

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.