1. Biomedicines. 2023 Jan 19;11(2):271. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines11020271.

Hepatitis C Virus-Lipid Interplay: Pathogenesis and Clinical Impact.

Elgretli W(1), Chen T(2), Kronfli N(3)(4), Sebastiani G(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Experimental Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, QC H4A 3J1, 
Canada.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine, McGill 
University Health Centre, Montreal, QC H4A 3J1, Canada.
(3)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases and Chronic Viral 
Illness Service, McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, QC H4A 3J1, Canada.
(4)Centre for Outcomes Research and Evaluation, Research Institute of the McGill 
University Health Centre, Montreal, QC H4A 3J1, Canada.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection represents the major cause of chronic liver 
disease, leading to a wide range of hepatic diseases, including cirrhosis and 
hepatocellular carcinoma. It is the leading indication for liver transplantation 
worldwide. In addition, there is a growing body of evidence concerning the role 
of HCV in extrahepatic manifestations, including immune-related disorders and 
metabolic abnormalities, such as insulin resistance and steatosis. HCV depends 
on its host cells to propagate successfully, and every aspect of the HCV life 
cycle is closely related to human lipid metabolism. The virus circulates as a 
lipid-rich particle, entering the hepatocyte via lipoprotein cell receptors. It 
has also been shown to upregulate lipid biosynthesis and impair lipid 
degradation, resulting in significant intracellular lipid accumulation 
(steatosis) and circulating hypocholesterolemia. Patients with chronic HCV are 
at increased risk for hepatic steatosis, dyslipidemia, and cardiovascular 
disease, including accelerated atherosclerosis. This review aims to describe 
different aspects of the HCV viral life cycle as it impacts host lipoproteins 
and lipid metabolism. It then discusses the mechanisms of HCV-related hepatic 
steatosis, hypocholesterolemia, and accelerated atherosclerosis.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines11020271
PMCID: PMC9953247
PMID: 36830808

Conflict of interest statement: GS has acted as a speaker for Merck, Gilead, 
Abbvie, Novonordisk, Novartis and Pfizer, served as an advisory board member for 
Pfizer, Merck, Novonordisk, Gilead and Intercept, and has received unrestricted 
research funding from Theratec. NK reports research funding from Gilead 
Sciences, advisory fees from Gilead Sciences, ViiV Healthcare, Merck and Abbvie, 
and speaker fees from Gilead Sciences and Merck. TC and WE declare no conflict 
of interest.