1. Stroke. 2023 Mar;54(3):686-696. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.122.041444. Epub 2023
Feb  27.

Emerging Roles of Endothelial Nitric Oxide in Preservation of Cognitive Health.

Katusic ZS(1)(2), d'Uscio LV(1)(2), He T(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology and Perioperative Medicine (Z.S.K., L.V.d., 
T.H.), Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics (Z.S.K., L.V.d, 
T.H.), Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.

eNOS (endothelial nitric oxide synthase) is critically important enzyme 
responsible for regulation of cardiovascular homeostasis. Under physiological 
conditions, constitutive eNOS activity and production of endothelial nitric 
oxide (NO) exert essential neurovascular protective functions. In this review, 
we first discuss the roles of endothelial NO in prevention of neuronal amyloid 
accumulation and formation of neurofibrillary tangles, hallmarks of Alzheimer 
disease pathology. Next, we review existing evidence suggesting that NO released 
from endothelium prevents activation of microglia, stimulates glycolysis in 
astrocytes, and increases biogenesis of mitochondria. We also address major risk 
factors for cognitive impairment including aging and ApoE4 (apolipoprotein 4) 
genotype with focus on their detrimental effects on eNOS/NO signaling. Relevant 
to this review, recent studies suggested that aged eNOS heterozygous mice are 
unique model of spontaneous cerebral small vessel disease. In this regard, we 
review contribution of dysfunctional eNOS to deposition of Aβ (amyloid-β) into 
blood vessel wall leading to development of cerebral amyloid angiopathy. We 
conclude that endothelial dysfunction manifested by the loss of neurovascular 
protective functions of NO may significantly contribute to development of 
cognitive impairment.

DOI: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.122.041444
PMCID: PMC9991080
PMID: 36848426 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures The author(s) declared the following 
potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or 
publication of this article: Dr. Katusic served as a consultant to Ironwood 
Pharmaceuticals (Massachusetts, USA).