1. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2023 Feb 1;24(2):375-387. doi: 
10.31557/APJCP.2023.24.2.375.

Unfolding of Imminent Bio-Signatures in the Prognosis of Thyroid Cancer; The 
Emergence of Estrogen Related Receptor Gamma (ERRγ) as a Hurricane.

Gulwani D(1), Upadhyay P(1), Goel R(1), Sarangthem V(2), Debraj Singh T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology Laboratory, All India Institute of Medical 
Sciences, New Delhi, India.
(2)Department of Pathology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, 
India.

Thyroid cancer's incidence has increased by leaps and bounds over the last years 
and accounts for 2.8% of new cases of cancers. This increasing bar is partially 
assisted by enormous screening to understand the sub-clinical status. Advanced 
tumor growth is the leading cause of thyroid cancer-associated death. However, 
the complete understanding of the underlying cause is still to be disclosed. The 
updated clinical assessment evidenced a few major oncogenes viz. RAS, BRAF, and 
RET as key drivers in the development and progression of thyroid cancer. The 
BRAF mutation, a major cause of aggressive tumor type in papillary thyroid 
carcinoma, is frequently reported. The characteristic oncogenic changes imply 
thyroid cancer to be clinically an ideal model for targeted therapy against RET, 
RAS, and BRAF mutation. Though the sensitive biochemical marker assay has been 
improvised, the diagnosis of thyroid follicular neoplasms is still a big 
challenge as the biopsy aspiration cannot define the nature of the tumor in 30% 
of the cases. The main hurdle is assisted distinction between follicular thyroid 
lesions. The discrimination between follicular thyroid adenomas and carcinomas 
is histologically accomplished. This strictly necessitates the identification of 
sensitive diagnostic/prognostic markers to mitigate the risk of thyroid cancer 
and to avoid the unnecessary hurdles of biopsy and surgery. An array of 
prognostic biomarkers is being used for the diagnosis of thyroid cancer. 
However, Estrogen Related Receptor Gamma (ERRγ) is setting a new benchmark among 
the clinical biomarkers. The dramatic expression of ERRγ in thyroid cancer 
enables itself not only to serve as a characteristic diagnostic marker but also 
as a therapeutic target. Recently, we have reported that ERRγ is upregulated in 
96 papillary thyroid cancer (PTC) and 26 poorly differentiated/ anaplastic 
thyroid cancer (ATC) samples. Various synthetic ERRγ inverse agonists viz. 
GSK5182, DN200434, and 24e are fully proved to modulate ERRγ expression in ATC 
to attain partial cure. If this finding can be assayed on a larger scale the 
evaluation of this marker may be warranted and informative. This review article 
highlights the ascending sheds of clinical biomarkers of thyroid cancer. This 
also reveals the clinical importance of ERRγ as an evolving diagnostic and 
therapeutic target in thyroid cancer.

DOI: 10.31557/APJCP.2023.24.2.375
PMCID: PMC10162641
PMID: 36853284 [Indexed for MEDLINE]