1. Clin Epigenetics. 2023 Mar 1;15(1):35. doi: 10.1186/s13148-023-01453-5.

Molecular characterisation of 36 multilocus imprinting disturbance (MLID) 
patients: a comprehensive approach.

Bilo L(1), Ochoa E(2), Lee S(2), Dey D(1), Kurth I(1), Kraft F(1), Rodger 
F(2)(3), Docquier F(2)(3), Toribio A(2)(3), Bottolo L(2)(4)(5), Binder G(6), 
Fekete G(7), Elbracht M(1), Maher ER(2), Begemann M(1), Eggermann T(8).

Author information:
(1)Medical Faculty, Institute for Human Genetics and Genome Medicine, RWTH 
Aachen University, Pauwelsstr. 30, 52074, Aachen, Germany.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 0QQ, 
UK.
(3)Stratified Medicine Core Laboratory NGS Hub, Department of Medical Genetics, 
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(4)MRC Biostatistics Unit, School of Clinical Medicine, University of Cambridge, 
Cambridge, UK.
(5)The Alan Turing Institute, London, UK.
(6)Pediatric Endocrinology, University Children's Hospital, Universiy of 
Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.
(8)Medical Faculty, Institute for Human Genetics and Genome Medicine, RWTH 
Aachen University, Pauwelsstr. 30, 52074, Aachen, Germany. 
teggermann@ukaachen.de.

BACKGROUND: Imprinting disorders (ImpDis) comprise diseases which are caused by 
aberrant regulation of monoallelically and parent-of-origin-dependent expressed 
genes. A characteristic molecular change in ImpDis patients is aberrant 
methylation signatures at disease-specific loci, without an obvious DNA change 
at the specific differentially methylated region (DMR). However, there is a 
growing number of reports on multilocus imprinting disturbances (MLIDs), i.e. 
aberrant methylation at different DMRs in the same patient. These MLIDs account 
for a significant number of patients with specific ImpDis, and several reports 
indicate a central role of pathogenic maternal effect variants in their 
aetiology by affecting the maturation of the oocyte and the early embryo. Though 
several studies on the prevalence and the molecular causes of MLID have been 
conducted, homogeneous datasets comprising both genomic and methylation data are 
still lacking.
RESULTS: Based on a cohort of 36 MLID patients, we here present both methylation 
data obtained from next-generation sequencing (NGS, ImprintSeq) approaches and 
whole-exome sequencing (WES). The compilation of methylation data did not reveal 
a disease-specific MLID episignature, and a predisposition for the phenotypic 
modification was not obvious as well. In fact, this lack of 
epigenotype-phenotype correlation might be related to the mosaic distribution of 
imprinting defects and their functional relevance in specific tissues.
CONCLUSIONS: Due to the higher sensitivity of NGS-based approaches, we suggest 
that ImprintSeq might be offered at reference centres in case of ImpDis patients 
with unusual phenotypes but MLID negative by conventional tests. By WES, 
additional MLID causes than the already known maternal effect variants could not 
be identified, neither in the patients nor in the maternal exomes. In cases with 
negative WES results, it is currently unclear to what extent either 
environmental factors or undetected genetic variants contribute to MLID.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13148-023-01453-5
PMCID: PMC9979536
PMID: 36859312 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no competing 
interests to declare.