1. Front Physiol. 2023 Feb 20;14:1081186. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2023.1081186. 
eCollection 2023.

Beyond CBD: Inhibitory effects of lesser studied phytocannabinoids on human 
voltage-gated sodium channels.

Milligan CJ(1), Anderson LL(2)(3)(4), McGregor IS(2)(3)(5), Arnold JC(2)(3)(4), 
Petrou S(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Florey Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health, The University of 
Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(2)Brain and Mind Centre, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(3)Lambert Initiative for Cannabinoid Therapeutics, The University of Sydney, 
Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(4)Discipline of Pharmacology, Sydney Pharmacy School, Faculty of Medicine and 
Health, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(5)School of Psychology, Faculty of Science, The University of Sydney, Sydney, 
NSW, Australia.
(6)Department of Medicine, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, 
Australia.

Introduction: Cannabis contains cannabidiol (CBD), the main non-psychoactive 
phytocannabinoid, but also many other phytocannabinoids that have therapeutic 
potential in the treatment of epilepsy. Indeed, the phytocannabinoids 
cannabigerolic acid (CBGA), cannabidivarinic acid (CBDVA), cannabichromenic acid 
(CBCA) and cannabichromene (CBC) have recently been shown to have 
anti-convulsant effects in a mouse model of Dravet syndrome (DS), an intractable 
form of epilepsy. Recent studies demonstrate that CBD inhibits voltage-gated 
sodium channel function, however, whether these other anti-convulsant 
phytocannabinoids affect these classic epilepsy drug-targets is unknown. 
Voltage-gated sodium (NaV) channels play a pivotal role in initiation and 
propagation of the neuronal action potential and NaV1.1, NaV1.2, NaV1.6 and 
NaV1.7 are associated with the intractable epilepsies and pain conditions. 
Methods: In this study, using automated-planar patch-clamp technology, we 
assessed the profile of the phytocannabinoids CBGA, CBDVA, cannabigerol (CBG), 
CBCA and CBC against these human voltage-gated sodium channels subtypes 
expressed in mammalian cells and compared the effects to CBD. Results: CBD and 
CBGA inhibited peak current amplitude in the low micromolar range in a 
concentration-dependent manner, while CBG, CBCA and CBC revealed only modest 
inhibition for this subset of sodium channels. CBDVA inhibited NaV1.6 peak 
currents in the low micromolar range in a concentration-dependent fashion, while 
only exhibiting modest inhibitory effects on NaV1.1, NaV1.2, and NaV1.7 
channels. CBD and CBGA non-selectively inhibited all channel subtypes examined, 
whereas CBDVA was selective for NaV1.6. In addition, to better understand the 
mechanism of this inhibition, we examined the biophysical properties of these 
channels in the presence of each cannabinoid. CBD reduced NaV1.1 and NaV1.7 
channel availability by modulating the voltage-dependence of steady-state fast 
inactivation (SSFI, V0.5 inact), and for NaV1.7 channel conductance was reduced. 
CBGA also reduced NaV1.1 and NaV1.7 channel availability by shifting the 
voltage-dependence of activation (V0.5 act) to a more depolarized potential, and 
for NaV1.7 SSFI was shifted to a more hyperpolarized potential. CBDVA reduced 
channel availability by modifying conductance, SSFI and recovery from SSFI for 
all four channels, except for NaV1.2, where V0.5 inact was unaffected. 
Discussion: Collectively, these data advance our understanding of the molecular 
actions of lesser studied phytocannabinoids on voltage-gated sodium channel 
proteins.

Copyright © 2023 Milligan, Anderson, McGregor, Arnold and Petrou.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2023.1081186
PMCID: PMC9986306
PMID: 36891145

Conflict of interest statement: JA is Deputy Academic Director of the Lambert 
Initiative. He has served as an expert witness in various medicolegal cases 
involving cannabis and cannabinoids. JA has received consulting fees from Creo 
Inc. and Medicinal Cannabis Industry Australia (MCIA). He has also received 
funding support from Australia’s National Health and Medical Research Council 
(NHMRC). IM is Academic Director of the Lambert Initiative for Cannabinoid 
Therapeutics. He has served as an expert witness in various medicolegal cases 
involving cannabis, has received honoraria from Janssen, is currently a 
consultant to Kinoxis Therapeutics, and has received research funding and 
fellowship support from the Lambert Initiative, NHMRC and Australian Research 
Council. JA and IM hold patents on cannabinoid therapies (PCT/AU2018/05089 and 
PCT/AU2019/050554). The remaining authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.