1. Molecules. 2023 Feb 27;28(5):2223. doi: 10.3390/molecules28052223.

Untargeted Metabolomics Combined with Sensory Analysis to Evaluate the Chemical 
Changes in Coppa Piacentina PDO during Different Ripening Times.

Rocchetti G(1), Scansani A(2), Leni G(1), Sigolo S(1), Bertuzzi T(1), Prandini 
A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal Science, Food and Nutrition, Università Cattolica del 
Sacro Cuore, Via Emilia Parmense 84, 29122 Piacenza, Italy.
(2)Consorzio Tutela Salumi DOP Piacentini, Via Tirotti 11, 29122 Piacenza, 
Italy.

Ripening time is known to drive the chemical and sensory profiles of dry meat 
products, thus potentially affecting the final quality of the product. Starting 
from these background conditions, the aim of this work was to shed light, for 
the first time, on the chemical modifications of a typical Italian PDO meat 
product-namely, Coppa Piacentina-during ripening, to find correlations between 
its sensory quality and the biomarker compounds related to the progress of 
ripening. The ripening time (from 60 to 240 days) was found to deeply modify the 
chemical composition of this typical meat product, providing potential 
biomarkers of both oxidative reactions and sensory attributes. The chemical 
analyses revealed that there is typically a significant decrease in the moisture 
content during ripening, likely due to increased dehydration. In addition, the 
fatty acid profile showed that the distribution of polyunsaturated fatty acids 
significantly (p < 0.05) decreased during ripening, because of their high 
susceptibility to oxidation and conversion to intermediate and secondary 
molecules. An untargeted metabolomics approach, coupled with unsupervised and 
supervised multivariate statistics, highlighted a significant impact (prediction 
scores > 1) of lipid oxidation during ripening time, with some metabolites (such 
as γ -glutamyl-peptides, hydroperoxy-fatty acids, and glutathione) being 
particularly discriminant in predicting the changes observed. The discriminant 
metabolites were coherent with the progressive increase of peroxide values 
determined during the entire ripening period. Finally, the sensory analysis 
outlined that the highest degree of ripening provided greater color intensity of 
the lean part, slice firmness, and chewing consistency, with glutathione and 
γ-glutamyl-glutamic acid establishing the highest number of significant 
correlations with the sensory attributes evaluated. Taken together, this work 
highlights the importance and validity of untargeted metabolomics coupled with 
sensory analysis to investigate the comprehensive chemical and sensory changes 
to dry meat during ripening.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules28052223
PMCID: PMC10004812
PMID: 36903465 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.