1. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2023 Jun;80:102209. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2023.102209. Epub
 2023 Mar 11.

Combination of pioglitazone, a PPARγ agonist, and synthetic surfactant B-YL 
prevents hyperoxia-induced lung injury in adult mice lung explants.

Kurihara C(1), Sakurai R(2), Chuang TD(2), Waring AJ(2), Walther FJ(2), Rehan 
VK(3).

Author information:
(1)Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Department of Pediatrics, Torrance, CA, USA; The 
Lundquist Institute for Biomedical Innovation at Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, 
Torrance, CA, USA.
(2)The Lundquist Institute for Biomedical Innovation at Harbor-UCLA Medical 
Center, Torrance, CA, USA.
(3)Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Department of Pediatrics, Torrance, CA, USA; The 
Lundquist Institute for Biomedical Innovation at Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, 
Torrance, CA, USA. Electronic address: vrehan@lundquist.org.

INTRODUCTION: Hyperoxia-induced lung injury is characterized by acute alveolar 
injury, disrupted epithelial-mesenchymal signaling, oxidative stress, and 
surfactant dysfunction, yet currently, there is no effective treatment. Although 
a combination of aerosolized pioglitazone (PGZ) and a synthetic lung surfactant 
(B-YL peptide, a surfactant protein B mimic) prevents hyperoxia-induced neonatal 
rat lung injury, whether it is also effective in preventing hyperoxia-induced 
adult lung injury is unknown.
METHOD: Using adult mice lung explants, we characterize the effects of 24 and 
72-h (h) exposure to hyperoxia on 1) perturbations in Wingless/Int (Wnt) and 
Transforming Growth Factor (TGF)-β signaling pathways, which are critical 
mediators of lung injury, 2) aberrations of lung homeostasis and injury repair 
pathways, and 3) whether these hyperoxia-induced aberrations can be blocked by 
concomitant treatment with PGZ and B-YL combination.
RESULTS: Our study reveals that hyperoxia exposure to adult mouse lung explants 
causes activation of Wnt (upregulation of key Wnt signaling intermediates 
β-catenin and LEF-1) and TGF-β (upregulation of key TGF-β signaling 
intermediates TGF-β type I receptor (ALK5) and SMAD 3) signaling pathways 
accompanied by an upregulation of myogenic proteins (calponin and fibronectin) 
and inflammatory cytokines (IL-6, IL-1β, and TNFα), and alterations in key 
endothelial (VEGF-A and its receptor FLT-1, and PECAM-1) markers. All of these 
changes were largely mitigated by the PGZ + B-YL combination.
CONCLUSION: The effectiveness of the PGZ + B-YL combination in blocking 
hyperoxia-induced adult mice lung injury ex-vivo is promising to be an effective 
therapeutic approach for adult lung injury in vivo.

Copyright © 2023. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2023.102209
PMCID: PMC10205668
PMID: 36907545 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest Authors Drs. 
Rehan, Walther, and Waring hold a patent on the composition and methods of 
administering PPARγ agonists, surfactant peptides, and phospholipids for 
preventing and treating neonatal lung injury (Patent #:20220047681). No other 
competing interest or conflict of interest to declare. All authors completed the 
ICMJE Form.