1. Comput Struct Biotechnol J. 2023 Mar 2;21:1995-2008. doi: 
10.1016/j.csbj.2023.02.051. eCollection 2023.

Computational tools for exploring peptide-membrane interactions in gram-positive 
bacteria.

Kumar S(1)(2), Balaya RDA(1), Kanekar S(1), Raju R(1)(2), Prasad TSK(2), 
Kandasamy RK(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Integrative Omics Data Science, Yenepoya (Deemed to be 
University), Mangalore 575018, India.
(2)Centre for Systems Biology and Molecular Medicine, Yenepoya Research Centre, 
Yenepoya (Deemed to be University), Mangalore 575018, India.
(3)Centre of Molecular Inflammation Research (CEMIR), and Department of Clinical 
and Molecular Medicine (IKOM), Norwegian University of Science and Technology, 
7491 Trondheim, Norway.
(4)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Center for Individualized 
Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

The vital cellular functions in Gram-positive bacteria are controlled by 
signaling molecules known as quorum sensing peptides (QSPs), considered 
promising therapeutic interventions for bacterial infections. In the bacterial 
system QSPs bind to membrane-coupled receptors, which then auto-phosphorylate 
and activate intracellular response regulators. These response regulators induce 
target gene expression in bacteria. One of the most reliable trends in drug 
discovery research for virulence-associated molecular targets is the use of 
peptide drugs or new functionalities. In this perspective, computational methods 
act as auxiliary aids for biologists, where methodologies based on machine 
learning and in silico analysis are developed as suitable tools for target 
peptide identification. Therefore, the development of quick and reliable 
computational resources to identify or predict these QSPs along with their 
receptors and inhibitors is receiving considerable attention. The databases such 
as Quorumpeps and Quorum Sensing of Human Gut Microbes (QSHGM) provide a 
detailed overview of the structures and functions of QSPs. The tools and 
algorithms such as QSPpred, QSPred-FL, iQSP, EnsembleQS and PEPred-Suite have 
been used for the generic prediction of QSPs and feature representation. The 
availability of compiled key resources for utilizing peptide features based on 
amino acid composition, positional preferences, and motifs as well as structural 
and physicochemical properties, including biofilm inhibitory peptides, can aid 
in elucidating the QSP and membrane receptor interactions in infectious 
Gram-positive pathogens. Herein, we present a comprehensive survey of diverse 
computational approaches that are suitable for detecting QSPs and QS 
interference molecules. This review highlights the utility of these methods for 
developing potential biomarkers against infectious Gram-positive pathogens.

© 2023 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.csbj.2023.02.051
PMCID: PMC10025024
PMID: 36950221

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.