1. Front Pharmacol. 2023 Mar 6;14:1082602. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2023.1082602. 
eCollection 2023.

Evaluation of therapeutic effects of tetramethylpyrazine nitrone in Alzheimer's 
disease mouse model and proteomics analysis.

Zhou X(1)(2)(3), Huang K(3), Wang Y(1)(4), Zhang Z(4), Liu Y(5), Hou Q(6), Yang 
X(7), Hoi MPM(2)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Stroke Center, Jinan University College of 
Pharmacy, The First Affiliated Hospital of Jinan University and Institute of New 
Drug Research, Guangzhou, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Quality Research in Chinese Medicine, Institute of 
Chinse Medical Sciences, University of Macau, Macau, China.
(3)Institute of GCP, Guangzhou Eighth People's Hospital Guangzhou Medical 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(4)Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Pharmacodynamic, College of Pharmacy, 
Institute of New Drug Research, Constituents of Traditional Chinese Medicine & 
New Drug Research, Jinan University, Guangdong, China.
(5)Department of Neurology, Daqing People's Hospital, Daqing, China.
(6)Department of Neurology, Clinical Neuroscience Center, the 7th Affiliated 
Hospital, Sun-Yat-sen University. Shenzhen, China.
(7)Key Laboratory of Modern Toxicology of Shenzhen, Shenzhen Center for Disease 
Control and Prevention, Shenzhen, China.
(8)DPS, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Macau, Macau, China.

The pathophysiology of Alzheimer's disease (AD) is multifactorial with 
characteristic extracellular accumulation of amyloid-beta (Aβ) and intraneuronal 
aggregation of hyperphosphorylated tau in the brain. Development of 
disease-modifying treatment for AD has been challenging. Recent studies suggest 
that deleterious alterations in neurovascular cells happens in parallel with Aβ 
accumulation, inducing tau pathology and necroptosis. Therefore, therapies 
targeting cellular Aβ and tau pathologies may provide a more effective strategy 
of disease intervention. Tetramethylpyrazine nitrone (TBN) is a nitrone 
derivative of tetramethylpyrazine, an active ingredient from Ligusticum 
wallichii Franchat (Chuanxiong). We previously showed that TBN is a potent 
scavenger of free radicals with multi-targeted neuroprotective effects in rat 
and monkey models of ischemic stroke. The present study aimed to investigate the 
anti-AD properties of TBN. We employed AD-related cellular model (N2a/APPswe) 
and transgenic mouse model (3×Tg-AD mouse) for mechanistic and behavioral 
studies. Our results showed that TBN markedly improved cognitive functions and 
reduced Aβ and hyperphosphorylated tau levels in mouse model. Further 
investigation of the underlying mechanisms revealed that TBN promoted 
non-amyloidogenic processing pathway of amyloid precursor protein (APP) in 
N2a/APPswe in vitro. Moreover, TBN preserved synapses from dendritic spine loss 
and upregulated synaptic protein expressions in 3×Tg-AD mice. Proteomic analysis 
of 3×Tg-AD mouse hippocampal and cortical tissues showed that TBN induced 
neuroprotective effects through modulating mitophagy, MAPK and mTOR pathways. In 
particular, TBN significantly upregulated PINK1, a key protein for mitochondrial 
homeostasis, implicating PINK1 as a potential therapeutic target for AD. In 
summary, TBN improved cognitive functions in AD-related mouse model, inhibited 
Aβ production and tau hyperphosphorylation, and rescued synaptic loss and 
neuronal damage. Multiple mechanisms underlie the anti-AD effects of TBN 
including the modulation of APP processing, mTOR signaling and PINK1-related 
mitophagy.

Copyright © 2023 Zhou, Huang, Wang, Zhang, Liu, Hou, Yang and Hoi.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2023.1082602
PMCID: PMC10025301
PMID: 36950017

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.