1. Cancer Res Commun. 2023 Feb 9;3(2):235-244. doi:
10.1158/2767-9764.CRC-22-0295.  eCollection 2023 Feb.

A PRRX1 Signature Identifies TIM-3 and VISTA as Potential Immune Checkpoint 
Targets in a Subgroup of Microsatellite Stable Colorectal Cancer Liver 
Metastases.

Nygaard V(1), Ree AH(2)(3), Dagenborg VJ(1)(2)(4), Børresen-Dale AL(5), Edwin 
B(2)(6)(7), Fretland ÅA(6)(7), Grzyb K(8), Haugen MH(1), Mælandsmo GM(#)(1)(9), 
Flatmark K(#)(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Tumor Biology, Institute for Cancer Research, Oslo University 
Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(2)Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(3)Department of Oncology, Akershus University Hospital, Lørenskog, Norway.
(4)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, 
Norway.
(5)Department of Cancer Genetics, Institute for Cancer Research, Oslo University 
Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(6)Department of Hepato-Pancreato-Biliary Surgery, Oslo University Hospital, 
Oslo, Norway.
(7)The Intervention Center, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(8)Department of Pathology, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(9)Institute for Medical Biology, Faculty of Health Sciences, UiT-The Arctic 
University of Norway, Tromsø, Norway.
(#)Contributed equally

Disease recurrence and drug resistance are major challenges in the clinical 
management of patients with colorectal cancer liver metastases (CLM), and 
because tumors are generally microsatellite stable (MSS), responses to immune 
therapies are poor. The mesenchymal phenotype is overrepresented in 
treatment-resistant cancers and is associated with an immunosuppressed 
microenvironment. The aim of this work was to molecularly identify and 
characterize a mesenchymal subgroup of MSS CLM to identify novel therapeutic 
approaches. We here generated a mesenchymal gene expression signature by 
analysis of resection specimens from 38 patients with CLM using ranked 
expression level of the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition-related 
transcription factor PRRX1. Downstream pathway analysis based on the resulting 
gene signature was performed and independent, publicly available datasets were 
used to validate the findings. A subgroup comprising 16% of the analyzed CLM 
samples were classified as mesenchymal, or belonging to the PRRX1 high group. 
Analysis of the PRRX1 signature genes revealed a distinct immunosuppressive 
phenotype with high expression of immune checkpoints HAVCR2/TIM-3 and VISTA, in 
addition to the M2 macrophage marker CD163. The findings were convincingly 
validated in datasets from three external CLM cohorts. Upregulation of immune 
checkpoints HAVCR2/TIM-3 and VISTA in the PRRX1 high subgroup is a novel 
finding, and suggests immune evasion beyond the PD-1/PD-L1 axis, which may 
contribute to poor response to PD-1/PD-L1-directed immune therapy in MSS 
colorectal cancer. Importantly, these checkpoints represent potential novel 
opportunities for immune-based therapy approaches in a subset of MSS CLM.
SIGNIFICANCE: CLM is an important cause of colorectal cancer mortality where the 
majority of patients have yet to benefit from immunotherapies. In this study of 
gene expression profiling analyses, we uncovered novel immune checkpoint targets 
in a subgroup of patients with MSS CLMs harboring a mesenchymal phenotype.

© 2023 The Authors; Published by the American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/2767-9764.CRC-22-0295
PMCID: PMC10035516
PMID: 36968142 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: V. Nygaard reports grants from Research Council 
of Norway, South-Eastern Norway Health Authority, and Sister Institution Network 
Fund during the conduct of the study. Å.A. Fretland reports personal fees from 
Bayer and Olympus outside the submitted work. M.H. Haugen reports grants from 
South-Eastern Healt Authorities Norway and MD Anderson Sister Institution 
Network Fund (SINF) during the conduct of the study. No disclosures were 
reported by the other authors.