1. Pathogens. 2023 Mar 2;12(3):402. doi: 10.3390/pathogens12030402.

Targeting Mitochondrial Therapy in the Regulation of HPV Infection and 
HPV-Related Cancers.

Cruz-Gregorio A(1)(2), Aranda-Rivera AK(2), Roviello GN(3), Pedraza-Chaverri 
J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Biomedicine, Ignacio Chávez National Institute 
of Cardiology, Juan Badiano No. 1, Colonia Section XVI, Tlalpan, Mexico City 
14080, Mexico.
(2)Laboratory F-315, Department of Biology, Faculty of Chemistry, National 
Autonomous University of Mexico, Mexico City 04510, Mexico.
(3)Institute of Biostructures and Bioimaging, Italian National Council for 
Research (IBB-CNR), Area di Ricerca site and Headquarters, Via Pietro Castellino 
111, 80131 Naples, Italy.

It has been previously proposed that some types of cancer cells reprogram their 
metabolic pathways, favoring the metabolism of glucose by aerobic glycolysis 
(Warburg effect) instead of oxidative phosphorylation, mainly because the 
mitochondria of these cells are damaged, thus displaying mitochondrial 
dysfunction. However, in several cancers, the mitochondria do not exhibit any 
dysfunction and are also necessary for the tumor's growth and maintenance. 
Remarkably, if the mitochondria are dysfunctional, specific processes associated 
with the release of cytochrome c (cyt c), such as apoptosis, are significantly 
impaired. In these cases, cellular biotherapies such as mitochondrial 
transplantation could restore the intrinsic apoptotic processes necessary for 
the elimination of cancers. On the other hand, if the mitochondria are in good 
shape, drugs that target the mitochondria are a valid option for treating the 
related cancers. Famously, the mitochondria are targeted by the human 
papillomavirus (HPV), and HPV-related cancers depend on the host's mitochondria 
for their development and progression. On the other hand, the mitochondria are 
also important during treatment, such as chemotherapy, since they are key 
organelles for the increase in reactive oxygen species (ROS), which 
significantly increases cell death due to the presence of oxidative stress (OS). 
In this way, the mitochondria in HPV infection and in the development of 
HPV-related cancer could be targeted to reduce or eliminate HPV infections or 
HPV-related cancers. To our knowledge, there was no previous review specifically 
focusing on this topic, so this work aimed to summarize for the first time the 
potential use of mitochondria-targeting drugs, providing molecular insights on 
the main therapeutics developed so far in HPV infection and HPV-related cancer. 
Thus, we reviewed the mechanisms associated with HPV-related cancers, with their 
early proteins and mitochondrial apoptosis specifically induced by different 
compounds or drugs, in which these molecules induce the production of ROS, the 
activation of proapoptotic proteins, the deactivation of antiapoptotic proteins, 
the loss of mitochondrial membrane potential (Δψm), cyt c release, and the 
activation of caspases, which are all events which lead to the activation of 
mitochondrial apoptosis pathways. This makes these compounds and drugs potential 
anticancer therapeutics that target the mitochondria and could be exploited in 
future biomedical strategies.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens12030402
PMCID: PMC10054155
PMID: 36986324

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.