1. DEN Open. 2023 Mar 27;3(1):e230. doi: 10.1002/deo2.230. eCollection 2023 Apr.

A case of multiple glucagonomas with no clinical manifestations of excess 
glucagon despite hyperglucagonemia.

Amano S(1), Suenaga S(1), Hamamoto K(1), Yada S(1), Tsuyama T(1), Shinoda S(1), 
Tanaka Y(2), Takemoto Y(2), Harada E(2), Tanabe K(3), Asahara S(4), Hoshii K(5), 
Takami T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology Yamaguchi University Graduate 
School of Medicine Yamaguchi Japan.
(2)Department of Surgery and Clinical Science Yamaguchi University Graduate 
School of Medicine Yamaguchi Japan.
(3)Department of Endocrinology Metabolism Hematological Science, and 
Therapeutics Yamaguchi University Graduate School of Medicine Yamaguchi Japan.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine Division of Diabetes and Endocrinology Kobe 
University Graduate School of Medicine Kobe Japan.
(5)Department of Molecular Pathology Yamaguchi University Graduate School of 
Medicine Yamaguchi Japan.

Herein we report the case of a patient with multiple glucagonomas that have been 
precisely described with endoscopic ultrasound. A 36-year-old woman was referred 
to our hospital for computed tomography investigation of multiple pancreatic 
masses. Physical examination was unremarkable; on contrast-enhanced computed 
tomography, mass lesions were evident in the head, body, and tail of the 
pancreas. The mass in the pancreatic head was poorly demarcated and exhibited a 
faint contrast effect, the one in the pancreatic body was a cystic lesion, and 
the one in the pancreatic tail was hypervascular. Blood investigations showed 
that serum glucagon was abnormally high at 7670 pg/ml; glucose tolerance was not 
impaired. There was no family history that suggested multiple endocrine 
neoplasia type 1 or von Hippel-Lindau disease. Endoscopic ultrasound revealed 
that there were additional masses, which were scattered isoechoic to hyperechoic 
lesions a few millimeters in size. Ultrasound-guided fine needle biopsy of the 
lesion in the pancreatic tail resulted in a diagnosis of a neuroendocrine tumor. 
Based on these pathologic findings, we performed a total pancreatectomy. A large 
number of nodules with tumor cells were evident in all cut surfaces of the 
surgical specimen. Immunostaining was positive for chromogranin A and glucagon, 
and glucagonoma was therefore diagnosed. It is conceivable that attenuated 
glucagon action could have contributed to the development of the multiple 
glucagonomas.

© 2023 The Authors. DEN Open published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd on 
behalf of Japan Gastroenterological Endoscopy Society.

DOI: 10.1002/deo2.230
PMCID: PMC10043567
PMID: 36998346

Conflict of interest statement: None.