1. Stem Cell Reports. 2023 Apr 11;18(4):817-828. doi:
10.1016/j.stemcr.2023.03.004.  Epub 2023 Mar 30.

Differentiation of uniparental human embryonic stem cells into granulosa cells 
reveals a paternal contribution to gonadal development.

Keshet G(1), Bar S(2), Sarel-Gallily R(2), Yanuka O(2), Benvenisty N(3), 
Eldar-Geva T(4).

Author information:
(1)The Azrieli Center for Stem Cells and Genetic Research, Department of 
Genetics, The Alexander Silberman Institute of Life Sciences, The Hebrew 
University of Jerusalem, Edmond J. Safra Campus, Givat Ram, Jerusalem, Israel. 
Electronic address: gal.cleitman@mail.huji.ac.il.
(2)The Azrieli Center for Stem Cells and Genetic Research, Department of 
Genetics, The Alexander Silberman Institute of Life Sciences, The Hebrew 
University of Jerusalem, Edmond J. Safra Campus, Givat Ram, Jerusalem, Israel.
(3)The Azrieli Center for Stem Cells and Genetic Research, Department of 
Genetics, The Alexander Silberman Institute of Life Sciences, The Hebrew 
University of Jerusalem, Edmond J. Safra Campus, Givat Ram, Jerusalem, Israel. 
Electronic address: nissimb@mail.huji.ac.il.
(4)Reproductive Endocrinology and Genetics Unit, Division of Obstetrics and 
Gynecology, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel; The Hebrew 
University School of Medicine, Jerusalem, Israel. Electronic address: 
gevat@szmc.org.il.

Genomic imprinting underlies the mammalian requirement for sexual reproduction. 
Nonetheless, the relative contribution of the two parental genomes during human 
development is not fully understood. Specifically, a fascinating question is 
whether the formation of the gonad, which holds the ability to reproduce, 
depends on equal contribution from both parental genomes. Here, we 
differentiated androgenetic and parthenogenetic human pluripotent stem cells 
(hPSCs) into ovarian granulosa-like cells (GLCs). We show that in contrast to 
biparental and androgenetic cells, parthenogenetic hPSCs present a reduced 
capacity to differentiate into GLCs. We further identify the paternally 
expressed gene IGF2 as the most upregulated imprinted gene upon differentiation. 
Remarkably, while IGF2 knockout androgenetic cells fail to differentiate into 
GLCs, the differentiation of parthenogenetic cells supplemented with IGF2 is 
partly rescued. Thus, our findings unravel a surprising essentiality of genes 
that are only expressed from the paternal genome to the development of the 
female reproductive system.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2023.03.004
PMCID: PMC10147827
PMID: 37001516 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interests N.B. is CSO of NewStem 
Ltd.