1. BMC Public Health. 2023 Apr 3;23(1):629. doi: 10.1186/s12889-023-15465-6.

The ADEM2 project: early pathogenic mechanisms of preschool wheeze and a 
randomised controlled trial assessing the gain in health and cost-effectiveness 
by application of the breath test for the diagnosis of asthma in wheezing 
preschool children.

Kienhorst S(1), van Aarle MHD(2), Jöbsis Q(2), Bannier MAGE(2), Kersten ETG(3), 
Damoiseaux J(4), van Schayck OCP(5), Merkus PJFM(6), Koppelman GH(3), van 
Schooten FJ(7); ADEM2 Consortium; Smolinska A(7), Dompeling E(2).

Collaborators: van der Sande LJTM, van Horck M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatric Pulmonology, Maastricht University Medical Centre, 
Maastricht, The Netherlands. sophie.kienhorst@mumc.nl.
(2)Department of Paediatric Pulmonology, Maastricht University Medical Centre, 
Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Paediatric Pulmonology and Pediatric Allergology, Beatrix 
Children's Hospital, and GRIAC Research Institute, University Medical Centre 
Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(4)Central Diagnostic Laboratory, Maastricht University Medical Centre, 
Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Family Medicine, Care and Public Health Research Institute 
(CAPHRI), Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Paediatric Pulmonology, Radboud University Medical Centre, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(7)Department Pharmacology and Toxicology, Faculty of Health, Medicine and Life 
Sciences, Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: The prevalence of asthma-like symptoms in preschool children is 
high. Despite numerous efforts, there still is no clinically available 
diagnostic tool to discriminate asthmatic children from children with transient 
wheeze at preschool age. This leads to potential overtreatment of children 
outgrowing their symptoms, and to potential undertreatment of children who turn 
out to have asthma. Our research group developed a breath test (using GC-tof-MS 
for VOC-analysis in exhaled breath) that is able to predict a diagnosis of 
asthma at preschool age. The ADEM2 study assesses the improvement in health gain 
and costs of care with the application of this breath test in wheezing preschool 
children.
METHODS: This study is a combination of a multi-centre, parallel group, two arm, 
randomised controlled trial and a multi-centre longitudinal observational cohort 
study. The preschool children randomised into the treatment arm of the RCT 
receive a probability diagnosis (and corresponding treatment recommendations) of 
either asthma or transient wheeze based on the exhaled breath test. Children in 
the usual care arm do not receive a probability diagnosis. Participants are 
longitudinally followed up until the age of 6 years. The primary outcome is 
disease control after 1 and 2 years of follow-up. Participants of the RCT, 
together with a group of healthy preschool children, also contribute to the 
parallel observational cohort study developed to assess the validity of 
alternative VOC-sensing techniques and to explore numerous other potential 
discriminating biological parameters (such as allergic sensitisation, 
immunological markers, epigenetics, transcriptomics, microbiomics) and the 
subsequent identification of underlying disease pathways and relation to the 
discriminative VOCs in exhaled breath.
DISCUSSION: The potential societal and clinical impact of the diagnostic tool 
for wheezing preschool children is substantial. By means of the breath test, it 
will become possible to deliver customized and high qualitative care to the 
large group of vulnerable preschool children with asthma-like symptoms. By 
applying a multi-omics approach to an extensive set of biological parameters we 
aim to explore (new) pathogenic mechanisms in the early development of asthma, 
creating potentially interesting targets for the development of new therapies.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Netherlands Trial Register, NL7336, Date registered 
11-10-2018.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12889-023-15465-6
PMCID: PMC10068201
PMID: 37013496 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.