1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2023 Jun 9;51(10):e56. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkad244.

Insplico: effective computational tool for studying splicing order of adjacent 
introns genome-wide with short and long RNA-seq reads.

Gohr A(1), Iñiguez LP(1), Torres-Méndez A(1), Bonnal S(1), Irimia M(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute of Science and 
Technology, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona, Spain.
(3)ICREA, Barcelona, Spain.

Although splicing occurs largely co-transcriptionally, the order by which 
introns are removed does not necessarily follow the order in which they are 
transcribed. Whereas several genomic features are known to influence whether or 
not an intron is spliced before its downstream neighbor, multiple questions 
related to adjacent introns' splicing order (AISO) remain unanswered. Here, we 
present Insplico, the first standalone software for quantifying AISO that works 
with both short and long read sequencing technologies. We first demonstrate its 
applicability and effectiveness using simulated reads and by recapitulating 
previously reported AISO patterns, which unveiled overlooked biases associated 
with long read sequencing. We next show that AISO around individual exons is 
remarkably constant across cell and tissue types and even upon major 
spliceosomal disruption, and it is evolutionarily conserved between human and 
mouse brains. We also establish a set of universal features associated with AISO 
patterns across various animal and plant species. Finally, we used Insplico to 
investigate AISO in the context of tissue-specific exons, particularly focusing 
on SRRM4-dependent microexons. We found that the majority of such microexons 
have non-canonical AISO, in which the downstream intron is spliced first, and we 
suggest two potential modes of SRRM4 regulation of microexons related to their 
AISO and various splicing-related features. Insplico is available on 
gitlab.com/aghr/insplico.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkad244
PMCID: PMC10250204
PMID: 37026474 [Indexed for MEDLINE]