1. Physiol Rep. 2023 Apr;11(7):e15652. doi: 10.14814/phy2.15652.

Probenecid slows disease progression in a murine model of autosomal dominant 
polycystic kidney disease.

Arkhipov SN(1)(2), Potter DL(1), Sultanova RF(3), Ilatovskaya DV(4), Harris 
PC(5), Pavlov TS(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hypertension and Vascular Research, Henry Ford Health, Detroit, 
Michigan, USA.
(2)Department of Physiology, Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan, USA.
(3)Division of Nephrology, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, 
South Carolina, USA.
(4)Department of Physiology, Medical College of Georgia, Augusta University, 
Augusta, Georgia, USA.
(5)Department of Nephrology and Hypertension, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, 
USA.

Development of autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) involves 
renal epithelial cell abnormalities. Cystic fluid contains a high level of ATP 
that, among other effects, leads to a reduced reabsorption of electrolytes in 
cyst-lining cells, and thus results in cystic fluid accumulation. Earlier, we 
demonstrated that Pkd1RC/RC mice, a hypomorphic model of ADPKD, exhibit 
increased expression of pannexin-1, a membrane channel capable of ATP release. 
In the current study, we found that human ADPKD cystic epithelia have higher 
pannexin-1 abundance than normal collecting ducts. We hypothesized that 
inhibition of pannexin-1 function with probenecid can be used to attenuate ADPKD 
development. Renal function in male and female Pkd1RC/RC and control mice was 
monitored between 9 and 20 months of age. To test the therapeutic effects of 
probenecid (a uricosuric agent and a pannexin-1 blocker), osmotic minipumps were 
implanted in male and female Pkd1RC/RC mice, and probenecid or vehicle was 
administered for 42 days until 1 year of age. Probenecid treatment improved 
glomerular filtration rates and slowed renal cyst formation in male mice (as 
shown in histopathology). The mechanistic effects of probenecid on sodium 
reabsorption and fluid transport were tested on polarized mpkCCDcl4 cells 
subjected to short-circuit current measurements, and in 3D cysts grown in 
Matrigel. In the mpkCCDcl4 epithelial cell line, probenecid elicited higher ENaC 
currents and attenuated in vitro cyst formation, indicating lower sodium and 
less fluid retention in the cysts. Our studies open new avenues of research into 
targeting pannexin-1 in ADPKD pathology.

© 2023 The Authors. Physiological Reports published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on 
behalf of The Physiological Society and the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.14814/phy2.15652
PMCID: PMC10079433
PMID: 37024297 [Indexed for MEDLINE]