1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Apr 4;24(7):6754. doi: 10.3390/ijms24076754.

NAGS, CPS1, and SLC25A13 (Citrin) at the Crossroads of Arginine and Pyrimidines 
Metabolism in Tumor Cells.

Owusu-Ansah M(1)(2), Guptan N(1), Alindogan D(1), Morizono M(3), Caldovic 
L(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Columbian College of Arts and Sciences, George Washington University, 
Washington, DC 20052, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Tropical Medicine, School of 
Medicine and Health Sciences, George Washington University, Washington, DC 
20052, USA.
(3)School of Mathematics, College of Science and Engineering, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.
(4)Department of Genomics and Precision Medicine, School of Medicine and Health 
Sciences, George Washington University, Washington, DC 20052, USA.
(5)Center for Genetic Medicine Research, Children's National Research Institute, 
Children's National Hospital, Washington, DC 20010, USA.

Urea cycle enzymes and transporters collectively convert ammonia into urea in 
the liver. Aberrant overexpression of carbamylphosphate synthetase 1 (CPS1) and 
SLC25A13 (citrin) genes has been associated with faster proliferation of tumor 
cells due to metabolic reprogramming that increases the activity of the CAD 
complex and pyrimidine biosynthesis. N-acetylglutamate (NAG), produced by NAG 
synthase (NAGS), is an essential activator of CPS1. Although NAGS is expressed 
in lung cancer derived cell lines, expression of the NAGS gene and its product 
was not evaluated in tumors with aberrant expression of CPS1 and citrin. We used 
data mining approaches to identify tumor types that exhibit aberrant 
overexpression of NAGS, CPS1, and citrin genes, and evaluated factors that may 
contribute to increased expression of the three genes and their products in 
tumors. Median expression of NAGS, CPS1, and citrin mRNA was higher in 
glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), glioma, and stomach adenocarcinoma (STAD) samples 
compared to the matched normal tissue. Median expression of CPS1 and citrin mRNA 
was higher in the lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) sample while expression of NAGS 
mRNA did not differ. High NAGS expression was associated with an unfavorable 
outcome in patients with glioblastoma and GBM. Low NAGS expression was 
associated with an unfavorable outcome in patients with LUAD. Patterns of DNase 
hypersensitive sites and histone modifications in the upstream regulatory 
regions of NAGS, CPS1, and citrin genes were similar in liver tissue, lung 
tissue, and A549 lung adenocarcinoma cells despite different expression levels 
of the three genes in the liver and lung. Citrin gene copy numbers correlated 
with its mRNA expression in glioblastoma, GBM, LUAD, and STAD samples. There was 
little overlap between NAGS, CPS1, and citrin sequence variants found in 
patients with respective deficiencies, tumor samples, and individuals without 
known rare genetic diseases. The correlation between NAGS, CPS1, and citrin mRNA 
expression in the individual glioblastoma, GBM, LUAD, and STAD samples was very 
weak. These results suggest that the increased cytoplasmic supply of either 
carbamylphosphate, produced by CPS1, or aspartate may be sufficient to promote 
tumorigenesis, as well as the need for an alternative explanation of CPS1 
activity in the absence of NAGS expression and NAG.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24076754
PMCID: PMC10094985
PMID: 37047726 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Ljubica Caldovic’s work was supported by the 
Recordati Rare Diseases, Inc. that manufactures and sells NCG as Carbaglu® 
(carglumic acid), which is used for the treatment of NAGS deficiency. Other 
manuscript authors declare no conflict of interest.