1. Neural Regen Res. 2023 Oct;18(10):2156-2160. doi: 10.4103/1673-5374.369097.

Alexander disease: the road ahead.

Pajares MA(1), Hernández-Gerez E(1), Pekny M(2), Pérez-Sala D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Structural and Chemical Biology, Centro de Investigaciones 
Biológicas Margarita Salas, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Laboratory of Astrocyte Biology and CNS Regeneration, Center for Brain 
Repair, Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Institute of Neuroscience and 
Physiology, Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, 
Sweden; University of Newcastle, Newcastle, NSW, and the Florey Institute of 
Neuroscience and Mental Health, Parkville, VIC, Australia.

Alexander disease is a rare neurodegenerative disorder caused by mutations in 
the glial fibrillary acidic protein, a type III intermediate filament protein 
expressed in astrocytes. Both early (infantile or juvenile) and adult onsets of 
the disease are known and, in both cases, astrocytes present characteristic 
aggregates, named Rosenthal fibers. Mutations are spread along the glial 
fibrillary acidic protein sequence disrupting the typical filament network in a 
dominant manner. Although the presence of aggregates suggests a proteostasis 
problem of the mutant forms, this behavior is also observed when the expression 
of wild-type glial fibrillary acidic protein is increased. Additionally, several 
isoforms of glial fibrillary acidic protein have been described to date, while 
the impact of the mutations on their expression and proportion has not been 
exhaustively studied. Moreover, the posttranslational modification patterns 
and/or the protein-protein interaction networks of the glial fibrillary acidic 
protein mutants may be altered, leading to functional changes that may modify 
the morphology, positioning, and/or the function of several organelles, in turn, 
impairing astrocyte normal function and subsequently affecting neurons. In 
particular, mitochondrial function, redox balance and susceptibility to 
oxidative stress may contribute to the derangement of glial fibrillary acidic 
protein mutant-expressing astrocytes. To study the disease and to develop 
putative therapeutic strategies, several experimental models have been 
developed, a collection that is in constant growth. The fact that most cases of 
Alexander disease can be related to glial fibrillary acidic protein mutations, 
together with the availability of new and more relevant experimental models, 
holds promise for the design and assay of novel therapeutic strategies.

DOI: 10.4103/1673-5374.369097
PMCID: PMC10328293
PMID: 37056123

Conflict of interest statement: None