1. Virology. 2023 Jun;583:14-26. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2023.04.001. Epub 2023 Apr 
10.

Generation and characterization of infectious molecular clones of 
transmitted/founder HIV-1 subtype C viruses.

Luthuli B(1), Gounder K(2), Deymier MJ(3), Dong KL(3), Balazs AB(3), Mann JK(4), 
Ndung'u T(5).

Author information:
(1)Africa Health Research Institute, Durban, South Africa.
(2)Africa Health Research Institute, Durban, South Africa; HIV Pathogenesis 
Programme, The Doris Duke Medical Research Institute, University of 
KwaZulu-Natal, Durban, South Africa.
(3)The Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT and Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(4)HIV Pathogenesis Programme, The Doris Duke Medical Research Institute, 
University of KwaZulu-Natal, Durban, South Africa.
(5)Africa Health Research Institute, Durban, South Africa; HIV Pathogenesis 
Programme, The Doris Duke Medical Research Institute, University of 
KwaZulu-Natal, Durban, South Africa; The Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT and Harvard 
University, Cambridge, MA, USA; Division of Infection and Immunity, University 
College London, London, UK. Electronic address: thumbi.ndungu@ahri.org.

The genetic diversity of HIV impedes vaccine development. Identifying the viral 
properties of transmitted/founder (T/F) variants may provide a common vaccine 
target. To study the biological nature of T/F viruses, we constructed 
full-length clones from women detected during Fiebig stage I acute HIV-1 
infection (AHI) from heterosexual male-to-female (MTF) transmission; and clones 
after one year of infection using In-Fusion-based cloning. Eighteen full-length 
T/F clones were generated from 9 women and six chronic infection clones were 
from 2 individuals. All clones but one were non-recombinant subtype C. Three of 
the 5 T/F clones and 3 chronic clones tested replicated efficiently in PBMCs and 
utilised CCR5 coreceptor for cell entry. Transmitted/founder and chronic 
infection clones displayed heterogenous in vitro replicative capacity and 
resistance to type I interferon. T/F viruses had shorter Env glycoproteins and 
fewer N-linked glycosylation sites in Env. Our findings suggest MTF transmission 
may select viruses with compact envelopes.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2023.04.001
PMCID: PMC10208420
PMID: 37084644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that none of the authors have any conflicts of interest regarding this 
study.