1. Pathogens. 2023 Mar 27;12(4):518. doi: 10.3390/pathogens12040518.

Microbiome and Its Dysbiosis in Inborn Errors of Immunity.

Sharma M(1), Dhaliwal M(1), Tyagi R(1), Goyal T(1), Sharma S(1), Rawat A(1).

Author information:
(1)AllergyImmunology Unit, Department of Pediatrics, Advanced Pediatrics Center, 
Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh 160012, 
India.

Inborn errors of immunity (IEI) can present with infections, autoimmunity, 
lymphoproliferation, granulomas, and malignancy. IEIs are due to genetic 
abnormalities that disrupt normal host-immune response or immune regulation. The 
microbiome appears essential for maintaining host immunity, especially in 
patients with a defective immune system. Altered gut microbiota in patients with 
IEI can lead to clinical symptoms. Microbial dysbiosis is the consequence of an 
increase in pro-inflammatory bacteria or a reduction in anti-inflammatory 
bacteria. However, functional and compositional differences in microbiota are 
also involved. Dysbiosis and a reduced alpha-diversity are well documented, 
particularly in conditions like common variable immunodeficiency. Deranged 
microbiota is also seen in Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, severe combined 
immunodeficiency, chronic granulomatous disease, selective immunoglobulin-A 
deficiency, Hyper IgE syndrome (HIGES), X-linked lymphoproliferative disease-2, 
immunodysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, x-linked syndrome, and 
defects of IL10 signalling. Distinct gastrointestinal, respiratory, and 
cutaneous symptoms linked to dysbiosis are seen in several IEIs, emphasizing the 
importance of microbiome identification. In this study, we discuss the processes 
that maintain immunological homeostasis between commensals and the host and the 
disruptions thereof in patients with IEIs. As the connection between microbiota, 
host immunity, and infectious illnesses is better understood, microbiota 
manipulation as a treatment strategy or infection prevention method would be 
more readily employed. Therefore, optimal prebiotics, probiotics, postbiotics, 
and fecal microbial transplantation can be promising strategies to restore the 
microbiota and decrease disease pathology in patients with IEIs.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens12040518
PMCID: PMC10145396
PMID: 37111404

Conflict of interest statement: Authors declare no conflict of interest.