1. Front Microbiol. 2023 Apr 11;14:1148065. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2023.1148065. 
eCollection 2023.

Genomic, transcriptomic, and metabolic characterization of 
2-Phenylethanol-resistant Saccharomyces cerevisiae obtained by evolutionary 
engineering.

Holyavkin C(1)(2), Turanlı-Yıldız B(1)(2), Yılmaz Ü(1)(2), Alkım C(1)(2), Arslan 
M(1)(2), Topaloğlu A(1)(2), Kısakesen Hİ(1)(2), de Billerbeck G(3), François 
JM(4), Çakar ZP(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology & Genetics, Faculty of Science & Letters, 
Istanbul Technical University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(2)Dr. Orhan Öcalgiray Molecular Biology, Biotechnology and Genetics Research 
Center (ITU-MOBGAM), Istanbul Technical University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(3)INSA, UPS, INP, Université de Toulouse, Toulouse, France.
(4)Toulouse Biotechnology Institute (TBI), CNRS, INRA, INSA, Université de 
Toulouse, Toulouse, France.

2-Phenylethanol is an aromatic compound commonly used in the food, cosmetic, and 
pharmaceutical industries. Due to increasing demand for natural products by 
consumers, the production of this flavor by microbial fermentation is gaining 
interest, as a sustainable alternative to chemical synthesis or expensive plant 
extraction, both processes relying on the use of fossil resources. However, the 
drawback of the fermentation process is the high toxicity of 2-phenylethanol to 
the producing microorganism. The aim of this study was to obtain a 
2-phenylethanol-resistant Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain by in vivo 
evolutionary engineering and characterize the adapted yeast at the genomic, 
transcriptomic and metabolic levels. For this purpose, the tolerance to 
2-phenylethanol was developed by gradually increasing the concentration of this 
flavor compound through successive batch cultivations, leading to an adapted 
strain that could tolerate 3.4 g/L of 2-phenylethanol, which was about 3-times 
better than the reference strain. Genome sequencing of the adapted strain 
identified point mutations in several genes, notably in HOG1 that encodes the 
Mitogen-Activated Kinase of the high-osmolarity signaling pathway. As this 
mutation is localized in the phosphorylation lip of this protein, it likely 
resulted in a hyperactive protein kinase. Transcriptomic analysis of the adapted 
strain supported this suggestion by revealing a large set of upregulated 
stress-responsive genes that could be explained in great part by HOG1-dependent 
activation of the Msn2/Msn4 transcription factor. Another relevant mutation was 
found in PDE2 encoding the low affinity cAMP phosphodiesterase, the missense 
mutation of which may lead to hyperactivation of this enzyme and thereby enhance 
the stressful state of the 2-phenylethanol adapted strain. In addition, the 
mutation in CRH1 that encodes a chitin transglycosylase implicated in cell wall 
remodeling could account for the increased resistance of the adapted strain to 
the cell wall-degrading enzyme lyticase. Finally, the potent upregulation of 
ALD3 and ALD4 encoding NAD+ -dependent aldehyde dehydrogenase together with the 
observed phenylacetate resistance of the evolved strain suggest a resistance 
mechanism involving conversion of 2-phenylethanol into phenylacetaldehyde and 
phenylacetate implicating these dehydrogenases.

Copyright © 2023 Holyavkin, Turanlı-Yıldız, Yılmaz, Alkım, Arslan, Topaloğlu, 
Kısakesen, de Billerbeck, François and Çakar.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2023.1148065
PMCID: PMC10127108
PMID: 37113225

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.