1. Front Neurosci. 2023 Apr 11;17:1141261. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2023.1141261. 
eCollection 2023.

Alterations of peripheral cytokines, BDNF, and surface-based morphometry indices 
in T2DM patients without cognitive impairment.

Lyu W(1), Chen Y(2), Zhao K(1), Tan X(1), Wu Y(3), Qiu S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou 
University of Chinese Medicine, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou 
University of Chinese Medicine, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(3)School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and 
Technology, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.

PURPOSE: This study aimed to investigate potential biological mechanisms 
underlying cognitive function alterations in Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) 
patients by integrating cortical morphology with peripheral cytokine levels and 
brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) levels, and to offer potential insights 
for the early detection of T2DM-related cognitive impairment.
METHODS: This study included 16 T2DM patients with a Montreal Cognitive 
Assessment (MoCA) score of at least 26 points, as well as 16 healthy controls 
with normal cognitive function. The participants also completed the digit span 
test and digit symbol substitution test. Participants' serum levels of 
Interleukin 4 (IL-4), IL-6, IL-10, tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α), 
interferon-gamma (IFN-γ), and BDNF were also examined. Each subject underwent a 
high-resolution 3T structural brain MRI scan. Based on the aparc. a2009s atlas, 
we calculated the cortical thickness, sulcus depth, gyrification index, and 
fractal dimension for each participant using surface-based morphometry (SBM). 
Correlation analysis between cognitive measures, serum levels of cytokines and 
BDNF, and SBM indices were further performed.
RESULTS: The levels of IL-4 and BDNF showed significant group differences. In 
the T2DM group, the sulcus depth exhibited a significant decrease in the left 
transverse frontopolar gyri and sulci, as well as in the right pole-occipital; 
the fractal dimension showed a significant increase in the right 
posterior-dorsal part of the cingulate gyrus; and the gyrification index 
significantly increased in the left inferior part of the precentral sulcus and 
right triangular part of the inferior frontal gyrus. Correlation analysis 
revealed a significant positive correlation between IL-10 levels and the sulcus 
depth of left transverse frontopolar gyri and sulci; a significant positive 
correlation between the sulcus depth of the right pole-occipital and the digit 
span test-forward scores, and a significant negative correlation between the 
gyrification index of the left inferior part of the precentral sulcus and the 
digit span test-backward scores among T2DM participants.
CONCLUSION: T2DM patients without cognitive impairment displayed reductions in 
IL 4 and BDNF levels, as well as significant alterations in their SBM indices, 
indicating that prior to the emergence of cognitive impairment, the SBM indices, 
peripheral cytokines, and BDNF may have altered in T2DM patients. IL-10 may 
lessen inflammation-related brain edema and preserve sulcus depth in T2DM 
patients through its anti-inflammatory activity.

Copyright © 2023 Lyu, Chen, Zhao, Tan, Wu and Qiu.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2023.1141261
PMCID: PMC10126356
PMID: 37113152

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.