1. BMC Genomics. 2023 May 1;24(1):225. doi: 10.1186/s12864-023-09259-8.

High-resolution structural variants catalogue in a large-scale whole genome 
sequenced bovine family cohort data.

Lee YL(1)(2), Bosse M(3), Takeda H(4), Moreira GCM(4), Karim L(5), Druet T(4), 
Oget-Ebrad C(4), Coppieters W(4)(5), Veerkamp RF(3), Groenen MAM(3), Georges 
M(4), Bouwman AC(3), Charlier C(4).

Author information:
(1)Animal Breeding and Genomics, Wageningen University & Research, Wageningen, 
the Netherlands. younglim.lee@uliege.be.
(2)Unit of Animal Genomics, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, GIGA-R &, University 
of Liège, Liège, Belgium. younglim.lee@uliege.be.
(3)Animal Breeding and Genomics, Wageningen University & Research, Wageningen, 
the Netherlands.
(4)Unit of Animal Genomics, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, GIGA-R &, University 
of Liège, Liège, Belgium.
(5)GIGA Institute, GIGA Genomics Platform, University of Liège, Liège, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: Structural variants (SVs) are chromosomal segments that differ 
between genomes, such as deletions, duplications, insertions, inversions and 
translocations. The genomics revolution enabled the discovery of sub-microscopic 
SVs via array and whole-genome sequencing (WGS) data, paving the way to unravel 
the functional impact of SVs. Recent human expression QTL mapping studies 
demonstrated that SVs play a disproportionally large role in altering gene 
expression, underlining the importance of including SVs in genetic analyses. 
Therefore, this study aimed to generate and explore a high-quality bovine SV 
catalogue exploiting a unique cattle family cohort data (total 266 samples, 
forming 127 trios).
RESULTS: We curated 13,731 SVs segregating in the population, consisting of 
12,201 deletions, 1,509 duplications, and 21 multi-allelic CNVs (> 50-bp). Of 
these, we validated a subset of copy number variants (CNVs) utilising a direct 
genotyping approach in an independent cohort, indicating that at least 62% of 
the CNVs are true variants, segregating in the population. Among gene-disrupting 
SVs, we prioritised two likely high impact duplications, encompassing ORM1 and 
POPDC3 genes, respectively. Liver expression QTL mapping results revealed that 
these duplications are likely causing altered gene expression, confirming the 
functional importance of SVs. Although most of the accurately genotyped CNVs are 
tagged by single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) ascertained in WGS data, most 
CNVs were not captured by individual SNPs obtained from a 50K genotyping array.
CONCLUSION: We generated a high-quality SV catalogue exploiting unique whole 
genome sequenced bovine family cohort data. Two high impact duplications 
upregulating the ORM1 and POPDC3 are putative candidates for postpartum feed 
intake and hoof health traits, thus warranting further investigation. Generally, 
CNVs were in low LD with SNPs on the 50K array. Hence, it remains crucial to 
incorporate CNVs via means other than tagging SNPs, such as investigation of 
tagging haplotypes, direct imputation of CNVs, or direct genotyping as done in 
the current study. The SV catalogue and the custom genotyping array generated in 
the current study will serve as valuable resources accelerating utilisation of 
full spectrum of genetic variants in bovine genomes.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-023-09259-8
PMCID: PMC10152703
PMID: 37127590 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that this study received 
funding from CRV B.V., Cobb, Hendrix Genetics, and TopigsNorsvin. MAMG is a 
member of the editorial board (Associate Editor) of BMC Genomics journal. All 
authors declare that the results are presented in full and as such present no 
conflict of interest.