1. Front Plant Sci. 2023 Apr 18;14:1157678. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2023.1157678. 
eCollection 2023.

Application of CRISPR/Cas9-mediated gene editing for abiotic stress management 
in crop plants.

Kumar M(1), Prusty MR(2), Pandey MK(3), Singh PK(4), Bohra A(5), Guo B(6), 
Varshney RK(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Plant Sciences, Agricultural Research Organization, Volcani 
Center, Rishon Lezion, Israel.
(2)Institute for Cereal Crop Improvement, Plant Science, Tel Aviv University, 
Tel Aviv, Israel.
(3)International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT), 
Hyderabad, India.
(4)Department of Biotechnology, Mizoram University (A Central University), 
Pachhunga University College, Aizawl, India.
(5)State Agricultural Biotechnology Centre, Centre for Crop and Food Innovation, 
Food Futures Institute, Murdoch University, Murdoch, WA, Australia.
(6)Crop Genetics and Breeding Research Unit, United States Department of 
Agriculture-Agricultural Research Service (USDA-ARS), Tifton, GA, United States.

Abiotic stresses, including drought, salinity, cold, heat, and heavy metals, 
extensively reducing global agricultural production. Traditional breeding 
approaches and transgenic technology have been widely used to mitigate the risks 
of these environmental stresses. The discovery of engineered nucleases as 
genetic scissors to carry out precise manipulation in crop stress-responsive 
genes and associated molecular network has paved the way for sustainable 
management of abiotic stress conditions. In this context, the clustered 
regularly interspaced short palindromic repeat-Cas (CRISPR/Cas)-based 
gene-editing tool has revolutionized due to its simplicity, accessibility, 
adaptability, flexibility, and wide applicability. This system has great 
potential to build up crop varieties with enhanced tolerance against abiotic 
stresses. In this review, we summarize the latest findings on understanding the 
mechanism of abiotic stress response in plants and the application of 
CRISPR/Cas-mediated gene-editing system towards enhanced tolerance to a 
multitude of stresses including drought, salinity, cold, heat, and heavy metals. 
We provide mechanistic insights on the CRISPR/Cas9-based genome editing 
technology. We also discuss applications of evolving genome editing techniques 
such as prime editing and base editing, mutant library production, transgene 
free and multiplexing to rapidly deliver modern crop cultivars adapted to 
abiotic stress conditions.

Copyright © 2023 Kumar, Prusty, Pandey, Singh, Bohra, Guo and Varshney.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2023.1157678
PMCID: PMC10153630
PMID: 37143874

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.