1. Front Pharmacol. 2023 Apr 18;14:1134408. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2023.1134408. 
eCollection 2023.

A molecular network-based pharmacological study on the protective effect of 
Panax notoginseng rhizomes against renal ischemia-reperfusion injury.

Li DD(1), Li N(2), Cai C(1), Wei CM(1), Liu GH(1), Wang TH(2), Xu FR(1).

Author information:
(1)Yunnan Key Laboratory of Dai and Yi Medicine, Yunnan University of Chinese 
Medicine, Kunming, Yunnan, China.
(2)Department of Laboratory Animal Science, Kunming Medical University, Kunming, 
Yunnan, China.

Objective: We aimed to explore the protective effect of Panax notoginseng 
rhizomes (PNR) on renal ischemia and reperfusion injury (RIRI) and the 
underlying molecular network mechanism based on network pharmacology and 
combined systemic experimental validation. Methods: A bilateral RIRI model was 
established, and Cr, SCr, and BUN levels were detected. Then, the PNR was 
pretreated 1 week before the RIRI model was prepared. To determine the effects 
of the PNR in RIRI, histopathological damage and the effect of PNRs to the 
kidney was assessed, using TTC, HE, and TUNEL staining. Furthermore, the 
underlying network pharmacology mechanism was detected by screening drug-disease 
intersection targets from PPI protein interactions and GO and KEGG analysis, and 
the hub genes were screened for molecular docking based on the Degree value. 
Finally, the expression of hub genes in kidney tissues was verified by qPCR, and 
the protein expression of related genes was further detected by Western blot 
(WB). Results: PNR pretreatment could effectively increase Cr level, decrease 
SCr and BUN levels, reduce renal infarct areas and renal tubular cell injury 
areas, and inhibit renal cell apoptosis. By using network pharmacology combined 
with bioinformatics, we screened co-targets both Panax notoginseng (Sanchi) and 
RIRI, acquired ten hub genes, and successfully performed molecular docking. Of 
these, pretreatment with the PNR reduced the mRNA levels of IL6 and MMP9 at 
postoperative day 1 and TP53 at postoperative day 7, and the protein expression 
of MMP9 at postoperative day 1 in IRI rats. These results showed that the PNR 
could decrease kidney pathological injury in IRI rats and inhibit apoptotic 
reaction and cell inflammation so as to improve renal injury effectively, and 
the core network mechanism is involved in the inhibition of MMP9, TP53, and 
IL-6. Conclusion: The PNR has a marked protective effect for RIRI, and the 
underlying mechanism is involved in inhibiting the expression of MMP9, TP53, and 
IL-6. This striking discovery not only provides fruitful evidence for the 
protective effect of the PNR in RIRI rats but also provides a novel mechanic 
explanation.

Copyright © 2023 Li, Li, Cai, Wei, Liu, Wang and Xu.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2023.1134408
PMCID: PMC10151715
PMID: 37144215

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.