1. PLoS One. 2023 May 4;18(5):e0284964. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0284964. 
eCollection 2023.

Infection of the maternal-fetal interface and vertical transmission following 
low-dose inoculation of pregnant rhesus macaques (Macaca mulatta) with an 
African-lineage Zika virus.

Koenig MR(1), Mitzey AM(1), Morgan TK(2)(3), Zeng X(4), Simmons HA(5), Mejia 
A(5), Leyva Jaimes F(6), Keding LT(1), Crooks CM(7), Weiler AM(5), Bohm EK(8), 
Aliota MT(8), Friedrich TC(5)(7), Mohr EL(9), Golos TG(1)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Comparative Biosciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 
Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America.
(2)Department of Pathology, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, 
Oregon, United States of America.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Oregon Health and Science 
University, Portland, Oregon, United States of America.
(4)Pathology Division, United States Army Medical Research Institute of 
Infectious Diseases, Frederick, MD, United States of America.
(5)Wisconsin National Primate Research Center, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 
Madison, WI, United States of America.
(6)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 
Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America.
(7)Department of Pathobiological Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 
Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America.
(8)Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, University of Minnesota, 
Twin Cities, St. Paul, Minnesota, United States of America.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, 
Wisconsin, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Congenital Zika virus (ZIKV) infection can result in birth defects, 
including malformations in the fetal brain and visual system. There are two 
distinct genetic lineages of ZIKV: African and Asian. Asian-lineage ZIKVs have 
been associated with adverse pregnancy outcomes in humans; however, recent 
evidence from experimental models suggests that African-lineage viruses can also 
be vertically transmitted and cause fetal harm.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: To evaluate the pathway of vertical transmission 
of African-lineage ZIKV, we inoculated nine pregnant rhesus macaques (Macaca 
mulatta) subcutaneously with 44 plaque-forming units of a ZIKV strain from 
Senegal, (ZIKV-DAK). Dams were inoculated either at gestational day 30 or 45. 
Following maternal inoculation, pregnancies were surgically terminated seven or 
14 days later and fetal and maternal-fetal interface tissues were collected and 
evaluated. Infection in the dams was evaluated via plasma viremia and 
neutralizing antibody titers pre- and post- ZIKV inoculation. All dams became 
productively infected and developed strong neutralizing antibody responses. ZIKV 
RNA was detected in maternal-fetal interface tissues (placenta, decidua, and 
fetal membranes) by RT-qPCR and in situ hybridization. In situ hybridization 
detected ZIKV predominantly in the decidua and revealed that the fetal membranes 
may play a role in ZIKV vertical transmission. Infectious ZIKV was detected in 
the amniotic fluid of three pregnancies and one fetus had ZIKV RNA detected in 
multiple tissues. No significant pathology was observed in any fetus; and ZIKV 
did not have a substantial effect on the placenta.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: This study demonstrates that a very low dose of 
African-lineage ZIKV can be vertically transmitted to the macaque fetus during 
pregnancy. The low inoculating dose used in this study suggests a low minimal 
infectious dose for rhesus macaques. Vertical transmission with a low dose in 
macaques further supports the high epidemic potential of African ZIKV strains.

Copyright: This is an open access article, free of all copyright, and may be 
freely reproduced, distributed, transmitted, modified, built upon, or otherwise 
used by anyone for any lawful purpose. The work is made available under the 
Creative Commons CC0 public domain dedication.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0284964
PMCID: PMC10159132
PMID: 37141276 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.