1. Microbiol Spectr. 2023 Jun 15;11(3):e0113523. doi: 10.1128/spectrum.01135-23. 
Epub 2023 May 9.

Development of Negative Controls for Fc-C-Type Lectin Receptor Probes.

Hatinguais R(1), Kay M(2), Salazar F(1), Conn DP(1), Williams DL(3), Cook PC(1), 
Willment JA(#)(1)(2), Brown GD(#)(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)MRC Centre for Medical Mycology, University of Exeter, Exeter, United 
Kingdom.
(2)Aberdeen Fungal Group, University of Aberdeen, Institute of Medical Sciences, 
Foresterhill, Aberdeen, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Surgery, James H. Quillen College of Medicine, Center for 
Inflammation, Infectious Disease and Immunity, East Tennessee State University, 
Johnson City, Tennessee, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Fc-C-type lectin receptor (Fc-CTLRs) probes are soluble chimeric proteins 
constituted of the extracellular domain of a CTLR fused with the constant 
fraction (Fc) of the human IgG. These probes are useful tools to study the 
interaction of CTLRs with their ligands, with applications similar to those of 
antibodies, often in combination with widely available fluorescent antibodies 
targeting the Fc fragment (anti-hFc). In particular, Fc-Dectin-1 has been 
extensively used to study the accessibility of β-glucans at the surface of 
pathogenic fungi. However, there is no universal negative control for Fc-CTLRs, 
making the distinction of specific versus nonspecific binding difficult. We 
describe here 2 negative controls for Fc-CTLRs: a Fc-control constituting of 
only the Fc portion, and a Fc-Dectin-1 mutant predicted to be unable to bind 
β-glucans. Using these new probes, we found that while Fc-CTLRs exhibit 
virtually no nonspecific binding to Candida albicans yeasts, Aspergillus 
fumigatus resting spores strongly bind Fc-CTLRs in a nonspecific manner. 
Nevertheless, using the controls we describe here, we were able to demonstrate 
that A. fumigatus spores expose a low amount of β-glucan. Our data highlight the 
necessity of appropriate negative controls for experiments involving Fc-CTLRs 
probes. IMPORTANCE While Fc-CTLRs probes are useful tools to study the 
interaction of CTLRs with ligands, their use is limited by the lack of 
appropriate negative controls in assays involving fungi and potentially other 
pathogens. We have developed and characterized 2 negative controls for Fc-CTLRs 
assays: Fc-control and a Fc-Dectin-1 mutant. In this manuscript, we characterize 
the use of these negative controls with zymosan, a β-glucan containing particle, 
and 2 human pathogenic fungi, Candida albicans yeasts and Aspergillus fumigatus 
conidia. We show that A. fumigatus conidia nonspecifically bind Fc-CTLRs probes, 
demonstrating the need for appropriate negative controls in such assays.

DOI: 10.1128/spectrum.01135-23
PMCID: PMC10269840
PMID: 37158741 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.