1. Plant Biotechnol J. 2023 Aug;21(8):1642-1658. doi: 10.1111/pbi.14065. Epub
2023  May 8.

Genomic analyses provide insights into the polyploidization-driven herbicide 
adaptation in Leptochloa weeds.

Chen K(#)(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Yang H(#)(1)(3)(5), Peng Y(1)(5), Liu D(5), Zhang 
J(6), Zhao Z(1)(2)(3)(4), Wu L(5), Lin T(7), Bai L(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Wang 
L(1)(2)(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Hybrid Rice, Hunan Academy of Agricultural Sciences, 
Changsha, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Indica Rice Genetics and Breeding in the Middle and Lower 
Reaches of Yangtze River Valley, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, 
Hunan Rice Research Institute, Hunan Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Changsha, 
China.
(3)Huangpu Research Institute of Longping Agricultural Science and Technology, 
Guangzhou, China.
(4)Longping Branch, College of Biology, Hunan University, Changsha, China.
(5)Hunan Weed Science Key Laboratory, Hunan Agricultural Biotechnology Research 
Institute, Hunan Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Changsha, China.
(6)Qingdao Kingagroot Compounds Co. Ltd, Qingdao, China.
(7)State Key Laboratory of Agrobiotechnology, Beijing Key Laboratory of Growth 
and Developmental Regulation for Protected Vegetable Crops, College of 
Horticulture, China Agricultural University, Beijing, China.
(#)Contributed equally

Polyploidy confers a selective advantage under stress conditions; however, 
whether polyploidization mediates enhanced herbicide adaptation remains largely 
unknown. Tetraploid Leptochloa chinensis is a notorious weed in the rice 
ecosystem, causing severe yield loss in rice. In China, L. chinensis has only 
one sister species, the diploid L. panicea, whose damage is rarely reported. To 
gain insights into the effects of polyploidization on herbicide adaptation, we 
first assembled a high-quality genome of L. panicea and identified genome 
structure variations with L. chinensis. Moreover, we identified 
herbicide-resistance genes specifically expanded in L. chinensis, which may 
confer a greater herbicide adaptability in L. chinensis. Analysis of gene 
retention and loss showed that five herbicide target-site genes and several 
herbicide nontarget-site resistance gene families were retained during 
polyploidization. Notably, we identified three pairs of 
polyploidization-retained genes including LcABCC8, LcCYP76C1 and LcCYP76C4 that 
may enhance herbicide resistance. More importantly, we found that both copies of 
LcCYP76C4 were under herbicide selection during the spread of L. chinensis in 
China. Furthermore, we identified another gene potentially involved in herbicide 
resistance, LcCYP709B2, which is also retained during polyploidization and under 
selection. This study provides insights into the genomic basis of the enhanced 
herbicide adaptability of Leptochloa weeds during polyploidization and provides 
guidance for the precise and efficient control of polyploidy weeds.

© 2023 The Authors. Plant Biotechnology Journal published by Society for 
Experimental Biology and The Association of Applied Biologists and John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/pbi.14065
PMCID: PMC10363762
PMID: 37154437 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.