1. JIMD Rep. 2023 Mar 3;64(3):238-245. doi: 10.1002/jmd2.12363. eCollection 2023 
May.

Paracetamol toxicity in classic homocystinuria: Effect of N-acetylcysteine on 
total homocysteine.

Elkhateeb N(1)(2), Hyde S(3), Hogg SL(4), Allsop D(5), Shankar A(3), Deegan 
P(1), Tan CY(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Metabolic Medicine Cambridge University hospitals NHS 
Foundation Trust Cambridge UK.
(2)Department of Clinical Genetics Cambridge University hospitals NHS Foundation 
Trust Cambridge UK.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology Norfolk and Norwich University Hospital NHS 
Trust Norwich UK.
(4)Biochemical Genetics Unit Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust 
Cambridge UK.
(5)Department of Histopathology Norfolk and Norwich University Hospitals NHS 
Trust Norwich UK.

Classical homocystinuria (HCU) is caused by cystathionine β-synthase deficiency 
leading to impaired homocysteine transsulfuration and accumulation of 
homocysteine and methionine. Patients present with a wide spectrum of 
manifestations including ocular, skeletal, neuropsychiatric, and vascular 
manifestations. We report a 48-year-old female with pyridoxine-unresponsive HCU 
treated with betaine, cyanocobalamin, and folate. Her diet was non-restricted 
due to intolerance of low-methionine diet. She was admitted to hospital 
following a fall, with multiple fractures and subsequently developed acute liver 
failure with encephalopathy. Shock, sepsis, and liver ischaemia/thrombosis were 
excluded. In the context of glutathione depletion expected in HCU, hepatic 
dysfunction was presumed to be due to iatrogenic paracetamol toxicity, despite 
paracetamol intake at conventional therapeutic dose, with role of 
hypermethioninemia as a contributing factor being uncertain. Betaine was 
discontinued on hospital admission. N-Acetylcysteine (NAC) infusion was 
initiated. Plasma total homocysteine (tHcy) was 3.4 μmol/L 9 days following 
initiation of NAC treatment with a markedly elevated plasma methionine of 
1278 μmol/L. tHcy concentration returned to pre-admission baseline after NAC was 
discontinued. Recovery following this episode was slow with a prolonged 
cholestatic phase and gradual improvement in jaundice and coagulopathy. We 
recommend that paracetamol should be administered cautiously in HCU patients due 
to underlying glutathione depletion and risk of toxicity even at therapeutic 
doses. NAC is clearly effective in lowering tHcy in classical HCU in the 
short-term however further research is required to assess clinical efficacy and 
use as a potential therapy in classical HCU.

© 2023 The Authors. JIMD Reports published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of 
SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jmd2.12363
PMCID: PMC10159864
PMID: 37151359

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.