1. Cell Mol Biol Lett. 2023 May 11;28(1):39. doi: 10.1186/s11658-023-00446-9.

Optogenetic control of YAP can enhance the rate of wound healing.

Toh PJY(1)(2), Sudol M(1)(3), Saunders TE(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Mechanobiology Institute, National University of Singapore, Singapore, 
Singapore.
(2)Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for 
Basic Metabolic Research, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(4)Mechanobiology Institute, National University of Singapore, Singapore, 
Singapore. timothy.saunders@warwick.ac.uk.
(5)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, A*STAR, Singapore, Singapore. 
timothy.saunders@warwick.ac.uk.
(6)Warwick Medical School, University of Warwick, Coventry, UK. 
timothy.saunders@warwick.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Tissues need to regenerate to restore function after injury. Yet, 
this regenerative capacity varies significantly between organs and between 
species. For example, in the heart, some species retain full regenerative 
capacity throughout their lifespan but human cardiac cells display a limited 
ability to repair the injury. After a myocardial infarction, the function of 
cardiomyocytes is impaired and reduces the ability of the heart to pump, causing 
heart failure. Therefore, there is a need to restore the function of an injured 
heart post myocardial infarction. We investigate in cell culture the role of the 
Yes-associated protein (YAP), a transcriptional co-regulator with a pivotal role 
in growth, in driving repair after injury.
METHODS: We express optogenetic YAP (optoYAP) in three different cell lines. We 
characterised the behaviour and function of optoYAP using fluorescence imaging 
and quantitative real-time PCR of downstream YAP target genes. Mutant constructs 
were generated using site-directed mutagenesis. Nuclear localised optoYAP was 
functionally tested using wound healing assay.
RESULTS: Utilising optoYAP, which enables precise control of pathway activation, 
we show that YAP induces the expression of downstream genes involved in 
proliferation and migration. optoYAP can increase the speed of wound healing in 
H9c2 cardiomyoblasts. Interestingly, this is not driven by an increase in 
proliferation, but by collective cell migration. We subsequently dissect 
specific phosphorylation sites in YAP to identify the molecular driver of 
accelerated healing.
CONCLUSIONS: This study shows that optogenetic YAP is functional in H9c2 
cardiomyoblasts and its controlled activation can potentially enhance wound 
healing in a range of conditions.

© 2023. Crown.

DOI: 10.1186/s11658-023-00446-9
PMCID: PMC10176910
PMID: 37170209 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.