1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Apr 26;24(9):7910. doi: 10.3390/ijms24097910.

Atherosclerosis and Inflammation: Insights from the Theory of General 
Pathological Processes.

Gusev E(1), Sarapultsev A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Immunology and Physiology, Ural Branch of the Russian Academy of 
Science, 620049 Ekaterinburg, Russia.
(2)Russian-Chinese Education and Research Center of System Pathology, South Ural 
State University, 454080 Chelyabinsk, Russia.

Recent advances have greatly improved our understanding of the molecular 
mechanisms behind atherosclerosis pathogenesis. However, there is still a need 
to systematize this data from a general pathology perspective, particularly with 
regard to atherogenesis patterns in the context of both canonical and 
non-classical inflammation types. In this review, we analyze various typical 
phenomena and outcomes of cellular pro-inflammatory stress in atherosclerosis, 
as well as the role of endothelial dysfunction in local and systemic 
manifestations of low-grade inflammation. We also present the features of immune 
mechanisms in the development of productive inflammation in stable and unstable 
plaques, along with their similarities and differences compared to canonical 
inflammation. There are numerous factors that act as inducers of the 
inflammatory process in atherosclerosis, including vascular endothelium aging, 
metabolic dysfunctions, autoimmune, and in some cases, infectious damage 
factors. Life-critical complications of atherosclerosis, such as cardiogenic 
shock and severe strokes, are associated with the development of acute systemic 
hyperinflammation. Additionally, critical atherosclerotic ischemia of the lower 
extremities induces paracoagulation and the development of chronic systemic 
inflammation. Conversely, sepsis, other critical conditions, and severe systemic 
chronic diseases contribute to atherogenesis. In summary, atherosclerosis can be 
characterized as an independent form of inflammation, sharing similarities but 
also having fundamental differences from low-grade inflammation and various 
variants of canonical inflammation (classic vasculitis).

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24097910
PMCID: PMC10178362
PMID: 37175617 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.