1. Mol Psychiatry. 2023 Jun;28(6):2594-2605. doi: 10.1038/s41380-023-02112-0.
Epub  2023 May 17.

Proteasome-independent K63 polyubiquitination selectively regulates ATP levels 
and proteasome activity during fear memory formation in the female amygdala.

Farrell K(1), Musaus M(2), Auerbach A(3), Navabpour S(4), Ray WK(5), Helm RF(5), 
Jarome TJ(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)School of Animal Sciences, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State 
University, Blacksburg, VA, USA.
(2)School of Neuroscience, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, 
Blacksburg, VA, USA.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State 
University, Blacksburg, VA, USA.
(4)Translational Biology, Medicine and Health Graduate Program, Virginia 
Polytechnic Institute and State University, Roanoke, VA, USA.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State 
University, Blacksburg, VA, USA.
(6)School of Animal Sciences, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State 
University, Blacksburg, VA, USA. tjjarome@vt.edu.
(7)School of Neuroscience, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, 
Blacksburg, VA, USA. tjjarome@vt.edu.
(8)Translational Biology, Medicine and Health Graduate Program, Virginia 
Polytechnic Institute and State University, Roanoke, VA, USA. tjjarome@vt.edu.

Females are more likely than males to develop post-traumatic stress disorder 
(PTSD). However, the neurobiological mechanisms responsible for these sex 
differences remain elusive. The ubiquitin proteasome system (UPS) is involved in 
fear memory formation and implicated in PTSD development. Despite this, 
proteasome-independent functions of the UPS have rarely been studied in the 
brain. Here, using a combination of molecular, biochemical, proteomic, 
behavioral, and novel genetic approaches, we investigated the role of 
proteasome-independent lysine-63 (K63)-polyubiquitination, the second most 
abundant ubiquitin modification in cells, in the amygdala during fear memory 
formation in male and female rats. Only females had increased levels of 
K63-polyubiquitination targeting in the amygdala following fear conditioning, 
which targeted proteins involved in ATP synthesis and proteasome function. 
CRISPR-dCas13b-mediated knockdown of K63-polyubiquitination in the amygdala via 
editing of the K63 codon in the major ubiquitin gene, Ubc, impaired fear memory 
in females, but not males, and caused a reduction in learning-related increases 
in ATP levels and proteasome activity in the female amygdala. These results 
suggest that proteasome-independent K63-polyubiquitination is selectively 
involved in fear memory formation in the female amygdala, where it is involved 
in the regulation of ATP synthesis and proteasome activity following learning. 
This indicates the first link between proteasome-independent and 
proteasome-dependent UPS functions in the brain during fear memory formation. 
Importantly, these data are congruent with reported sex differences in PTSD 
development and may contribute to our understanding of why females are more 
likely to develop PTSD than males.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41380-023-02112-0
PMCID: PMC10615704
PMID: 37198264 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DISCLOSURES The authors report no biomedical 
financial interests or potential conflicts of interest