1. Front Immunol. 2023 May 3;14:1156689. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1156689. 
eCollection 2023.

Case Report: Interindividual variability and possible role of heterozygous 
variants in a family with deficiency of adenosine deaminase 2: are all 
heterozygous born equals?

Pulvirenti F(1), Cinicola BL(2)(3), Ferrari S(4), Guadagnolo D(5), Sculco E(3), 
Capponi M(2), Loffredo L(6), Sciannamea M(3), Insalaco A(7), Quinti I(1)(3), De 
Benedetti F(7), Zicari AM(2).

Author information:
(1)Reference Centre for Primary Immune Deficiencies, Azienda Ospedaliera 
Universitaria Policlinico Umberto I, Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Maternal Infantile and Urological Sciences, Sapienza University 
of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(3)Department of Molecular Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(4)Medical Genetics Unit, IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Bologna, 
Bologna, Italy.
(5)Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, 
Italy.
(6)Department of Clinical, Internal Medicine, Anesthesiology and Cardiovascular 
Sciences, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(7)Division of Rheumatology, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, 
Italy.

Deficiency of adenosine deaminase 2 (DADA2) is a rare systemic autoinflammatory 
disease, typically with autosomal recessive inheritance, usually caused by 
biallelic loss of function mutations in the ADA2 gene. The phenotypic spectrum 
is broad, generally including fever, early-onset vasculitis, stroke, and 
hematologic dysfunction. Heterozygous carriers may show related signs and 
symptoms, usually milder and at an older age. Here we describe the case of two 
relatives, the proband and his mother, bearing an ADA2 homozygous pathogenic 
variant, and a heterozygous son. The proband was a 17-year-old boy with 
intermittent fever, lymphadenopathies, and mild hypogammaglobulinemia. He also 
had sporadic episodes of aphthosis, livedo reticularis and abdominal pain. 
Hypogammaglobulinemia was documented when he was 10 years old, and symptoms 
appeared in his late adolescence. The mother demonstrated mild 
hypogammaglobulinemia, chronic pericarditis since she was 30 years old and two 
transient episodes of diplopia without lacunar lesions on MRI. ADA2 
(NM_001282225.2) sequencing identified both mother and son as homozygous for the 
c.1358A>G, p.(Tyr453Cys) variant. ADA2 activity in the proband and the mother 
was 80-fold lower than in the controls. Clinical features in both patients 
improved on anti-tumor necrosis factor therapy. An older son was found to be 
heterozygous for the same mutation post-mortem. He died at the age of 12 years 
due to a clinical picture of fever, lymphadenitis, skin rash and 
hypogammaglobulinemia evolving toward fatal multiorgan failure. Biopsies of 
skin, lymph nodes, and bone marrow excluded lymphomas and vasculitis. Despite 
being suspected of symptomatic carrier, the contribution of an additional 
variant in compound heterozygosity, or further genetic could not be ruled out, 
due to poor quality of DNA samples available. In conclusion, this familiar case 
demonstrated the wide range of phenotypic variability in DADA2. The search for 
ADA2 mutations and the assessment of ADA2 activity should be considered also in 
patients with the association of hypogammaglobulinemia and inflammatory 
conditions, also with late presentation and in absence of vasculitis. 
Furthermore, the clinical picture of the deceased carrier suggests a possible 
contribution of heterozygous pathogenic variants to inflammation.

Copyright © 2023 Pulvirenti, Cinicola, Ferrari, Guadagnolo, Sculco, Capponi, 
Loffredo, Sciannamea, Insalaco, Quinti, De Benedetti and Zicari.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1156689
PMCID: PMC10188974
PMID: 37207212 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.