1. J Cachexia Sarcopenia Muscle. 2023 Aug;14(4):1721-1736. doi:
10.1002/jcsm.13252.  Epub 2023 May 20.

SPSB1-mediated inhibition of TGF-β receptor-II impairs myogenesis in 
inflammation.

Li Y(1)(2), Dörmann N(2), Brinschwitz B(2), Kny M(1), Martin E(2), Bartels 
K(2)(3), Li N(2), Giri PV(2), Schwanz S(2), Boschmann M(1), Hille S(4)(5), 
Fielitz B(2)(3), Wollersheim T(6), Grunow J(6), Felix SB(2)(3), Weber-Carstens 
S(6), Luft FC(1), Müller OJ(4)(5), Fielitz J(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Experimental and Clinical Research Center (ECRC), Charité-Universitätsmedizin 
Berlin, Max Delbrück Center (MDC) for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz 
Association, Berlin, Germany.
(2)DZHK (German Center for Cardiovascular Research), partner site Greifswald, 
Greifswald, Germany.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine B, Cardiology, University Medicine 
Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine III, University of Kiel, Kiel, Germany.
(5)German Centre for Cardiovascular Research (DZHK), partner site 
Hamburg/Kiel/Lübeck, Germany.
(6)Department of Anaesthesiology and Operative Intensive Care Medicine (CCM, 
CVK), Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie 
Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin and Berlin Institute of 
Health, Berlin, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Sepsis-induced intensive care unit-acquired weakness (ICUAW) 
features profound muscle atrophy and attenuated muscle regeneration related to 
malfunctioning satellite cells. Transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β) is 
involved in both processes. We uncovered an increased expression of the TGF-β 
receptor II (TβRII)-inhibitor SPRY domain-containing and SOCS-box protein 1 
(SPSB1) in skeletal muscle of septic mice. We hypothesized that SPSB1-mediated 
inhibition of TβRII signalling impairs myogenic differentiation in response to 
inflammation.
METHODS: We performed gene expression analyses in skeletal muscle of cecal 
ligation and puncture- (CLP) and sham-operated mice, as well as vastus lateralis 
of critically ill and control patients. Pro-inflammatory cytokines and specific 
pathway inhibitors were used to quantitate Spsb1 expression in myocytes. 
Retroviral expression plasmids were used to investigate the effects of SPSB1 on 
TGF-β/TβRII signalling and myogenesis in primary and immortalized myoblasts and 
differentiated myotubes. For mechanistical analyses we used 
coimmunoprecipitation, ubiquitination, protein half-life, and protein synthesis 
assays. Differentiation and fusion indices were determined by 
immunocytochemistry, and differentiation factors were quantified by qRT-PCR and 
Western blot analyses.
RESULTS: SPSB1 expression was increased in skeletal muscle of ICUAW patients and 
septic mice. Tumour necrosis factor (TNF), interleukin-1β (IL-1β), and IL-6 
increased the Spsb1 expression in C2C12 myotubes. TNF- and IL-1β-induced Spsb1 
expression was mediated by NF-κB, whereas IL-6 increased the Spsb1 expression 
via the glycoprotein 130/JAK2/STAT3 pathway. All cytokines reduced myogenic 
differentiation. SPSB1 avidly interacted with TβRII, resulting in TβRII 
ubiquitination and destabilization. SPSB1 impaired TβRII-Akt-Myogenin signalling 
and diminished protein synthesis in myocytes. Overexpression of SPSB1 decreased 
the expression of early (Myog, Mymk, Mymx) and late (Myh1, 3, 7) 
differentiation-markers. As a result, myoblast fusion and myogenic 
differentiation were impaired. These effects were mediated by the SPRY- and 
SOCS-box domains of SPSB1. Co-expression of SPSB1 with Akt or Myogenin reversed 
the inhibitory effects of SPSB1 on protein synthesis and myogenic 
differentiation. Downregulation of Spsb1 by AAV9-mediated shRNA attenuated 
muscle weight loss and atrophy gene expression in skeletal muscle of septic 
mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Inflammatory cytokines via their respective signalling pathways 
cause an increase in SPSB1 expression in myocytes and attenuate myogenic 
differentiation. SPSB1-mediated inhibition of TβRII-Akt-Myogenin signalling and 
protein synthesis contributes to a disturbed myocyte homeostasis and myogenic 
differentiation that occurs during inflammation.

© 2023 The Authors. Journal of Cachexia, Sarcopenia and Muscle published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Society on Sarcopenia, Cachexia and Wasting 
Disorders.

DOI: 10.1002/jcsm.13252
PMCID: PMC10401548
PMID: 37209006 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.