1. Front Pharmacol. 2023 May 3;14:1179099. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2023.1179099. 
eCollection 2023.

Horizon scan of DNA-based methods for quality control and monitoring of herbal 
preparations.

Raclariu-Manolică AC(1)(2), Mauvisseau Q(2), de Boer HJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Stejarul Research Centre for Biological Sciences, National Institute of 
Research and Development for Biological Sciences, Piatra Neamț, Romania.
(2)Natural History Museum, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.

Herbal medicines and preparations are widely used in healthcare systems 
globally, but concerns remain about their quality and safety. New herbal 
products are constantly being introduced to the market under varying regulatory 
frameworks, with no global consensus on their definition or characterization. 
These biologically active mixtures are sold through complex globalized value 
chains, which create concerns around contamination and profit-driven 
adulteration. Industry, academia, and regulatory bodies must collaborate to 
develop innovative strategies for the identification and authentication of 
botanicals and their preparations to ensure quality control. High-throughput 
sequencing (HTS) has significantly improved our understanding of the total 
species diversity within DNA mixtures. The standard concept of DNA barcoding has 
evolved over the last two decades to encompass genomic data more broadly. Recent 
research in DNA metabarcoding has focused on developing methods for quantifying 
herbal product ingredients, yielding meaningful results in a regulatory 
framework. Techniques, such as loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP), 
DNA barcode-based Recombinase Polymerase Amplification (BAR-RPA), DNA barcoding 
coupled with High-Resolution Melting (Bar-HRM), and microfluidics-based methods, 
offer more affordable tests for the detection of target species. While target 
capture sequencing and genome skimming are considerably increasing the species 
identification resolution in challenging plant clades, ddPCR enables the 
quantification of DNA in samples and could be used to detect intended and 
unwanted ingredients in herbal medicines. Here, we explore the latest advances 
in emerging DNA-based technologies and the opportunities they provide as taxa 
detection tools for evaluating the safety and quality of dietary supplements and 
herbal medicines.

Copyright © 2023 Raclariu-Manolică, Mauvisseau and de Boer.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2023.1179099
PMCID: PMC10193163
PMID: 37214460

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.