1. Microlife. 2022 May 18;3:uqac006. doi: 10.1093/femsml/uqac006. eCollection
2022.

Human milk oligosaccharides induce acute yet reversible compositional changes in 
the gut microbiota of conventional mice linked to a reduction of butyrate 
levels.

Holst AQ(1), Jois H(1)(2), Laursen MF(1), Sommer MOA(3), Licht TR(1), Bahl 
MI(1).

Author information:
(1)National Food Institute, Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800 Kgs. 
Lyngby, Denmark.
(2)Glycom / DSM, DK-2970 Hørsholm, Denmark.
(3)Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Technical University of 
Denmark, DK 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark.

Human Milk Oligosaccharides (HMOs) are glycans with prebiotic properties known 
to drive microbial selection in the infant gut, which in turn influences immune 
development and future health. Bifidobacteria are specialized in HMO degradation 
and frequently dominate the gut microbiota of breastfed infants. However, some 
species of Bacteroidaceae also degrade HMOs, which may prompt selection also of 
these species in the gut microbiota. To investigate to what extent specific HMOs 
affect the abundance of naturally occurring Bacteroidaceae species in a complex 
mammalian gut environment, we conducted a study in 40 female NMRI mice 
administered three structurally different HMOs, namely 6'sialyllactose (6'SL, n 
= 8), 3-fucosyllactose (3FL, n = 16), and Lacto-N-Tetraose (LNT, n = 8), through 
drinking water (5%). Compared to a control group receiving unsupplemented 
drinking water (n = 8), supplementation with each of the HMOs significantly 
increased both the absolute and relative abundance of Bacteroidaceae species in 
faecal samples and affected the overall microbial composition analyzed by 
16s rRNA amplicon sequencing. The compositional differences were mainly 
attributed to an increase in the relative abundance of the genus Phocaeicola 
(formerly Bacteroides) and a concomitant decrease of the genus Lacrimispora 
(formerly Clostridium XIVa cluster). During a 1-week washout period performed 
specifically for the 3FL group, this effect was reversed. Short-chain fatty acid 
analysis of faecal water revealed a decrease in acetate, butyrate and 
isobutyrate levels in animals supplemented with 3FL, which may reflect the 
observed decrease in the Lacrimispora genus. This study highlights HMO-driven 
Bacteroidaceae selection in the gut environment, which may cause a reduction of 
butyrate-producing clostridia.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of FEMS.

DOI: 10.1093/femsml/uqac006
PMCID: PMC10117735
PMID: 37223362

Conflict of interest statement: Harshitha Jois is employed as a PhD student at 
the company Glycom/DSM, which produces and sells human milk oligosaccharides. 
All other authors declare that they have no competing financial interests.