1. Clin Transl Med. 2023 May;13(5):e1267. doi: 10.1002/ctm2.1267.

Neddylation inhibition sensitises renal medullary carcinoma tumours to platinum 
chemotherapy.

Shapiro DD(1)(2), Zacharias NM(3), Tripathi DN(4), Karki M(5), Bertocchio JP(5), 
Soeung M(5), He R(5), Westerman ME(3), Gao J(5), Rao P(6), Lam TNA(5), Jonasch 
E(5), Perelli L(5), Cheng EH(7), Carugo A(8)(9)(10), Heffernan TP(8)(9), Walker 
CL(4), Genovese G(5)(11)(12), Tannir NM(5), Karam JA(3)(13), Msaouel 
P(4)(5)(12)(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public 
Health, Madison, Wisconsin, USA.
(2)Division of Urology, William S. Middleton Memorial Veterans Hospital, 
Madison, Wisconsin, USA.
(3)Department of Urology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, Texas, USA.
(4)Center for Precision Environmental Health, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas, USA.
(5)Department of Genitourinary Medical Oncology, The University of Texas MD 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA.
(6)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, Texas, USA.
(7)Human Oncology & Pathogenesis Program and Department of Pathology, Memorial 
Sloan Kettering Cancer Institute, New York, New York, USA.
(8)Institute for Applied Cancer Science, The University of Texas MD Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA.
(9)Translational Research to Advance Therapeutics and Innovation in Oncology, 
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA.
(10)Department of Oncology, IRBM Spa, Rome, Italy.
(11)Department of Genomic Medicine, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, Texas, USA.
(12)David H. Koch Center for Applied Research of Genitourinary Cancers, The 
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA.
(13)Department of Translational Molecular Pathology, The University of Texas MD 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA.

BACKGROUND: Renal medullary carcinoma (RMC) is a highly aggressive cancer in 
need of new therapeutic strategies. The neddylation pathway can protect cells 
from DNA damage induced by the platinum-based chemotherapy used in RMC. We 
investigated if neddylation inhibition with pevonedistat will synergistically 
enhance antitumour effects of platinum-based chemotherapy in RMC.
METHODS: We evaluated the IC50 concentrations of the neddylation-activating 
enzyme inhibitor pevonedistat in vitro in RMC cell lines. Bliss synergy scores 
were calculated using growth inhibition assays following treatment with varying 
concentrations of pevonedistat and carboplatin. Protein expression was assessed 
by western blot and immunofluorescence assays. The efficacy of pevonedistat 
alone or in combination with platinum-based chemotherapy was evaluated in vivo 
in platinum-naïve and platinum-experienced patient-derived xenograft (PDX) 
models of RMC.
RESULTS: The RMC cell lines demonstrated IC50 concentrations of pevonedistat 
below the maximum tolerated dose in humans. When combined with carboplatin, 
pevonedistat demonstrated a significant in vitro synergistic effect. Treatment 
with carboplatin alone increased nuclear ERCC1 levels used to repair the 
interstrand crosslinks induced by platinum salts. Conversely, the addition of 
pevonedistat to carboplatin led to p53 upregulation resulting in FANCD2 
suppression and reduced nuclear ERCC1 levels. The addition of pevonedistat to 
platinum-based chemotherapy significantly inhibited tumour growth in both 
platinum-naïve and platinum-experienced PDX models of RMC (p < .01).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that pevonedistat synergises with carboplatin 
to inhibit RMC cell and tumour growth through inhibition of DNA damage repair. 
These findings support the development of a clinical trial combining 
pevonedistat with platinum-based chemotherapy for RMC.

© 2023 The Authors. Clinical and Translational Medicine published by John Wiley 
& Sons Australia, Ltd on behalf of Shanghai Institute of Clinical 
Bioinformatics.

DOI: 10.1002/ctm2.1267
PMCID: PMC10210052
PMID: 37226898 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Jose A. Karam reports honoraria for scientific 
advisory board memberships/consulting for Merck, Pfizer, Johnson and Johnson; 
stock ownership in MedTek, ROMTech; research funding to institution from Mirati, 
Roche/Genentech, Merck, Elypta. Pavlos Msaouel reports honoraria for scientific 
advisory boards membership for Mirati Therapeutics, Bristol‐Myers Squibb and 
Exelixis; consulting fees from Axiom Healthcare; non‐branded educational 
programmes supported by Exelixis and Pfizer; leadership or fiduciary roles as a 
Medical Steering Committee Member for the Kidney Cancer Association and a Kidney 
Cancer Scientific Advisory Board Member for KCCure; and research funding from 
Takeda, Bristol‐Myers Squibb, Mirati Therapeutics and Gateway for Cancer 
Research. Nizar M. Tannir reports grants/contracts from Bristol‐Myers Squibb, 
Nektar Therapeutics, Calithera Bioscience, Arrowhead Pharmaceuticals, Eisai and 
Novartis; consulting fees from Oncorena; honoraria for advisory meetings, 
presentations and educational events from Bristol‐Myers Squibb, Nektar 
Therapeutics, Exelixis, Eisai, Eli Lilly, Oncorena, Calithera, Surface Oncology, 
Novartis, Ipsen and Merck Sharp & Dohme; participation on a data safety 
monitoring board or advisory board as a member of the US RCC Advisory Board 
Committee for Merck; and is a stockholder of Amgen, Arcturus Therapeutics, Arcus 
Biosciences, Bellus Health, BioCryst, Corvus Pharmaceuticals, First Trust Amex 
Biotech, Johnson & Johnson, Merck, Nuvation Bio, Revolution Medicines, Spdr S&P 
Pharmaceuticals, Surface Oncology, Vanguard Healthcare Solutions and Xencor.