1. J Alzheimers Dis Rep. 2023 Apr 20;7(1):279-297. doi: 10.3233/ADR220114. 
eCollection 2023.

A Preliminary Comparison of the Methylome and Transcriptome from the Prefrontal 
Cortex Across Alzheimer's Disease and Lewy Body Dementia.

Fisher DW(1), Tulloch J(2), Yu CE(2)(3), Tsuang D(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA, USA.
(2)Geriatric Research, Education, and Clinical Center, Veterans Affairs Puget 
Sound Health Care System, Seattle, WA, USA.
(3)Division of Gerontology and Geriatric Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Pathological amyloid-β and α-synuclein are associated with a 
spectrum of related dementias, ranging from Alzheimer's disease (AD) and 
dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) to Parkinson disease dementia (PDD). While these 
diseases share clinical and pathological features, they also have unique 
patterns of pathology. However, epigenetic factors that contribute to these 
pathological differences remain unknown.
OBJECTIVE: In this preliminary study, we explore differences in DNA methylation 
and transcription in five neuropathologically defined groups: cognitively 
unimpaired controls, AD, pure DLB, DLB with concomitant AD (DLBAD), and PDD.
METHODS: We employed an Illumina Infinium 850k array and RNA-seq to quantify 
these differences in DNA methylation and transcription, respectively. We then 
used Weighted Gene Co-Network Expression Analysis (WGCNA) to determine 
transcriptional modules and correlated these with DNA methylation.
RESULTS: We found that PDD was transcriptionally unique and correlated with an 
unexpected hypomethylation pattern compared to the other dementias and controls. 
Surprisingly, differences between PDD and DLB were especially notable with 197 
differentially methylated regions. WGCNA yielded numerous modules associated 
with controls and the four dementias: one module was associated with 
transcriptional differences between controls and all the dementias as well as 
having significant overlap with differentially methylated probes. Functional 
enrichment demonstrated that this module was associated with responses to 
oxidative stress.
CONCLUSION: Future work that extends these joint DNA methylation and 
transcription analyses will be critical to better understanding of differences 
that contribute to varying clinical presentation across dementias.

© 2023 – The authors. Published by IOS Press.

DOI: 10.3233/ADR220114
PMCID: PMC10200238
PMID: 37220618

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interest to 
report.