1. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2023 Jun 23;26(6):438-450. doi: 
10.1093/ijnp/pyad023.

Chronic 3,4-Methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA) Use Is Related to Glutamate and 
GABA Concentrations in the Striatum But Not the Anterior Cingulate Cortex.

Zimmermann J(1)(2)(3), Zölch N(4)(5), Coray R(1)(3), Bavato F(1), Friedli N(1), 
Baumgartner MR(6), Steuer AE(7), Opitz A(8), Werner A(8), Oeltzschner G(9)(10), 
Seifritz E(3)(11), Stock AK(8)(12), Beste C(8), Cole DM(1)(3), Quednow BB(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Experimental and Clinical Pharmacopsychology, Department of Psychiatry, 
Psychotherapy, and Psychosomatics, Psychiatric University Hospital Zurich, 
University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Health Sciences and Technology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, 
Switzerland.
(3)Neuroscience Center Zurich, ETH Zurich and University of Zurich, Zurich, 
Switzerland.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, Psychiatric 
University Hospital Zurich, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(5)Institute of Forensic Medicine, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(6)Center for Forensic Hair Analytics, Institute of Forensic Medicine, 
University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(7)Department of Forensic Pharmacology and Toxicology, Institute of Forensic 
Medicine, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(8)Cognitive Neurophysiology, Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, TU 
Dresden, Dresden, Germany.
(9)Russell H. Morgan Department of Radiology and Radiological Science, Johns 
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(10)F.M. Kirby Research Center for Functional Brain Imaging, Kennedy Krieger 
Institute, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(11)Department of Psychiatry, Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, Psychiatric 
University Hospital Zurich (Drs Zölch and Seifritz), University of Zurich, 
Zurich, Switzerland.
(12)Biopsychology, Faculty of Psychology, School of Science, TU Dresden, 
Germany.

Comment in
    Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2023 Sep 25;26(9):616-617. doi: 
10.1093/ijnp/pyad048.

BACKGROUND: 3,4-Methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA) is a widely used 
recreational substance inducing acute release of serotonin. Previous studies in 
chronic MDMA users demonstrated selective adaptations in the serotonin system, 
which were assumed to be associated with cognitive deficits. However, serotonin 
functions are strongly entangled with glutamate as well as γ-aminobutyric acid 
(GABA) neurotransmission, and studies in MDMA-exposed rats show long-term 
adaptations in glutamatergic and GABAergic signaling.
METHODS: We used proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) to measure the 
glutamate-glutamine complex (GLX) and GABA concentrations in the left striatum 
and medial anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) of 44 chronic but recently abstinent 
MDMA users and 42 MDMA-naïve healthy controls. While the Mescher-Garwood 
point-resolved-spectroscopy sequence (MEGA-PRESS) is best suited to quantify 
GABA, recent studies reported poor agreement between conventional 
short-echo-time PRESS and MEGA-PRESS for GLX measures. Here, we applied both 
sequences to assess their agreement and potential confounders underlying the 
diverging results.
RESULTS: Chronic MDMA users showed elevated GLX levels in the striatum but not 
the ACC. Regarding GABA, we found no group difference in either region, although 
a negative association with MDMA use frequency was observed in the striatum. 
Overall, GLX measures from MEGA-PRESS, with its longer echo time, appeared to be 
less confounded by macromolecule signal than the short-echo-time PRESS and thus 
provided more robust results.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that MDMA use affects not only serotonin but 
also striatal GLX and GABA concentrations. These insights may offer new 
mechanistic explanations for cognitive deficits (e.g., impaired impulse control) 
observed in MDMA users.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of CINP.

DOI: 10.1093/ijnp/pyad023
PMCID: PMC10289146
PMID: 37235749 [Indexed for MEDLINE]