1. Vaccines (Basel). 2023 May 20;11(5):1002. doi: 10.3390/vaccines11051002.

The Quantification of Spike Proteins in the Inactivated SARS-CoV-2 Vaccines of 
the Prototype, Delta, and Omicron Variants by LC-MS.

Xu K(1), Sun H(2), Wang K(1), Quan Y(1), Qiao Z(1), Hu Y(2), Li C(1).

Author information:
(1)NHC Key Laboratory of Research on Quality and Standardization of Biotech 
Products, NMPA Key Laboratory for Quality Research and Evaluation of Biological 
Products, National Institutes for Food and Drug Control, No. 2, Tiantan Xili, 
Dongcheng District, Beijing 100050, China.
(2)Sinovac Life Sciences Co., Ltd., No. 21, Tianfu St., Daxing Biomedicine 
Industrial Base of Zhongguancun Science Park, Daxing District, Beijing 100050, 
China.

Developing variant vaccines or multivalent vaccines is a feasible way to address 
the epidemic as the SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern (VOCs) posed an increased 
risk to global public health. The spike protein of the SARS-CoV-2 virus was 
usually used as the main antigen in many types of vaccines to produce 
neutralizing antibodies against the virus. However, the spike (S) proteins of 
different variants were only differentiated by a few amino acids, making it 
difficult to obtain specific antibodies that can distinguish different VOCs, 
thereby challenging the accurate distinction and quantification of the variants 
using immunological methods such as ELISA. Here, we established a method based 
on LC-MS to quantify the S proteins in inactivated monovalent vaccines or 
trivalent vaccines (prototype, Delta, and Omicron strains). By analyzing the S 
protein sequences of the prototype, Delta, and Omicron strains, we identified 
peptides that were different and specific among the three strains and 
synthesized them as references. The synthetic peptides were isotopically labeled 
as internal targets. Quantitative analysis was performed by calculating the 
ratio between the reference and internal target. The verification results have 
shown that the method we established had good specificity, accuracy, and 
precision. This method can not only accurately quantify the inactivated 
monovalent vaccine but also could be applied to each strain in inactivated 
trivalent SARS-CoV-2 vaccines. Hence, the LC-MS method established in this study 
can be applied to the quality control of monovalent and multivalent SARS-CoV-2 
variation vaccines. By enabling more accurate quantification, it will help to 
improve the protection of the vaccine to some extent.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines11051002
PMCID: PMC10224489
PMID: 37243106

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interest or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.