1. Front Genet. 2023 May 11;14:1150616. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1150616. 
eCollection 2023.

Recent advancements in the breeding of sorghum crop: current status and future 
strategies for marker-assisted breeding.

Baloch FS(1), Altaf MT(1), Liaqat W(2), Bedir M(1), Nadeem MA(1), Cömertpay 
G(3), Çoban N(3), Habyarimana E(4), Barutçular C(2), Cerit I(3), Ludidi N(5)(6), 
Karaköy T(1), Aasim M(1), Chung YS(7), Nawaz MA(8), Hatipoğlu R(9), Kökten K(1), 
Sun HJ(10).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Agricultural Sciences and Technologies, Sivas University of 
Science and Technology, Sivas, Türkiye.
(2)Department of Field Crops, Faculty of Agriculture, Çukurova University, 
Adana, Türkiye.
(3)Eastern Mediterranean Agricultural Research Institute, Adana, Türkiye.
(4)International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics, Hyderabad, 
Telangana, India.
(5)Plant Stress Tolerance Laboratory, Department of Biotechnology, University of 
the Western Cape, Bellville, South Africa.
(6)DSI-NRF Centre of Excellence in Food Security, University of the Western 
Cape, Bellville, South Africa.
(7)Department of Plant Resources and Environment, Jeju National University, 
Jeju, Republic of Korea.
(8)Advanced Engineering School (Agrobiotek), Tomsk State University, Tomsk, 
Russia.
(9)Kırşehir Ahi Evran Universitesi Ziraat Fakultesi Tarla Bitkileri Bolumu, 
Kırşehir, Türkiye.
(10)Subtropical Horticulture Research Institute, Jeju National University, Jeju, 
Republic of Korea.

Sorghum is emerging as a model crop for functional genetics and genomics of 
tropical grasses with abundant uses, including food, feed, and fuel, among 
others. It is currently the fifth most significant primary cereal crop. Crops 
are subjected to various biotic and abiotic stresses, which negatively impact on 
agricultural production. Developing high-yielding, disease-resistant, and 
climate-resilient cultivars can be achieved through marker-assisted breeding. 
Such selection has considerably reduced the time to market new crop varieties 
adapted to challenging conditions. In the recent years, extensive knowledge was 
gained about genetic markers. We are providing an overview of current advances 
in sorghum breeding initiatives, with a special focus on early breeders who may 
not be familiar with DNA markers. Advancements in molecular plant breeding, 
genetics, genomics selection, and genome editing have contributed to a thorough 
understanding of DNA markers, provided various proofs of the genetic variety 
accessible in crop plants, and have substantially enhanced plant breeding 
technologies. Marker-assisted selection has accelerated and precised the plant 
breeding process, empowering plant breeders all around the world.

Copyright © 2023 Baloch, Altaf, Liaqat, Bedir, Nadeem, Cömertpay, Çoban, 
Habyarimana, Barutçular, Cerit, Ludidi, Karaköy, Aasim, Chung, Nawaz, Hatipoğlu, 
Kökten and Sun.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1150616
PMCID: PMC10213934
PMID: 37252661

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.