1. Front Immunol. 2023 May 12;14:1170357. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1170357. 
eCollection 2023.

Serum albumin binding knob domains engineered within a V(H) framework III 
bispecific antibody format and as chimeric peptides.

Adams R(1), Joyce C(1), Kuravskiy M(1), Harrison K(2)(3), Ahdash Z(1), Balmforth 
M(1), Chia K(1), Marceddu C(1), Coates M(1), Snowden J(1), Goursaud E(4), 
Ménochet K(1), van den Elsen J(5), Payne RJ(2)(3), Lawson ADG(1), Scott-Tucker 
A(1), Macpherson A(1).

Author information:
(1)Early Solutions, UCB Biopharma UK, Slough, United Kingdom.
(2)School of Chemistry, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(3)Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for Innovations in Peptide 
and Protein Science, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(4)Early Solutions, UCB Biopharma SA, Braine L'Alleud, Belgium.
(5)Department of Life Sciences, University of Bath, Bath, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Serum albumin binding is an established mechanism to extend the 
serum half-life of antibody fragments and peptides. The cysteine rich knob 
domains, isolated from bovine antibody ultralong CDRH3, are the smallest single 
chain antibody fragments described to date and versatile tools for protein 
engineering.
METHODS: Here, we used phage display of bovine immune material to derive knob 
domains against human and rodent serum albumins. These were used to engineer 
bispecific Fab fragments, by using the framework III loop as a site for knob 
domain insertion.
RESULTS: By this route, neutralisation of the canonical antigen (TNFα) was 
retained but extended pharmacokinetics in-vivo were achieved through albumin 
binding. Structural characterisation revealed correct folding of the knob domain 
and identified broadly common but non-cross-reactive epitopes. Additionally, we 
show that these albumin binding knob domains can be chemically synthesised to 
achieve dual IL-17A neutralisation and albumin binding in a single chemical 
entity.
CONCLUSIONS: This study enables antibody and chemical engineering from bovine 
immune material, via an accessible discovery platform.

Copyright © 2023 Adams, Joyce, Kuravskiy, Harrison, Ahdash, Balmforth, Chia, 
Marceddu, Coates, Snowden, Goursaud, Ménochet, Elsen, Payne, Lawson, 
Scott-Tucker and Macpherson.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1170357
PMCID: PMC10213618
PMID: 37251411 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: This work was funded by UCB Biopharma UK. The 
funder had a role in data collection and analysis, decision to publish and 
preparation of the manuscript. All authors except KH, RJP and JE are past or 
present UCB employees and may hold shares and/or stock options. AM, AL and AS-T 
are inventors on patent applications relating to knob domain peptides and RA is 
an inventor on a patent relating to framework III insertions. The remaining 
authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial 
or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of 
interest.