1. Drug Deliv. 2023 Dec;30(1):2219427. doi: 10.1080/10717544.2023.2219427.

Responsive nanosystems for targeted therapy of ulcerative colitis: Current 
practices and future perspectives.

Chen M(1), Lan H(2), Jin K(3), Chen Y(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Colorectal Surgery, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, Zhejiang 
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(2)Department of Surgical Oncology, Hangzhou Cancer Hospital, Hangzhou, 
Zhejiang, China.
(3)Department of Colorectal Surgery, Affiliated Jinhua Hospital, Zhejiang 
University School of Medicine, Jinhua, Zhejiang, China.
(4)Department of Colorectal Surgery, Xinchang People's Hospital, Affiliated 
Xinchang Hospital, Wenzhou Medical University, Xinchang, Zhejiang, China.

The pharmacological approach to treating gastrointestinal diseases is suffering 
from various challenges. Among such gastrointestinal diseases, ulcerative 
colitis manifests inflammation at the colon site specifically. Patients 
suffering from ulcerative colitis notably exhibit thin mucus layers that offer 
increased permeability for the attacking pathogens. In the majority of 
ulcerative colitis patients, the conventional treatment options fail in 
controlling the symptoms of the disease leading to distressing effects on the 
quality of life. Such a scenario is due to the failure of conventional therapies 
to target the loaded moiety into specific diseased sites in the colon. Targeted 
carriers are needed to address this issue and enhance the drug effects. 
Conventional nanocarriers are mostly readily cleared and have nonspecific 
targeting. To accumulate the desired concentration of the therapeutic candidates 
at the inflamed area of the colon, smart nanomaterials with responsive nature 
have been explored recently that include pH responsive, reactive oxygen species 
responsive (ROS), enzyme responsive and thermo - responsive smart nanocarrier 
systems. The formulation of such responsive smart nanocarriers from 
nanotechnology scaffolds has resulted in the selective release of therapeutic 
drugs, avoiding systemic absorption and limiting the undesired delivery of 
targeting drugs into healthy tissues. Recent advancements in the field of 
responsive nanocarrier systems have resulted in the fabrication of 
multi-responsive systems i.e. dual responsive nanocarriers and derivitization 
that has increased the biological tissues and smart nanocarrier's interaction. 
In addition, it has also led to efficient targeting and significant cellular 
uptake of the therapeutic moieties. Herein, we have highlighted the latest 
status of the responsive nanocarrier drug delivery system, its applications for 
on-demand delivery of drug candidates for ulcerative colitis, and the prospects 
are underpinned.

DOI: 10.1080/10717544.2023.2219427
PMCID: PMC10405869
PMID: 37288799 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report there are no competing 
interests to declare.