1. J Am Heart Assoc. 2023 Jun 20;12(12):e028298. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.122.028298.
Epub  2023 Jun 15.

Prolylcarboxypeptidase Alleviates Hypertensive Cardiac Remodeling by Regulating 
Myocardial Tissue Angiotensin II.

Nguyen BY(1), Zhou F(1), Binder P(1), Liu W(1), Hille SS(2), Luo X(3), Zi M(1), 
Zhang H(1), Adamson A(1), Ahmed FZ(1), Butterworth S(1), Cartwright EJ(1), 
Müller OJ(2), Guan K(3), Fitzgerald EM(1), Wang X(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health The University of Manchester 
Manchester United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine III University of Kiel Kiel Germany.
(3)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Faculty of Medicine Carl Gustav 
Carus Technische Universitaet Dresden Dresden Germany.

Background Prolonged activation of angiotensin II is the main mediator that 
contributes to the development of heart diseases, so converting angiotensin II 
into angiotensin 1-7 has emerged as a new strategy to attenuate detrimental 
effects of angiotensin II. Prolylcarboxypeptidase is a lysosomal pro-X 
carboxypeptidase that is able to cleave angiotensin II at a preferential acidic 
pH optimum. However, insufficient attention has been given to the 
cardioprotective functions of prolylcarboxylpeptidase. Methods and Results We 
established a CRISPR/CRISPR-associated protein 9-mediated global 
prolylcarboxylpeptidase-knockout and adeno-associated virus serotype 9-mediated 
cardiac prolylcarboxylpeptidase overexpression mouse models, which were 
challenged with the angiotensin II infusion (2 mg/kg per day) for 4 weeks, 
aiming to investigate the cardioprotective effect of prolylcarboxylpeptidase 
against hypertensive cardiac hypertrophy. Prolylcarboxylpeptidase expression was 
upregulated after 2 weeks of angiotensin II infusion and then became 
downregulated afterward in wild-type mouse myocardium, suggesting its 
compensatory function against angiotensin II stress. Moreover, angiotensin 
II-treated prolylcarboxylpeptidase-knockout mice showed aggravated cardiac 
remodeling and dampened cardiac contractility independent of hypertension. We 
also found that prolylcarboxylpeptidase localizes in cardiomyocyte lysosomes, 
and loss of prolylcarboxylpeptidase led to excessive angiotensin II levels in 
myocardial tissue. Further screening demonstrated that hypertrophic 
prolylcarboxylpeptidase-knockout hearts showed upregulated extracellular 
signal-regulated kinases 1/2 and downregulated protein kinase B activities. 
Importantly, adeno-associated virus serotype 9-mediated restoration of 
prolylcarboxylpeptidase expression in prolylcarboxylpeptidase-knockout hearts 
alleviated angiotensin II-induced hypertrophy, fibrosis, and cell death. 
Interestingly, the combination of adeno-associated virus serotype 9-mediated 
prolylcarboxylpeptidase overexpression and an antihypertensive drug, losartan, 
likely conferred more effective protection than a single treatment protocol to 
mitigate angiotensin II-induced cardiac dysfunction. Conclusions Our data 
demonstrate that prolylcarboxylpeptidase protects the heart from angiotensin 
II-induced hypertrophic remodeling by controlling myocardial angiotensin II 
levels.

DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.122.028298
PMCID: PMC10356030
PMID: 37318028 [Indexed for MEDLINE]