1. mSphere. 2023 Aug 24;8(4):e0009923. doi: 10.1128/msphere.00099-23. Epub 2023
Jun  13.

Clinically relevant antibiotic resistance in Escherichia coli from black kites 
in southwestern Siberia: a genetic and phenotypic investigation.

Tarabai H(1)(2), Krejci S(3), Karyakin I(4), Bitar I(5), Literak I(1)(3), 
Dolejska M(1)(3)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Central European Institute of Technology (CEITEC), University of Veterinary 
Sciences , Brno, Czech Republic.
(2)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Science, University of South Bohemia , 
Ceske Budejovice, Czech Republic.
(3)Department of Biology and Wildlife Diseases, Faculty of Veterinary Hygiene 
and Ecology, University of Veterinary Sciences , Brno, Czech Republic.
(4)LLC Sibecocenter , Novosibirsk, Russia.
(5)Biomedical Center, Charles University , Prague, Czech Republic.
(6)Department of Clinical Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of Laboratory 
Medicine, The University Hospital , Brno, Czech Republic.

Wild birds including raptors can act as vectors of clinically relevant bacteria 
with antibiotic resistance. The aim of this study was to investigate the 
occurrence of antibiotic-resistant Escherichia coli in black kites (Milvus 
migrans) inhabiting localities in proximity to human-influenced environments in 
southwestern Siberia and investigate their virulence and plasmid contents. A 
total of 51 E. coli isolates mostly with multidrug resistance (MDR) profiles 
were obtained from cloacal swabs of 35 (64%, n = 55) kites. Genomic analyses of 
36 whole genome sequenced E. coli isolates showed: (i) high prevalence and 
diversity of their antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) and common association 
with ESBL/AmpC production (27/36, 75%), (ii) carriage of mcr-1 for colistin 
resistance on IncI2 plasmids in kites residing in proximity of two large cities, 
(iii) frequent association with class one integrase (IntI1, 22/36, 61%), and 
(iv) presence of sequence types (STs) linked to avian-pathogenic (APEC) and 
extra-intestinal pathogenic E. coli (ExPEC). Notably, numerous isolates had 
significant virulence content. One E. coli with APEC-associated ST354 carried 
qnrE1 encoding fluoroquinolone resistance on IncHI2-ST3 plasmid, the first 
detection of such a gene in E. coli from wildlife. Our results implicate black 
kites in southwestern Siberia as reservoirs for antibiotic-resistant E. coli. It 
also highlights the existing link between proximity of wildlife to human 
activities and their carriage of MDR bacteria including pathogenic STs with 
significant and clinically relevant antibiotic resistance determinants. 
IMPORTANCE Migratory birds have the potential to acquire and disperse clinically 
relevant antibiotic-resistant bacteria (ARB) and their associated antibiotic 
resistance genes (ARGs) through vast geographical regions. The opportunistic 
feeding behavior associated with some raptors including black kites and the 
growing anthropogenic influence on their natural habitats increase the 
transmission risk of multidrug resistance (MDR) and pathogenic bacteria from 
human and agricultural sources into the environment and wildlife. Thus, 
monitoring studies investigating antibiotic resistance in raptors may provide 
essential data that facilitate understanding the fate and evolution of ARB and 
ARGs in the environment and possible health risks for humans and animals 
associated with the acquisition of these resistance determinants by wildlife.

DOI: 10.1128/msphere.00099-23
PMCID: PMC10449506
PMID: 37310717 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.