1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2023 May 31;10:1197273. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2023.1197273. 
eCollection 2023.

Pyoderma gangrenosum following anti-TNF therapy in chronic recurrent multifocal 
osteomyelitis: drug reaction or cutaneous manifestation of the disease? A 
critical review on the topic with an emblematic case report.

Romagnuolo M(1)(2), Moltrasio C(1), Iannone C(3), Gattinara M(4), Cambiaghi 
S(5), Marzano AV(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Dermatology Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, 
Milan, Italy.
(2)Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, Università degli Studi di 
Milano, Milan, Italy.
(3)Division of Clinical Rheumatology, ASST Gaetano Pini-CTO Institute, Milan, 
Italy.
(4)Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health, Research Center for 
Adult and Pediatric Rheumatic Diseases, University of Milan, Milan, Italy.
(5)Pediatric Dermatology Unit, Department of Clinical Sciences and Community 
Health, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy.

Chronic recurrent multifocal osteomyelitis (CRMO) is a rare autoinflammatory 
disease, clinically characterized by chronic and recurrent episodes of 
osteoarticular inflammation, that generally presents in children and 
adolescents. From a dermatological point-of-view, CMRO can be associated with 
skin rashes mainly including psoriasis, palmoplantar pustulosis and acne. 
Pyoderma gangrenosum (PG) is a rare immune-mediated inflammatory skin disease 
classified within the spectrum of neutrophilic dermatoses that, in some cases, 
has been reported as cutaneous manifestation in CMRO patients. This paper 
presents a 16-year female patient diagnosed with CMRO, who presented PG lesions 
located on the lower leg, that arose after the administration of the tumour 
necrosis factor (TNF)-α inhibitor adalimumab. Cases of PG have been reported in 
patients being treated with certain medications, including TNF-α antagonists, 
leading to classified them in a setting aptly termed "drug-induced PG." In this 
paper, we discuss the co-occurrence of PG and CRMO, in the light of recent 
evidence on the pathogenesis of both diseases and giving ample space to a 
literature review on drug induced PG. In our case, it is plausible that PG could 
be considered a cutaneous manifestation of CRMO, although the mechanisms 
underlying this intriguingly relationship remain to be fully unraveled.

Copyright © 2023 Romagnuolo, Moltrasio, Iannone, Gattinara, Cambiaghi and 
Marzano.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2023.1197273
PMCID: PMC10264797
PMID: 37324147

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.