1. Front Bioeng Biotechnol. 2023 Jun 6;11:1179332. doi:
10.3389/fbioe.2023.1179332.  eCollection 2023.

Micronutrient optimization for tissue engineered articular cartilage production 
of type II collagen.

Cruz MA(1), Gonzalez Y(1), Vélez Toro JA(1), Karimzadeh M(1), Rubbo A(1), Morris 
L(1), Medam R(1), Splawn T(2), Archer M(3), Fernandes RJ(3), Dennis JE(2), Kean 
TJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Biionix Cluster, Internal Medicine, University of Central Florida College of 
Medicine, Orlando, FL, United States.
(2)Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States.
(3)Department of Orthopaedics and Sports Medicine, University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA, United States.

Tissue Engineering of cartilage has been hampered by the inability of engineered 
tissue to express native levels of type II collagen in vitro. Inadequate levels 
of type II collagen are, in part, due to a failure to recapitulate the 
physiological environment in culture. In this study, we engineered primary 
rabbit chondrocytes to express a secreted reporter, Gaussia Luciferase, driven 
by the type II collagen promoter, and applied a Design of Experiments approach 
to assess chondrogenic differentiation in micronutrient-supplemented medium. 
Using a Response Surface Model, 240 combinations of micronutrients absent in 
standard chondrogenic differentiation medium, were screened and assessed for 
type II collagen promoter-driven Gaussia luciferase expression. While the target 
of this study was to establish a combination of all micronutrients, 
alpha-linolenic acid, copper, cobalt, chromium, manganese, molybdenum, vitamins 
A, E, D and B7 were all found to have a significant effect on type II collagen 
promoter activity. Five conditions containing all micronutrients predicted to 
produce the greatest luciferase expression were selected for further study. 
Validation of these conditions in 3D aggregates identified an optimal condition 
for type II collagen promoter activity. Engineered cartilage grown in this 
condition, showed a 170% increase in type II collagen expression (Day 22 
Luminescence) and in Young's tensile modulus compared to engineered cartilage in 
basal media alone.Collagen cross-linking analysis confirmed formation of type 
II-type II collagen and type II-type IX collagen cross-linked heteropolymeric 
fibrils, characteristic of mature native cartilage. Combining a Design of 
Experiments approach and secreted reporter cells in 3D aggregate culture enabled 
a high-throughput platform that can be used to identify more optimal 
physiological culture parameters for chondrogenesis.

Copyright © 2023 Cruz, Gonzalez, Vélez Toro, Karimzadeh, Rubbo, Morris, Medam, 
Splawn, Archer, Fernandes, Dennis and Kean.

DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2023.1179332
PMCID: PMC10280293
PMID: 37346792

Conflict of interest statement: TK and MC are inventors named on a patent 
application on “Anabolic Drugs Stimulating Type II Collagen Production from 
Chondrocytes or their Progenitors” is in process and is tangentially related. 
The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of 
any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential 
conflict of interest.