1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2023 Jun 9;13:1197290. doi: 
10.3389/fcimb.2023.1197290. eCollection 2023.

The secretome of the fish pathogen Tenacibaculum maritimum includes soluble 
virulence-related proteins and outer membrane vesicles.

Escribano MP(1), Balado M(1), Toranzo AE(1), Lemos ML(1), Magariños B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Parasitology, Institute of Aquaculture and 
Faculty of Biology-CIBUS, University of Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de 
Compostela, Spain.

Tenacibaculum maritimum, the etiological agent of tenacibaculosis in marine 
fish, constitutively secretes extracellular products (ECPs) in which protein 
content has not been yet comprehensively studied. In this work, the prevalence 
of extracellular proteolytic and lipolytic activities related to virulence was 
analyzed in 64 T. maritimum strains belonging to the O1-O4 serotypes. The 
results showed the existence of a great intra-specific heterogeneity in the 
enzymatic capacity, particularly within serotype O4. Thus, the secretome of a 
strain belonging to this serotype was characterized by analyzing the protein 
content of ECPs and the possible production of outer membrane vesicles (OMVs). 
Notably, the ECPs of T. maritimum SP9.1 contain a large amount of OMVs that were 
characterized by electron microscopy and purified. Thus, ECPs were divided into 
soluble (S-ECPs) and insoluble fractions (OMVs), and their protein content was 
analyzed by a high-throughput proteomic approach. A total of 641 proteins were 
identified in ECPs including some virulence-related factors, which were mainly 
found in one of the fractions, either OMVs or S-ECPs. Outer membrane proteins 
such as TonB-dependent siderophore transporters and the type IX secretion system 
(T9SS)-related proteins PorP, PorT, and SprA appeared to be mainly associated 
with OMVs. By contrast, putative virulence factors such as sialidase SiaA, 
chondroitinase CslA, sphingomyelinase Sph, ceramidase Cer, and collagenase Col 
were found only in the S-ECPs. These findings clearly demonstrate that T. 
maritimum releases, through surface blebbing, OMVs specifically enriched in 
TonB-dependent transporters and T9SS proteins. Interestingly, in vitro and in 
vivo assays also showed that OMVs could play a key role in virulence by 
promoting surface adhesion and biofilm formation and maximizing the cytotoxic 
effects of the ECPs. The characterization of T. maritimum secretome provides 
insights into ECP function and can constitute the basis for future studies aimed 
to elucidate the full role of OMVs in the pathogenesis of fish tenacibaculosis.

Copyright © 2023 Escribano, Balado, Toranzo, Lemos and Magariños.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2023.1197290
PMCID: PMC10288586
PMID: 37360528 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.