1. Gels. 2023 Jun 6;9(6):467. doi: 10.3390/gels9060467.

Robust, Fire-Retardant, and Water-Resistant Wood/Polyimide Composite Aerogels 
with a Hierarchical Pore Structure for Thermal Insulation.

Zhao L(1), Chen J(1), Pan D(1), Hou Y(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Qilu Normal University, Jinan 
250200, China.

The use of energy-saving materials is an effective strategy for decreasing 
energy consumption and carbon emission. Wood is a type of biomass material with 
a natural hierarchical structure, which results in its high thermal insulation. 
It has been widely used in construction. However, developing wood-based 
materials without flammability and dimensional instability is still a challenge. 
Herein, we developed a wood/polyimide composite aerogel with a well-preserved 
hierarchical pore structure and dense hydrogen bonds inside, resulting in its 
excellent chemical compatibility and strong interfacial interactions between its 
two components. This novel wood-based composite was fabricated by removing most 
hemicellulose and lignin from natural wood, followed by the fast impregnation 
using an 'in situ gel' process. The introduction of polyimide into delignified 
wood substantially improved its mechanical properties, with the compression 
resistance being improved by over five times. Notably, the thermal conductivity 
coefficient of the developed composite was approximately half that of natural 
wood. Furthermore, the composite exhibited excellent fire-retardancy, 
hydrophobicity, thermal insulation, and mechanical properties. This study 
provides a novel method for wood modification, which not only aids interfacial 
compatibility between wood and polyimide but also retains the properties of the 
two components. The developed composite can effectively reduce energy 
consumption, making it promising for practical and complex thermal insulation 
applications.

DOI: 10.3390/gels9060467
PMCID: PMC10298113
PMID: 37367138

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.