1. Front Surg. 2023 Jun 15;10:1166764. doi: 10.3389/fsurg.2023.1166764.
eCollection  2023.

Retroperitoneal undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma with total nephrectomy: a 
case report and literature review.

Yu K(1), Wang L(2), Bu F(3), Zhang J(2), Hai Y(2), Hu R(1), Lu J(1), Shi X(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, The First Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun, 
China.
(2)Department of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery, The First Hospital of 
Jilin University, Changchun, China.
(3)Department of Plastic and Aesthetic Surgery, The First Hospital of Jilin 
University, Changchun, China.

BACKGROUND: Undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma (UPS) is a highly malignant 
soft tissue sarcoma with a poor prognosis and no clear effective clinical means 
for treatment, and there has been no significant progress in research within 
this field in recent years. This study aimed to investigate the epidemiology, 
etiology, clinical features, diagnostic modalities, various treatment 
modalities, and prognosis of retroperitoneal undifferentiated pleomorphic 
sarcoma and to contribute to the clinical management of this type of disease. In 
this study, we report a case of undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma with a 
primary origin in the retroperitoneum. Undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma 
occurring in the retroperitoneum is rarely reported.
CASE DESCRIPTION: A 59-year-old man with abdominal distension and pain for 4 
months presented to our hospital after the failure of conservative treatment. A 
9.6 cm by 7.4 cm mass in the left retroperitoneum was found on a CT scan of the 
whole abdomen with three degrees of enhancement. After surgical treatment, the 
tumor and the left kidney were completely removed, and pathological examination 
and genetic sequencing showed an apparent undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma. 
The patient subsequently declined follow-up treatment and is currently alive and 
well.
CONCLUSIONS: At the current level of clinical technology, the treatment of 
undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma is still in the exploratory stage, and the 
scarcity of clinical cases of this disease may have hindered the acquisition of 
clinical trials and research data for this disease. At present, the first choice 
of treatment for undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma is still radical 
resection. In the existing clinical studies, there are no strong data to support 
the effect of preoperative neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy and adjuvant 
chemoradiotherapy in clinical practice. Similar to other diseases, the use of 
radiotherapy and chemotherapy before and after surgery may be a potential 
treatment for this disease in the future. Targeted therapy for this disease 
still needs further exploration, and we need more reports on related diseases to 
promote future treatment and research on this disease.

© 2023 Yu, Wang, Bu, Zhang, Hai, Hu, Lu and Shi.

DOI: 10.3389/fsurg.2023.1166764
PMCID: PMC10308313
PMID: 37396292

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.