1. Drug Des Devel Ther. 2023 Jun 28;17:1933-1943. doi: 10.2147/DDDT.S417563. 
eCollection 2023.

Informatics on Drug Repurposing for Breast Cancer.

Zhou H(#)(1)(2), Liu H(#)(3), Yu Y(3), Yuan X(3)(4), Xiao L(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Lymphoma and Hematology, The Affiliated Cancer Hospital of 
Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, People's 
Republic of China.
(2)Department of Lymphoma and Hematology, Hunan Cancer Hospital, Changsha, 
Hunan, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Laboratory Diagnosis, Changsha Kingmed Center for Clinical 
Laboratory, Changsha, Hunan, People's Republic of China.
(4)Department of Laboratory Diagnosis, Guangzhou Kingmed Center for Clinical 
Laboratory, Guangzhou, Guangdong, People's Republic of China.
(5)Department of Histology and Embryology of Xiangya School of Medicine, Central 
South University, Changsha, Hunan, People's Republic of China.
(#)Contributed equally

Moving a new drug from bench to bedside is a long and arduous process. The 
tactic of drug repurposing, which solves "new" diseases with "old" existing 
drugs, is more efficient and economical than conventional ab-initio way for drug 
development. Information technology has dramatically changed the paradigm of 
biomedical research in the new century, and drug repurposing studies have been 
significantly accelerated by implementing informatics techniques related to 
genomics, systems biology and biophysics during the past few years. A series of 
remarkable achievements in this field comes with the practical applications of 
in silico approaches including transcriptomic signature matching, 
gene-connection-based scanning, and simulated structure docking in repositioning 
drug therapies against breast cancer. In this review, we systematically curated 
these impressive accomplishments with summarization of the main findings on 
potentially repurposable drugs, and provide our insights into the current issues 
as well as future directions of the field. With the prospective improvement in 
reliability, the computer-assisted repurposing strategy will play a more 
critical role in drug research and development.

© 2023 Zhou et al.

DOI: 10.2147/DDDT.S417563
PMCID: PMC10315146
PMID: 37405253 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: H.L., Y.Y. and X.Y. are all employees of 
Changsha Kingmed Center for Clinical Laboratory. X.Y. is also an employee of 
Guangzhou Kingmed Center for Clinical Laboratory. All other authors declare no 
financial or non-financial competing interests in this work.