1. Glob Reg Health Technol Assess. 2023 Jun 26;10:53-61. doi: 
10.33393/grhta.2023.2582. eCollection 2023 Jan-Dec.

Buone pratiche per lo sviluppo dei modelli di budget impact a livello regionale.

[Article in Italian]

Marcellusi A(1), Ragonese A(1), Marinozzi A(2), Bortolami A(3), Mucherino S(4), 
Moreno C(5), Antenori A(6), Ferrario M(7), Simonelli C(8), Zanuzzi M(9), Cicoira 
M(10), Lasala R(11), Russoniello F(12), Attanasio F(13), Donati C(14), Roni 
C(15), Gemmi F(16), Mennini FS(17), Russo P(18), Scroccaro G(19), Canonico 
PL(20).

Author information:
(1)Economic Evaluation and HTA (EEHTA-CEIS), Università degli Studi di Roma "Tor 
Vergata", Roma.
(2)Farmacia Ospedaliera, ASL 4 Teramo, Teramo.
(3)Istituto Oncologico Veneto IRCCS Padova, Padova.
(4)CIRFF- Centro Interdipartimentale di Ricerca in Farmacoeconomia e 
Farmacoutilizzazione, Dipartimento di Farmacia, Università degli studi di Napoli 
Federico II, Napoli.
(5)Value & Access Specialist, Regulatory Pharma Net, Pisa.
(6)Lead Pricing, Reimbursement & Access, Eli Lilly Italy Spa, Roma.
(7)Integrated Access Lead, Roche Spa, Monza (MB).
(8)Study and Scientific Solutions, Medtronic Clinical & Regulatory Solutions 
(MCRS), Roma.
(9)Agenzia Italiana del Farmaco, Ufficio Valutazioni Economiche, Roma.
(10)Dipartimento del Farmaco, ASP Trapani, Trapani.
(11)Farmacia Ospedaliera, Corato, ASL Bari, Bari.
(12)Dipartimento Farmaceutico, ASL Napoli 1 Centro, Napoli.
(13)Politiche del Farmaco, Regione Toscana, Firenze.
(14)IRCCS Istituto Romagnolo per lo Studio dei Tumori (IRST) "Dino Amadori", 
Meldola, (FC).
(15)Direzione Centrale Salute, Politiche Sociali e Disabilità, Assistenza 
Farmaceutica, Regione Autonoma Friuli-Venezia Giulia, Trieste.
(16)Agenzia Regionale di Sanità della Toscana, Firenze.
(17)EEHTA CEIS, Facoltà di Economia, Università degli Studi di Roma "Tor 
Vergata", Roma, Presidente SiHTA.
(18)Direttore Ufficio Valutazioni Economiche e Ufficio Registri di Monitoraggio, 
Italian Medicine Agency (AIFA), Roma.
(19)Direzione Farmaceutico-Protesica Dispositivi Medici, Area Sanità e Sociale, 
Regione del Veneto, Venezia.
(20)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Università del Piemonte Orientale; 
Presidente ISPOR Italy Rome Chapter, Novara - Italy.

INTRODUCTION: The present work aims to discuss the current scenario of 
procedures and regulations regarding budget impact analysis/models (BIA/BIM) at 
regional level in Italy and to provide a standardized approach and detailed 
recommendations for developing these analyses.
METHOD: A systematic review of the literature was conducted in order to collect 
existing guidelines or specific regional procedures for budget impact analysis 
in Italy. All the records were analysed in qualitative terms according to a 
pre-specified analytical framework, based on the ISPOR BIA guidelines. At the 
end of the analysis, a consensus questionnaire was developed to establish agreed 
approaches and to provide possible solutions to any critical issues. A list of 
39 statements was developed. The survey was distributed to 69 experts who rated 
their level of agreement with each statement on a 5-point Likert scale. 
Consensus was predefined as more than 66% of the panel agreeing/disagreeing with 
any given statement.
RESULTS: Sisty-nine experts answered the questionnaire; a total of 30/39 
statements achieved consensus. There was agreement on most of the statements. 
Time horizon to consider and costs were the issues on which no agreement was 
found. The results allowed the working group to define a list of good practices.
CONCLUSION: While the structure and development of BIM are now well-known and 
well-applied at national level, there remains a great diversity of management of 
BIM tools at regional level. Consensus was reached among participating experts, 
as to the main characteristics, determinants and features of regional BIA/BIM in 
the perspective of the Italian payer.

DOI: 10.33393/grhta.2023.2582
PMCID: PMC10318586
PMID: 37408853

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors declare no 
potential conflict of interest with respect to the research, authorship and/or 
publication of this article. The authors declare the following competing 
interests: Francesco Attanasio,, Alberto Bortolami, Pier Luigi Canonico, Marco 
Cicoira, Caterina Donati, Fabrizio Gemmi, Andrea Marcellusi, Andrea Marinozzi, 
Francesco Saverio Mennini, Carolina Moreno, Sara Mucherino, Angela Ragonese, 
Chiara Roni, Pierluigi Russo, Francesco Russoniello, Claudia Simonelli, Matteo 
Zanuzzi declare no conflict of interest. Amalia Antenori is an employee and 
minor shareholder of Eli Lilly, Italy Spa; Matteo Ferrario is an employee of 
Roche Spa; Ruggero Lasala is member of the Comitato Unico di Ricerca e 
Formazione at SIFO; Giovanna Scroccaro receives honoraria for lectures;