1. Biosens Bioelectron. 2023 Oct 1;237:115488. doi: 10.1016/j.bios.2023.115488. 
Epub 2023 Jun 30.

Enzyme - Switch sensors for therapeutic drug monitoring of immunotherapies.

Campbell E(1), Adamson H(1), Kohl D(1), Tiede C(2), Wälti C(3), Tomlinson DC(2), 
Jeuken LJC(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Biomedical Science, University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT, United 
Kingdom; Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular Biology, University of Leeds, 
LS2 9JT, United Kingdom.
(2)Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular Biology, University of Leeds, LS2 
9JT, United Kingdom; School of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of 
Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT, United Kingdom.
(3)School of Electronic and Electrical Engineering, University of Leeds, LS2 
9JT, United Kingdom.
(4)School of Biomedical Science, University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT, United 
Kingdom; Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular Biology, University of Leeds, 
LS2 9JT, United Kingdom; Leiden Institute of Chemistry, Leiden University, PO 
Box 9502, 2300 RA, Leiden, the Netherlands. Electronic address: 
L.J.C.Jeuken@lic.leidenuniv.nl.

Therapeutic monoclonal antibodies (TmAb) have emerged as effective treatments 
for a number of cancers and autoimmune diseases. However, large interpatient 
disparities in the pharmacokinetics of TmAb treatment requires close therapeutic 
drug monitoring (TDM) to optimise dosage for individual patients. Here we 
demonstrate an approach for achieving rapid, sensitive quantification of two 
monoclonal antibody therapies using a previously described enzyme switch sensor 
platform. The enzyme switch sensor consists of a β-lactamase - β-lactamase 
inhibitor protein (BLA-BLIP) complex with two anti-idiotype binding proteins 
(Affimer proteins) as recognition elements. The BLA-BLIP sensor was engineered 
to detect two TmAbs (trastuzumab and ipilimumab) by developing constructs 
incorporating novel synthetic binding reagents to each of these mAbs. 
Trastuzumab and ipilimumab were successfully monitored with sub nM sensitivity 
in up to 1% serum, thus covering the relevant therapeutic range. Despite the 
modular design, the BLA-BLIP sensor was unsuccessful in detecting two further 
TmAbs (rituximab and adalimumab), an explanation for which was explored. In 
conclusion, the BLA-BLIP sensors provide a rapid biosensor for TDM of 
trastuzumab and ipilimumab with the potential to improve therapy. The 
sensitivity of this platform alongside its rapid action would be suitable for 
bedside monitoring in a point-of-care (PoC) setting.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bios.2023.115488
PMCID: PMC10427837
PMID: 37419072 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be 
considered as potential competing interests: The Affimer reagents used in this 
report are owned by the University of Leeds (UoL) but licensed to Avacta Life 
Sciences. The UoL receive royalties from Avacta Life Sciences as part of the 
license agreement, which is managed by the commercialisation team. The authors 
declare no competing financial interest.