1. Endokrynol Pol. 2023 Jul 11. doi: 10.5603/EP.a2023.0043. Online ahead of
print.

Association between TSH suppression therapy and type 2 deiodinase gene 
polymorphism in differentiated thyroid carcinoma.

Zheng X(1), Zhong L(2), Zhou T(1), Zhao F(1), Chen B(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Shanghai Sixth People's 
Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, 
Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Ultrasound in Medicine, Shanghai Sixth People's Hospital 
Affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Shanghai Sixth People's 
Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, 
Shanghai, China. binchendoc@163.com.

INTRODUCTION: Oral levothyroxine (L-T4) suppression of thyroid-stimulating 
hormone (TSH) levels is the most commonly used clinical approach to manage and 
treat patients after thyroid cancer surgery. This study aimed to investigate the 
association between TSH suppression therapy and type 2 deiodinase gene (DIO2) 
polymorphism in differentiated thyroid carcinoma (DTC).
MATERIAL AND METHODS: A total of 240 patients with DTC who received total 
thyroidectomy (TT; 120) and hemithyroidectomy (HT; 120) were enrolled in this 
study. The serum TSH, free triiodothyronine (FT3), and free thyroxine (FT4) 
levels were detected using an automatic serum immune analyser and 
electrochemiluminescence immunoassay. Based on the results of DIO2 gene 
detection, 3 genotypes of Thr92Ala were detected.
RESULTS: The serum TSH levels were inhibited after oral L-T4 treatment, but the 
proportion of patients who reached the TSH suppression standard in the 
hemithyroidectomy group was higher than in the total thyroidectomy group. After 
TSH suppression treatment, serum FT4 levels were increased in both total 
thyroidectomy and hemithyroidectomy. The difference in serum TSH, FT3, and FT4 
levels was associated with different genotypes, and patients with high cytosine 
cytosine (CC) genotypes may have difficulty meeting the TSH suppression 
criteria.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients who underwent total thyroidectomy exhibited higher 
postoperative serum FT4 levels than patients in the hemithyroidectomy group 
after TSH suppression therapy. The Thr92Ala polymorphism of type 2 deiodinase 
(D2) was associated with TSH suppression therapy.

DOI: 10.5603/EP.a2023.0043
PMID: 37431871