1. Part Fibre Toxicol. 2023 Jul 10;20(1):26. doi: 10.1186/s12989-023-00537-7.

Airway and systemic biomarkers of health effects after short-term exposure to 
indoor ultrafine particles from cooking and candles - A randomized controlled 
double-blind crossover study among mild asthmatic subjects.

Laursen KR(1), Christensen NV(2)(3), Mulder FA(2)(3), Schullehner J(1)(4), 
Hoffmann HJ(5), Jensen A(6), Møller P(6), Loft S(6), Olin AC(7), Rasmussen 
BB(3), Rosati B(3)(8), Strandberg B(9), Glasius M(3), Bilde M(3), Sigsgaard 
T(10); Climate Chamber Group.

Author information:
(1)Environment, Occupation and Health, Department of Public Health, Aarhus 
University, Aarhus, Denmark.
(2)Interdisciplinary Nanoscience Centre (iNANO), Aarhus University, Aarhus, 
Denmark.
(3)Department of Chemistry, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.
(4)Geological Survey of Denmark and Greenland, Aarhus, Denmark.
(5)Department of Respiratory Diseases and Allergy, Aarhus University Hospital, 
Aarhus, Denmark.
(6)Section of Environmental Health, Department of Public Health, University of 
Copenhagen, Aarhus, Denmark.
(7)Department of Public Health and Community Medicine, University of Gothenburg, 
Gothenburg, Sweden.
(8)Faculty of Physics, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(9)Division of Occupational and Environmental Medicine, Lund University, Lund, 
Sweden.
(10)Environment, Occupation and Health, Department of Public Health, Aarhus 
University, Aarhus, Denmark. ts@ph.au.dk.

BACKGROUND: There is insufficient knowledge about the systemic health effects of 
exposure to fine (PM2.5) and ultrafine particles emitted from typical indoor 
sources, including cooking and candlelight burning. We examined whether 
short-term exposure to emissions from cooking and burning candles cause 
inflammatory changes in young individuals with mild asthma. Thirty-six 
non-smoking asthmatics participated in a randomized controlled double-blind 
crossover study attending three exposure sessions (mean PM2.5 µg/m3; polycyclic 
aromatic hydrocarbons ng/m3): (a) air mixed with emissions from cooking (96.1; 
1.1), (b) air mixed with emissions from candles (89.8; 10), and (c) clean 
filtered air (5.8; 1.0). Emissions were generated in an adjacent chamber and let 
into a full-scale exposure chamber where participants were exposed for five 
hours. Several biomarkers were assessed in relation to airway and systemic 
inflammatory changes; the primary outcomes of interest were surfactant Protein-A 
(SP-A) and albumin in droplets in exhaled air - novel biomarkers for changes in 
the surfactant composition of small airways. Secondary outcomes included 
cytokines in nasal lavage, cytokines, C-reactive protein (CRP), epithelial 
progenitor cells (EPCs), genotoxicity, gene expression related to DNA-repair, 
oxidative stress, and inflammation, as well as metabolites in blood. Samples 
were collected before exposure start, right after exposure and the next morning.
RESULTS: SP-A in droplets in exhaled air showed stable concentrations following 
candle exposure, while concentrations decreased following cooking and clean air 
exposure. Albumin in droplets in exhaled air increased following exposure to 
cooking and candles compared to clean air exposure, although not significant. 
Oxidatively damaged DNA and concentrations of some lipids and lipoproteins in 
the blood increased significantly following exposure to cooking. We found no or 
weak associations between cooking and candle exposure and systemic inflammation 
biomarkers including cytokines, CRP, and EPCs.
CONCLUSIONS: Cooking and candle emissions induced effects on some of the 
examined health-related biomarkers, while no effect was observed in others; 
Oxidatively damaged DNA and concentrations of lipids and lipoproteins were 
increased in blood after exposure to cooking, while both cooking and candle 
emissions slightly affected the small airways including the primary outcomes 
SP-A and albumin. We found only weak associations between the exposures and 
systemic inflammatory biomarkers. Together, the results show the existence of 
mild inflammation following cooking and candle exposure.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12989-023-00537-7
PMCID: PMC10332087
PMID: 37430267 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.