1. Molecules. 2023 Jun 29;28(13):5105. doi: 10.3390/molecules28135105.

Hybrid Polymer-Silica Nanostructured Materials for Environmental Remediation.

Grisolia A(1), Dell'Olio G(1), Spadafora A(1), De Santo M(2), Morelli C(2), 
Leggio A(2), Pasqua L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Engineering, University of Calabria, via P. 
Bucci, 87036 Arcavacata di Rende (CS), Italy.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, Health and Nutritional Sciences, University of 
Calabria, via P. Bucci, 87036 Arcavacata di Rende (CS), Italy.

Due to the ever-growing global population, it is necessary to develop highly 
effective processes that minimize the impact of human activities and consumption 
on the environment. The levels of organic and inorganic contaminants have 
rapidly increased in recent years, posing a threat to ecosystems. Removing these 
toxic pollutants from the environment is a challenging task that requires 
physical, chemical, and biological methods. An effective solution involves the 
use of novel engineered materials, such as silica-based nanostructured 
materials, which exhibit a high removal capacity for various pollutants. The 
starting materials are also thermally and mechanically stable, allowing for easy 
design and development at the nanoscale through versatile functionalization 
procedures, enabling their effective use in pollutant capture. However, 
improvements concerning mechanical properties or applicability for repeated 
cycles may be required to refine their structural features. This review focuses 
on hybrid/composite polymer-silica nanostructured materials. The state of the 
art in nanomaterial synthesis, different techniques of functionalization, and 
polymer grafting are described. Furthermore, it explores the application of 
polymer-modified nanostructured materials for the capture of heavy metals, dyes, 
hydrocarbons and petroleum derivatives, drugs, and other organic compounds. The 
paper concludes by offering recommendations for future research aimed at 
advancing the application of polymer-silica nanostructured materials in the 
efficiency of pollutant uptake.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules28135105
PMCID: PMC10343502
PMID: 37446768

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.