1. Front Immunol. 2023 Jun 30;14:1172369. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1172369. 
eCollection 2023.

Analysis of a series of Italian APECED patients with autoimmune hepatitis and 
gastro-enteropathies.

Paldino G(1), Faienza MF(2), Cappa M(3), Pietrobattista A(4), Capalbo D(5), 
Valenzise M(6), Lampasona V(7), Cudini A(1), Carbone E(1), Pagliarosi O(1), 
Maggiore G(4), Salerno M(8), Betterle C(9), Fierabracci A(1).

Author information:
(1)Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Precision and Regenerative Medicine and Ionian Area, University 
of Bari "Aldo Moro", Bari, Italy.
(3)Research Unit for Innovative Therapies in Endocrinopathies, Bambino Gesù 
Children's Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(4)Hepatology, Gastroenterology and Nutrition Unit, Bambino Gesù Children's 
Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(5)Pediatric Endocrinology Unit, Department of Mother and Child, University 
Hospital Federico II, Naples, Italy.
(6)Department of Human Pathology of Adulthood and Childhood, Messina University, 
Messina, Italy.
(7)San Raffaele Hospital, IRCCS, Milan, Italy.
(8)Pediatric Endocrinology Unit, Department of Translational Medical Sciences, 
University of Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy.
(9)Clinical Immunology, Padua University, Padua, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy 
(APECED) syndrome is a rare monogenic disease determined by biallelic mutations 
in AIRE gene, which encodes a transcription factor essential for central immune 
tolerance. Classic diagnosis is determined by the presence of two of the main 
APECED clinical diseases: chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis, chronic 
hypoparathyroidism, and Addison's disease. Non-endocrine autoimmunity, involving 
the liver, intestine, eyes, and kidneys, is generally reported in a minority of 
European patients, while American APECED patients have a higher tendency of 
developing organ-specific non-endocrine manifestations early in life. This 
observation led to the revision of the diagnostic criteria to permit earlier 
diagnosis based on the appearance of one classic triad symptom or one 
non-classical manifestation at a young age in the presence of IFNωAbs or AIRE 
mutations (Ferre-Lionakis criteria).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We analyzed the clinical, genetic, and autoantibody (Ab) 
profiles in a series of 14 pediatric Italian APECED patients with 
gastrointestinal manifestations (seven male and seven female patients). Ten 
patients presented hepatitis (APECED-associated hepatitis (APAH)), while seven 
were affected by constipation, diarrhea, and malabsorption. Four patients had 
developed APAH before classic triad symptoms.
RESULTS: Based on the age of appearance of non-endocrine manifestations 
including APAH and gastro-enteropathy, the Ferre-Lionakis criteria would have 
allowed an expedited diagnosis in 11/14 patients. Abs to tryptophan hydroxylase 
(TPHAb) and hepatic aromatic l-amino acid decarboxylase (AADC) were 
significantly associated with APECED patients of the present series. Abs to 
cP4501A2 were detectable in the serum of 4/8 patients with APAH, and Abs to 
cP4502A6 were detectable in 3/8 patients. AADC Abs tested positive in 5/7 
patients, which is indicative of gastrointestinal dysfunction in APECED and 
TPHAb in 5/7 patients with gastrointestinal dysfunction. IFNAb was significantly 
associated with the syndrome.
CONCLUSION: Although Ferre-Lionakis expanded criteria applied to the American 
cohorts of APECED patients would require validation in independent large cohorts 
of European patients, the results of this study emphasize the importance to 
evaluate the presence and the age of appearance of APAH and autoimmune 
enteropathy even in European cohorts for an earlier APECED diagnosis. An earlier 
APECED diagnosis would also allow the prevention of episodes of life-threatening 
hypocalcemic seizures and adrenal crisis, which are the main manifestations of 
undiagnosed APECED.

Copyright © 2023 Paldino, Faienza, Cappa, Pietrobattista, Capalbo, Valenzise, 
Lampasona, Cudini, Carbone, Pagliarosi, Maggiore, Salerno, Betterle and 
Fierabracci.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1172369
PMCID: PMC10348686
PMID: 37457714 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.