1. J Educ Teach Emerg Med. 2021 Apr 19;6(2):C73-C188. doi: 10.21980/J84063. 
eCollection 2021 Apr.

A Pediatric Emergency Medicine Refresher Course for Generalist Healthcare 
Providers in Belize: Respiratory Emergencies.

Kosoko AA(1), Genisca AE(2), Rus M(3), Ramayya S(4), Johnson L(5), Mackey J(6).

Author information:
(1)McGovern Medical School at the University of Texas Health Science Center at 
Houston, Department of Emergency Medicine, Houston, TX.
(2)The Warren Alpert Medical School of Medicine Brown University/Hasbro 
Children's Hospital, Departments of Emergency Medicine and Pediatrics, 
Providence, RI.
(3)Texas Children's Hospital/Baylor College of Medicine, Section of Emergency 
Medicine, Houston, TX.
(4)The Warren Alpert Medical School of Medicine Brown University, Providence, 
RI.
(5)Karl Heusner Memorial Hospital, Former Director of Medical Services and 
Trauma Surgery Consultant, Belize City, Belize.
(6)Henry J.N. Taub Baylor College of Medicine, Department of Emergency Medicine, 
Houston TX.

AUDIENCE AND TYPE OF CURRICULUM: This is a refresher curriculum utilizing 
multiple methods of education to augment the skills of generalist healthcare 
providers in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs) in the identification and 
stabilization of pediatric respiratory emergencies. Our audience of 
implementation was Belizean generalist providers.
LENGTH OF CURRICULUM: Nine hours.
INTRODUCTION: In the pediatric population, early recognition and stabilization 
can improve patient outcomes. Compared with many Western systems that rely on 
specialists and even subspecialists, in many lower-resource settings, 
generalists provide most emergency medical care. The purpose of this module is 
to present a curriculum focused on the identification and stabilization of 
common pediatric respiratory emergencies for general practitioners (physicians 
and nurses) working in the acute care setting. Our aim is to provide a care 
framework and refresher training for the management of pediatric respiratory 
emergencies for providers who may regularly see the acutely ill pediatric 
patient but who may not have had recent or any extensive teaching in the 
management of acute pediatric airway management, bronchiolitis, pneumonia, and 
asthma.
EDUCATIONAL GOALS: This curriculum presents a refresher course in recognizing 
and stabilizing pediatric acute respiratory complaints for generalist healthcare 
providers practicing in LMICs. Our goal is to implement this curriculum in the 
small LMIC of Belize. This module focuses on common respiratory complaints, 
including asthma, bronchiolitis, pneumonia and acute airway management.
EDUCATIONAL METHODS: The educational strategies used in this curriculum include 
didactic lectures, medical simulation, small-group sessions, and a skills lab.
RESEARCH METHODS: We scored written pretests before and posttests after 
intervention and retested participants to evaluate for knowledge retention. 
Participants provided qualitative feedback on the module.
RESULTS: We taught 26 providers. Twenty-one providers completed the posttest and 
eight completed the retest. The mean test scores improved from 8.3 ± 2.8 in the 
pretest to 9.7 ± 1.3 to the posttest (mean difference = 1.4; P = 0.027). The 
mean test score at pretest was 8.0 ± 4.0, which increased to 9.9 ± 2.5 at retest 
four months later (mean difference = 1.9, P = 0.049). Fifteen (71.4%) 
participants found the course "extremely useful," and 28 (28.5%) participants 
"very useful."
DISCUSSION: This curriculum is an effective and well-received training tool for 
Belizean generalist providers. Although limited by sample size and 20% attrition 
for the retest, there was a statistically significant improvement in test 
performance. We believe that our pilot in Belize shows that this type of 
refresher course could be useful for teaching generalist providers in LMICs to 
optimize care of the acutely ill pediatric patient with respiratory ailment. 
Evaluation of other modules in this curriculum, application of the curriculum in 
other locations, and measuring clinical patient outcomes will be included in 
future investigations.
TOPICS: Medical simulation, rapid cycle deliberate practice (RCDP), Belize, 
bronchiolitis, pneumonia, asthma, airway, respiratory distress, low- and 
middle-income country (LMIC), collaboration, global health.

© 2021 Kosoko, et al.

DOI: 10.21980/J84063
PMCID: PMC10332788
PMID: 37465711