1. Front Oncol. 2023 Jul 4;13:1188579. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2023.1188579.
eCollection  2023.

Solitary fibrous tumor with IGF-II-induced non-islet cell tumor hypoglycemia: a 
case report and molecular characterization by next-generation sequencing.

Niedra H(1), Konrade I(2)(3), Peculis R(1), Isajevs S(2), Saksis R(1), Skapars 
R(2), Sivins A(2), Daukste BE(2), Mezaka D(2), Rovite V(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Functional Genomics, Latvian Biomedical Research 
and Study Centre, Riga, Latvia.
(2)RigaEast Clinical University Hospital, Riga, Latvia.
(3)Department of Internal Diseases, Riga Stradins University, Riga, Latvia.

BACKGROUND: Non-islet cell tumor-induced hypoglycemia (NICTH) is a rare, 
life-threatening medical condition caused by excessive insulin-like growth 
factor II (IGF-II) secretion from tumors of most commonly mesenchymal origin. 
Using next-generation sequencing, we have characterized the genome and 
transcriptome of the resected IGF-II-secreting solitary fibrous tumor from a 
patient with severe hypoglycemia accompanied by hypoglycemia unawareness.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 69-year-old male patient presenting with abdominal 
discomfort was examined using computer tomography, revealing a large lesion at 
the lesser pelvis extending above the umbilicus. As no bone and lymph node 
metastases were detected, the patient was scheduled for laparotomy. Before 
surgery, the patient presented with symptoms of severe hypoglycemia. Suppressed 
C-peptide levels and subsequent hypokalemia indicated a possible case of NICTH. 
The patient was treated with methylprednisolone (8 mg) to assess hypoglycemia. 
After the surgery, mild hypoglycemia was present for the postoperative period, 
and no radiological recurrences were observed 3 and 12 months after discharge. 
Histopathological examination results were consistent with the diagnosis of 
malignant solitary fibrous tumor (SFT). Overexpression of IGF-II was confirmed 
by both immunohistochemistry and RNA sequencing. Further NGS analysis revealed 
an SFT characteristic alteration-NAB2-STAT6 fusion. Additionally, three 
deleterious missense variants were detected in oncogenes BIRC6, KIT, and POLQ, 
and one homozygous in-frame deletion in the RBM10 tumor suppressor gene.
CONCLUSION: While the NAB2-STAT6 fusions are well characterized, the mutational 
landscape of SFTs remains understudied. This study reports the importance of NGS 
to characterize SFTs as we detected four coding variants in genes (BIRC6, KIT, 
POLQ, and RBM10) associated with tumorigenesis that could potentially contribute 
to the overall pathogenesis of SFT.

Copyright © 2023 Niedra, Konrade, Peculis, Isajevs, Saksis, Skapars, Sivins, 
Daukste, Mezaka and Rovite.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2023.1188579
PMCID: PMC10352493
PMID: 37469410

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.