1. Bio Protoc. 2023 Jul 20;13(14):e4724. doi: 10.21769/BioProtoc.4724.
eCollection  2023 Jul 20.

HDR-based CRISPR/Cas9-mediated Knockout of PD-L1 in C57BL/6 Mice.

Heeb LV(1), Taskoparan B(2), Katsoulas A(2), Beffinger M(2), Clavien PA(1), 
Kobold S(3)(4), Gupta A(1), Berg JV(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Visceral Surgery and Transplantation University Hospital 
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Institute of Laboratory Animal Science, University of Zurich, Zurich, 
Switzerland.
(3)Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Department of Medicine IV, Klinikum der 
Universität München, München, Germany.
(4)German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), partner site Munich, Munich, Germany.

The immune-inhibitory molecule programmed cell death ligand 1 (PD-L1) has been 
shown to play a role in pathologies such as autoimmunity, infections, and 
cancer. The expression of PD-L1 not only on cancer cells but also on 
non-transformed host cells is known to be associated with cancer progression. 
Generation of PD-L1 deficiency in the murine system enables us to specifically 
study the role of PD-L1 in physiological processes and diseases. One of the most 
versatile and easy to use site-specific gene editing tools is the CRISPR/Cas9 
system, which is based on an RNA-guided nuclease system. Similar to its 
predecessors, the Zinc finger nucleases or transcription activator-like effector 
nucleases (TALENs), CRISPR/Cas9 catalyzes double-strand DNA breaks, which can 
result in frameshift mutations due to random nucleotide insertions or deletions 
via non-homologous end joining (NHEJ). Furthermore, although less frequently, 
CRISPR/Cas9 can lead to insertion of defined sequences due to homology-directed 
repair (HDR) in the presence of a suitable template. Here, we describe a 
protocol for the knockout of PD-L1 in the murine C57BL/6 background using 
CRISPR/Cas9. Targeting of exon 3 coupled with the insertion of a HindIII 
restriction site leads to a premature stop codon and a loss-of-function 
phenotype. We describe the targeting strategy as well as founder screening, 
genotyping, and phenotyping. In comparison to NHEJ-based strategy, the presented 
approach results in a defined stop codon with comparable efficiency and 
timelines as NHEJ, generates convenient founder screening and genotyping 
options, and can be swiftly adapted to other targets.

©Copyright : © 2023 The Authors; This is an open access article under the CC BY 
license.

DOI: 10.21769/BioProtoc.4724
PMCID: PMC10366997
PMID: 37497456

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsJ.v.B. and M.B. are 
shareholders and part time employees of InCephalo AG. J.v.B. is an inventor of 
patents related to immunotherapy of cancer and has received licensing fees for 
these, speaker fees from Bristol Meyer Squibb and research support by Boehringer 
Ingelheim Animal Health for work not related to this manuscript. S.K. is 
inventor of several patents in the field of immuno-oncology. S.K. received 
license fees from TCR2 Inc and Carina Biotech. S.K. received research support 
from TCR2 Inc., Arcus Bioscience, Plectonic GmBH and Tabby Therapeutics for work 
unrelated to the manuscript. Beyond this, the authors have no relevant financial 
interest to disclose.