1. Immun Inflamm Dis. 2023 Jul;11(7):e925. doi: 10.1002/iid3.925.

Triad3A involved in the regulation of endotoxin tolerance and mycobactericidal 
activity through the NFκB-nitric oxide pathway.

Qin Y(1)(2), Chen J(3), Xu K(2), Lu Y(4), Xu F(1), Shi J(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, The Sixth People's Hospital of Nantong, 
Nantong, Jiangsu, China.
(2)Department of Pathogen Biology, School of Medicine, Nantong University, 
Nantong, China.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Nantong 
University, Nantong First People's Hospital, Nantong, Jiangsu, China.
(4)Department of Critical Care Medicine, Affiliated Hospital of Nantong 
University, Nantong, China.
(5)Nantong Key Laboratory of Translational Medicine in Cardiothoracic Diseases, 
Nantong Clinical Medical Research Center of Cardiothoracic Disease, Institution 
of Translational Medicine in Cardiothoracic Diseases, Affiliated Hospital of 
Nantong University, Nantong, Jiangsu, China.

INTRODUCTION: Sepsis is characterized by an endotoxin tolerance phenotype that 
occurs in the stage of infection. Persistent bacterial infection can lead to 
immune cell exhaustion. Triad3A, an E3 ubiquitin ligase, negatively regulates 
its activation by TLR4. However, the effect of Triad3A on endotoxin tolerance 
and bactericidal ability in the state of endotoxin tolerance remains unclear.
METHODS: Using single dose LPS and repeated LPS stimulated macrophage cell lines 
at indicated times, we investigated miR-191, Tirad3A, TRAF3, TLR4, p-P65, TNF-α, 
IL-1β, and iNOS expression, the effect of miR-191 on Triad3A and TRAF3, gene 
loss-of-function analyses, the effect of Triad3A on TLR4, p-P65, cytokine, and 
mycobactericidal activity in endotoxin tolerant cells infected with 
Mycobacterium marinum.
RESULTS: Here we found that Triad3A is involved in regulating endotoxin 
tolerance. Our result also displayed that miR-191 expression is downregulated in 
macrophages in the state of endotoxin tolerance. miR-191 can directly bind to 
Triad3A and TRAF3. Additionally, knockdown of Triad3A can reverse the effect of 
decreasing TNF-α and IL-1β in endotoxin tolerant macrophages. Furthermore, we 
demonstrated that the TLR4-NF-κB-NO pathway was associated with Triad3A and 
responsible for the killing of intracellular mycobacteria in a tuberculosis 
sepsis model.
CONCLUSIONS: These results provide new insight into the mechanisms of Triad3A 
induced tolerogenic phenotype in macrophages, which can help the better 
comprehension of the pathogenesis involved in septic shock with infection of 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and suggest that Triad3A may be a potential drug 
target for the treatment of severe septic tuberculosis.

© 2023 The Authors. Immunity, Inflammation and Disease published by John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/iid3.925
PMCID: PMC10363814
PMID: 37506157 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.