1. Clin Transl Med. 2023 Aug;13(8):e1359. doi: 10.1002/ctm2.1359.

Genetic and pharmacological inhibition of METTL3 alleviates renal fibrosis by 
reducing EVL m6A modification through an IGF2BP2-dependent mechanism.

Ni WJ(1)(2), Zhou H(3), Lu H(2), Ma NN(4), Hou BB(5), Li W(2), Kong FX(2)(6), Yu 
JT(2), Hou R(2), Jin J(7)(8), Wen JG(2), Zhang T(4), Meng XM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Anhui Provincial Hospital, The First Affiliated 
Hospital of USTC, Division of Life Sciences and Medicine, University of Science 
and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui, People's Republic of China.
(2)Inflammation and Immune Mediated Diseases Laboratory of Anhui Province, Anhui 
Institute of Innovative Drugs, School of Pharmacy, Anhui Medical University, 
Hefei, Anhui, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Pharmacy, Anhui Provincial Cancer Hospital, The First 
Affiliated Hospital of USTC, Division of Life Sciences and Medicine, University 
of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui, People's Republic of China.
(4)Department of Urology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical 
University, Hefei, Anhui, People's Republic of China.
(5)Department of Urology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical 
University, Hefei, Anhui, People's Republic of China.
(6)Department of Pharmacy, The Second People's Hospital of Hefei, Hefei, Anhui, 
People's Republic of China.
(7)Research Center for Translational Medicine, The Second Affiliated Hospital of 
Anhui Medical University, Hefei, Anhui, People's Republic of China.
(8)School of Basic Medicine, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, Anhui, People's 
Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: N6 -methyladenosine (m6A) is of great importance in renal physiology 
and disease progression, but its function and mechanism in renal fibrosis remain 
to be comprehensively and extensively explored. Hence, this study will explore 
the function and potential mechanism of critical regulator-mediated m6A 
modification during renal fibrosis and thereby explore promising anti-renal 
fibrosis agents.
METHODS: Renal tissues from humans and mice as well as HK-2 cells were used as 
research subjects. The profiles of m6A modification and regulators in renal 
fibrosis were analysed at the protein and RNA levels using Western blotting, 
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction and other methods. Methylation 
RNA immunoprecipitation sequencing and RNA sequencing coupled with 
methyltransferase-like 3 (METTL3) conditional knockout were used to explore the 
function of METTL3 and potential targets. Gene silencing and overexpression 
combined with RNA immunoprecipitation were performed to investigate the 
underlying mechanism by which METTL3 regulates the Ena/VASP-like (EVL) m6A 
modification that promotes renal fibrosis. Molecular docking and virtual 
screening with in vitro and in vivo experiments were applied to screen promising 
traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) monomers and explore their mechanism of 
regulating the METTL3/EVL m6A axis and anti-renal fibrosis.
RESULTS: METTL3 and m6A modifications were hyperactivated in both the tubular 
region of fibrotic kidneys and HK-2 cells. Upregulated METTL3 enhanced the m6A 
modification of EVL mRNA to improve its stability and expression in an 
insulin-like growth factor 2 mRNA-binding protein 2 (IGF2BP2)-dependent manner. 
Highly expressed EVL binding to Smad7 abrogated the Smad7-induced suppression of 
transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β1)/Smad3 signal transduction, which 
conversely facilitated renal fibrosis progression. Molecular docking and virtual 
screening based on the structure of METTL3 identified a TCM monomer named 
isoforsythiaside, which inhibited METTL3 activity together with the METTL3/EVL 
m6A axis to exert anti-renal fibrosis effects.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, the overactivated METTL3/EVL m6A axis is a potential 
target for renal fibrosis therapy, and the pharmacological inhibition of METTL3 
activity by isoforsythiaside suggests that it is a promising anti-renal fibrosis 
agent.

© 2023 The Authors. Clinical and Translational Medicine published by John Wiley 
& Sons Australia, Ltd on behalf of Shanghai Institute of Clinical 
Bioinformatics.

DOI: 10.1002/ctm2.1359
PMCID: PMC10400756
PMID: 37537731 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare they have no conflicts of 
interest.