1. Aging Cell. 2023 Sep;22(9):e13893. doi: 10.1111/acel.13893. Epub 2023 Aug 7.

Decoding of translation-regulating entities reveals heterogeneous translation 
deficiency patterns in cellular senescence.

Papaspyropoulos A(1)(2), Hazapis O(1), Altulea A(3), Polyzou A(1), Verginis 
P(4), Evangelou K(1), Fousteri M(5), Papantonis A(6)(7), Demaria M(3), Gorgoulis 
V(1)(2)(8)(9)(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Carcinogenesis Group, Department of Histology and Embryology, 
School of Medicine, National Kapodistrian University of Athens (NKUA), Athens, 
Greece.
(2)Biomedical Research Foundation, Academy of Athens, Athens, Greece.
(3)European Research Institute for the Biology of Ageing (ERIBA), University 
Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(4)Medical School, University of Crete, Heraklion, Greece.
(5)Institute for Fundamental Biomedical Research, Biomedical Sciences Research 
Center "Alexander Fleming", Vari, Greece.
(6)Institute of Pathology, University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen, 
Germany.
(7)Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne, University of Cologne, Cologne, 
Germany.
(8)Clinical Molecular Pathology, Medical School, University of Dundee, Dundee, 
UK.
(9)Molecular and Clinical Cancer Sciences, Manchester Cancer Research Centre, 
Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre, University of Manchester, 
Manchester, UK.
(10)Center for New Biotechnologies and Precision Medicine, Medical School, 
National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece.
(11)Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Surrey, Surrey, UK.

Cellular senescence constitutes a generally irreversible proliferation barrier, 
accompanied by macromolecular damage and metabolic rewiring. Several senescence 
types have been identified based on the initiating stimulus, such as replicative 
(RS), stress-induced (SIS) and oncogene-induced senescence (OIS). These 
senescence subtypes are heterogeneous and often develop subset-specific 
phenotypes. Reduced protein synthesis is considered a senescence hallmark, but 
whether this trait pertains to various senescence subtypes and if distinct 
molecular mechanisms are involved remain largely unknown. Here, we analyze large 
published or experimentally produced RNA-seq and Ribo-seq datasets to determine 
whether major translation-regulating entities such as ribosome stalling, the 
presence of uORFs/dORFs and IRES elements may differentially contribute to 
translation deficiency in senescence subsets. We show that 
translation-regulating mechanisms may not be directly relevant to RS, however 
uORFs are significantly enriched in SIS. Interestingly, ribosome stalling, 
uORF/dORF patterns and IRES elements comprise predominant mechanisms upon OIS, 
strongly correlating with Notch pathway activation. Our study provides for the 
first time evidence that major translation dysregulation mechanisms/patterns 
occur during cellular senescence, but at different rates depending on the 
stimulus type. The degree at which those mechanisms accumulate directly 
correlates with translation deficiency levels. Our thorough analysis contributes 
to elucidating crucial and so far unknown differences in the translation 
machinery between senescence subsets.

© 2023 The Authors. Aging Cell published by Anatomical Society and John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/acel.13893
PMCID: PMC10497830
PMID: 37547972 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: M.D. is a co‐founder and shareholder of Cleara 
Biotech and an advisor for Oisin Biotechnologies. The laboratory of M.D. 
received funding from Cleara Biotech, Oisin Biotechnologies and Ono 
Pharmaceuticals.