1. J Hum Kinet. 2023 Jul 15;87:77-93. doi: 10.5114/jhk/168282. eCollection 2023 
Jul.

The Impact of Acute Mild Normobaric Hypoxia and a Single Bout of Exercise to 
Volitional Exhaustion on Cognitive Performance in Endurance and Strength-Trained 
Athletes: The role of BDNF, EP-1, Catecholamines and Lactate.

Piotrowicz Z(1), Czuba M(2), Chalimoniuk M(3), Langfort J(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Sport Sciences, The Jerzy Kukuczka Academy of Physical 
Education, Katowice, Poland.
(2)Department of Applied and Clinical Physiology, Collegium Medicum University 
of Zielona Gora, Zielona Gora, Poland.
(3)Department of Physical Education and Health in Biała Podlaska, Józef 
Piłsudski University of Physical Education in Warsaw, Biała Podlaska, Poland.

The aim of the study was to examine whether a single bout of exercise to 
volitional exhaustion, performed under moderate normobaric hypoxia (H), would 
affect psychomotor performance (PP) in differently trained athletes. For this 
purpose, ten strength-trained (S) athletes, ten endurance-trained (E) athletes 
and ten healthy men leading a sedentary lifestyle as a control (C) group 
performed voluntarily two graded exercise tests until volitional exhaustion 
(EVE) under normoxia (N) and H (FiO2 = 14.7%). We measured the peripheral level 
of the brain derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), choice reaction time (CRT) and 
the number of correct reactions (NCR) as indices of PP. Psychomotor tests were 
performed at rest, immediately after the EVE and 3 minutes after the EVE. Venous 
blood samples were collected at rest, immediately after cessation of each EVE, 
and 1 h after each EVE. The results showed that the EVE significantly (p < 0.05) 
impaired CRT under N and H, and NCR under H only in the E group. The higher 
WRmax in the E compared to the S and C groups was associated with a significant 
(p < 0.005) increase in adrenaline (A) and noradrenaline (NA). There were no 
significant differences between conditions (N vs. H) in the BDNF at rest and 
after exercise. The EVE impaired cognitive function only in the E group; higher 
involvement of the sympathetic nervous system, A and NA may also play a role in 
this phenomenon. Therefore, it can be concluded that exposure to H did not have 
a negative impact on CRT or NCR. Moreover, BDNF did not improve cognitive 
function.

Copyright: © Academy of Physical Education in Katowice.

DOI: 10.5114/jhk/168282
PMCID: PMC10407317
PMID: 37559758

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.