1. J Biol Rhythms. 2023 Dec;38(6):586-600. doi: 10.1177/07487304231190156. Epub 
2023 Aug 11.

Ambient Temperature Effects on the Spring and Autumn Somatic Growth Trajectory 
Show Plasticity in the Photoneuroendocrine Response Pathway in the Tundra Vole.

van Dalum MJ(1), van Rosmalen L(2)(3), Appenroth D(1), Cazarez Marquez F(1), 
Roodenrijs RTM(2), de Wit L(2), Hut RA(2), Hazlerigg DG(1).

Author information:
(1)Arctic Seasonal Timekeeping Initiative, Department of Arctic and Marine 
Biology, UiT-the Arctic University of Norway, Tromsø, Norway.
(2)Chronobiology Unit, Groningen Institute for Evolutionary Life Sciences, 
University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(3)The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, California.

Seasonal mammals register photoperiodic changes through the photoneuroendocrine 
system enabling them to time seasonal changes in growth, metabolism, and 
reproduction. To a varying extent, proximate environmental factors like ambient 
temperature (Ta) modulate timing of seasonal changes in physiology, conferring 
adaptive flexibility. While the molecular photoneuroendocrine pathway governing 
the seasonal responses is well defined, the mechanistic integration of 
nonphotoperiodic modulatory cues is poorly understood. Here, we explored the 
interaction between Ta and photoperiod in tundra voles, Microtus oeconomus, a 
boreal species in which the main impact of photoperiod is on postnatal somatic 
growth. We demonstrate that postweaning growth potential depends on both 
gestational and postweaning patterns of photoperiodic exposure, with the highest 
growth potential seen in voles experiencing short (8 h) gestational and long 
(16 h) postweaning photoperiods-corresponding to a spring growth program. 
Modulation by Ta was asymmetric: low Ta (10 °C) enhanced the growth potential of 
voles gestated on short photoperiods independent of postweaning photoperiod 
exposure, whereas in voles gestated on long photoperiods, showing a lower 
autumn-programmed growth potential, the effect of Ta was highly dependent on 
postweaning photoperiod. Analysis of the primary molecular elements involved in 
the expression of a neuroendocrine response to photoperiod, thyrotropin beta 
subunit (tshβ) in the pars tuberalis, somatostatin (srif) in the arcuate 
nucleus, and type 2/3 deiodinase (dio2/dio3) in the mediobasal hypothalamus 
identified dio2 as the most Ta-sensitive gene across the study, showing 
increased expression at higher Ta, while higher Ta reduced somatostatin 
expression. Contrastingly dio3 and tshβ were largely insensitive to Ta. Overall, 
these observations reveal a complex interplay between Ta and photoperiodic 
control of postnatal growth in M. oeconomus, and suggest that integration of Ta 
into the control of growth occurs downstream of the primary photoperiodic 
response cascade revealing potential adaptivity of small herbivores facing 
rising temperatures at high latitudes.

DOI: 10.1177/07487304231190156
PMCID: PMC10617003
PMID: 37565646 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest StatementThe authors have 
no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, 
and/or publication of this article.