1. Cureus. 2023 Jul 11;15(7):e41727. doi: 10.7759/cureus.41727. eCollection 2023 
Jul.

Alcoholic Hepatitis Mimicking Iron Overload Disorders With Hyperferritinemia and 
Severely Elevated Transferrin Saturation: A Case Report.

Munankami S(1), Amin S(2), Shrestha M(2), Paudel R(2), Pokhrel A(2).

Author information:
(1)General Medicine, Kathmandu Medical College, Kathmandu, NPL.
(2)Internal Medicine, Reading Tower Health, Reading, USA.

Iron overload disorders can present as non-specific symptoms and develop 
gradually but, if untreated, can be very fatal. The common causes 
include multiple blood transfusions for chronic anemia and increased iron 
absorption, including hereditary hemochromatosis (HH). HH is one of the common 
causes of iron overload disorders and usually presents with liver cirrhosis in a 
setting of significantly elevated ferritin and elevated transferrin saturation. 
Alcoholic hepatitis is a clinical syndrome of progressive inflammatory liver 
injury associated with long-term heavy intake of ethanol. However, in patients 
with alcohol abuse, excessive alcohol consumption can disrupt iron metabolism 
releasing large amounts of iron into circulation. This can cause severely 
elevated ferritin due to disruption of iron metabolism, simulating iron overload 
disorders such as HH, especially if the patient also has liver cirrhosis. Even 
though a high transferrin saturation of greater than 45% is recommended as a 
cutoff transferrin value as high sensitivity for detecting iron overload 
disorders, it has a low specificity and positive predictive value and often 
identifies people with other causes of acutely elevated ferritin levels such as 
alcohol liver disease and hepatitis. Recognizing this feature and timely 
management can spare the patient from unnecessary phlebotomies and prompt 
treatment for alcoholic hepatitis. We present an interesting case of severe 
alcoholic hepatitis mimicking HH with severely elevated ferritin levels and 
transferrin saturation with underlying liver cirrhosis.

Copyright © 2023, Munankami et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.41727
PMCID: PMC10415023
PMID: 37575743

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.