1. Microbiol Spectr. 2023 Aug 21;11(5):e0117523. doi: 10.1128/spectrum.01175-23. 
Online ahead of print.

Tezacaftor/Ivacaftor therapy has negligible effects on the cystic fibrosis gut 
microbiome.

Marsh R(1), Dos Santos C(2), Hanson L(2)(3), Ng C(4)(5), Major G(4)(6), Smyth 
AR(4)(5), Rivett D(2), van der Gast C(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Applied Sciences, Northumbria University , Newcastle, United 
Kingdom.
(2)Department of Natural Sciences, Manchester Metropolitan University , 
Manchester, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Life Sciences, Manchester Metropolitan University , Manchester, 
United Kingdom.
(4)School of Medicine, University of Nottingham , Nottingham, United Kingdom.
(5)NIHR Nottingham Biomedical Research Centre , Nottingham, United Kingdom.
(6)Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences, Société des Produits Nestlé , Lausanne, 
Switzerland.
(7)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust , 
Salford, United Kingdom.

People with cystic fibrosis (pwCF) experience a range of persistent 
gastrointestinal symptoms throughout life. There is evidence indicating 
interaction between the microbiota and gut pathophysiology in CF. However, there 
is a paucity of knowledge on the potential effects of CF transmembrane 
conductance regulator (CFTR) modulator therapies on the gut microbiome. In a 
pilot study, we investigated the impact of Tezacaftor/Ivacaftor dual combination 
CFTR modulator therapy on the gut microbiota and metabolomic functioning in 
pwCF. Fecal samples from 12 pwCF taken at baseline and following placebo or 
Tezacaftor/Ivacaftor administration were subjected to microbiota sequencing and 
to targeted metabolomics to assess the short-chain fatty acid (SCFA) 
composition. Ten healthy matched controls were included as a comparison. 
Inflammatory calprotectin levels and patient symptoms were also investigated. No 
significant differences were observed in overall gut microbiota characteristics 
between any of the study stages, extended also across intestinal inflammation, 
gut symptoms, and SCFA-targeted metabolomics. However, microbiota and SCFA 
metabolomic compositions, in pwCF, were significantly different from controls in 
all study treatment stages. CFTR modulator therapy with Tezacaftor/Ivacaftor had 
negligible effects on both the gut microbiota and SCFA composition across the 
course of the study and did not alter toward compositions observed in healthy 
controls. Future longitudinal CFTR modulator studies will investigate more 
effective CFTR modulators and should use prolonged sampling periods, to 
determine whether longer-term changes occur in the CF gut microbiome. IMPORTANCE 
People with cystic fibrosis (pwCF) experience persistent gastrointestinal (GI) 
symptoms throughout life. The research question "how can we relieve 
gastrointestinal symptoms, such as stomach pain, bloating, and nausea?" remains 
a top priority for clinical research in CF. While CF transmembrane conductance 
regulator (CFTR) modulator therapies are understood to correct underlying issues 
of CF disease and increasing the numbers of pwCF are now receiving some form of 
CFTR modulator treatment. It is not known how these therapies affect the gut 
microbiome or GI system. In this pilot study, we investigated, for the first 
time, effects of the dual combination CFTR modulator medicine, 
Tezacaftor/Ivacaftor. We found it had negligible effects on patient GI symptoms, 
intestinal inflammation, or gut microbiome composition and functioning. Our 
findings are important as they fill important knowledge gaps on the relative 
effectiveness of these widely used treatments. We are now investigating triple 
combination CFTR modulators with prolonged sampling periods.

DOI: 10.1128/spectrum.01175-23
PMCID: PMC10581179
PMID: 37607068

Conflict of interest statement: R.J.M., C.D.S., and L.H. have nothing to 
disclose. D.R. and C.v.d.G. report grant funding from Vertex Pharmaceuticals 
outside of the submitted work. C.N., G.M., and A.R.S. report grants and speaker 
honorarium from Vertex Pharmaceuticals outside the submitted work. G.M. is an 
employee of Société Produits de Nestlé S.A.