1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Aug 14;24(16):12764. doi: 10.3390/ijms241612764.

The Role of Autophagy as a Trigger of Post-Translational Modifications of 
Proteins and Extracellular Vesicles in the Pathogenesis of Rheumatoid Arthritis.

Riitano G(1), Recalchi S(1), Capozzi A(1), Manganelli V(1), Misasi R(1), 
Garofalo T(1), Sorice M(1), Longo A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, "Sapienza" University of Rome, 00161 
Rome, Italy.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic systemic autoimmune disease, 
characterized by persistent joint inflammation, leading to cartilage and bone 
destruction. Autoantibody production is directed to post-translational modified 
(PTM) proteins, i.e., citrullinated or carbamylated. Autophagy may be the common 
feature in several types of stress (smoking, joint injury, and infections) and 
may be involved in post-translational modifications (PTMs) in proteins and the 
generation of citrullinated and carbamylated peptides recognized by the immune 
system in RA patients, with a consequent breakage of tolerance. Interestingly, 
autophagy actively provides information to neighboring cells via a process 
called secretory autophagy. Secretory autophagy combines the autophagy machinery 
with the secretion of cellular content via extracellular vesicles (EVs). A role 
for exosomes in RA pathogenesis has been recently demonstrated. Exosomes are 
involved in intercellular communications, and upregulated proteins and RNAs may 
contribute to the development of inflammatory arthritis and the progression of 
RA. In RA, most of the exosomes are produced by leukocytes and synoviocytes, 
which are loaded with PTM proteins, mainly citrullinated proteins, inflammatory 
molecules, and enzymes that are implicated in RA pathogenesis. Microvesicles 
derived from cell plasma membrane may also be loaded with PTM proteins, playing 
a role in the immunopathogenesis of RA. An analysis of changes in EV profiles, 
including PTM proteins, could be a useful tool for the prevention of 
inflammation in RA patients and help in the discovery of personalized medicine.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms241612764
PMCID: PMC10454292
PMID: 37628944 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.