1. J Clin Med. 2023 Aug 9;12(16):5176. doi: 10.3390/jcm12165176.

Current Evidence for Biological Biomarkers and Mechanisms Underlying Acute to 
Chronic Pain Transition across the Pediatric Age Spectrum.

Duff IT(1), Krolick KN(2), Mahmoud HM(2), Chidambaran V(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218, 
USA.
(2)Department of Anesthesia, Cincinnati Children's Hospital, Cincinnati, OH 
45242, USA.

Chronic pain is highly prevalent in the pediatric population. Many factors are 
involved in the transition from acute to chronic pain. Currently, there are 
conceptual models proposed, but they lack a mechanistically sound integrated 
theory considering the stages of child development. Objective biomarkers are 
critically needed for the diagnosis, risk stratification, and prognosis of the 
pathological stages of pain chronification. In this article, we summarize the 
current evidence on mechanisms and biomarkers of acute to chronic pain 
transitions in infants and children through the developmental lens. The goal is 
to identify gaps and outline future directions for basic and clinical research 
toward a developmentally informed theory of pain chronification in the pediatric 
population. At the outset, the importance of objective biomarkers for 
chronification of pain in children is outlined, followed by a summary of the 
current evidence on the mechanisms of acute to chronic pain transition in 
adults, in order to contrast with the developmental mechanisms of pain 
chronification in the pediatric population. Evidence is presented to show that 
chronic pain may have its origin from insults early in life, which prime the 
child for the development of chronic pain in later life. Furthermore, available 
genetic, epigenetic, psychophysical, electrophysiological, neuroimaging, 
neuroimmune, and sex mechanisms are described in infants and older children. In 
conclusion, future directions are discussed with a focus on research gaps, 
translational and clinical implications. Utilization of developmental mechanisms 
framework to inform clinical decision-making and strategies for prevention and 
management of acute to chronic pain transitions in children, is highlighted.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm12165176
PMCID: PMC10455285
PMID: 37629218

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.