1. JMIR Form Res. 2023 Aug 25;7:e49738. doi: 10.2196/49738.

Exploring Patient Needs and Designing Concepts for Digitally Supported Health 
Solutions in Managing Type 2 Diabetes: Cocreation Study.

Persson DR(1), Zhukouskaya K(1), Wegener AK(2), Jørgensen LK(2), Bardram JE(3), 
Bækgaard P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Technical University 
of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark.
(2)Danish Diabetes Association, Glostrup, Denmark.
(3)Department of Health Technology, Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. 
Lyngby, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: Self-management of the progressive disease type 2 diabetes mellitus 
(T2DM) becomes part of the daily life of patients starting from the time of 
diagnosis. However, despite the availability of technical innovations, the 
uptake of digital solutions remains low. One reason that has been reported is 
that digital solutions often focus purely on clinical factors that may not align 
with the patient's perspective.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to develop digital solutions that address 
the needs of patients with T2DM, designed from the user's perspective. The goal 
was to address the patients' expressed real-world needs by having the users 
themselves choose the scope and format of the solutions.
METHODS: Using participatory methods, we conducted 3 cocreation workshops in 
collaboration with the Danish Diabetes Association, with 20 persons with T2DM 
and 11 stakeholders across workshops: user experience designers, researchers, 
and diabetes experts including a diabetes nurse. The overall structure of the 3 
workshops was aligned with the 4 phases of the double diamond: initially 
discovering and mapping out key experienced issues, followed by a workshop on 
thematic mapping and definition of key concepts, and succeeded by an exploration 
and development of 2 prototypes. Subsequently, high-fidelity interactive 
prototypes were refined as part of the delivery phase, in which 7 formative 
usability tests were conducted.
RESULTS: The workshops mapped experiential topics over time from prediagnosis to 
the current state, resulting in a detailed exploration and understanding of 6 
themes related to and based on the experiences of patients with T2DM: diabetes 
care, diabetes knowledge, glucose monitoring, diet, physical activity, and 
social aspects of diabetes. Two prototypes were developed by the participants to 
address some of their expressed needs over time related to the 6 themes: an 
activity-based continuous glucose monitoring app and a web-based guide to 
diabetes. Both prototypes emphasize periods of structured self-measurements of 
blood glucose to support evolving needs for self-exploration through distinct 
phases of learning, active use, and supporting use. Periods of low or 
intermittent use may thus not reflect a failure of design in a traditional sense 
but rather be a sign of evolving needs over time.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that the needs of patients with T2DM differ 
between individuals and change over time. As a result, the suggested digitally 
supported empowering health prototypes can be personalized to support 
self-exploration, individual preference in long-term management, and changing 
needs over time. Despite individuals experiencing different journeys with 
diabetes, users perceive the self-measurement of blood glucose as a universally 
useful tool to empower everyday decision-making.

©Dan Roland Persson, Katiarina Zhukouskaya, Anne-Marie Karin Wegener, Lene Kølle 
Jørgensen, Jakob Eyvind Bardram, Per Bækgaard. Originally published in JMIR 
Formative Research (https://formative.jmir.org), 25.08.2023.

DOI: 10.2196/49738
PMCID: PMC10492168
PMID: 37624633

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.