1. PLoS Pathog. 2023 Aug 28;19(8):e1011514. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1011514. 
eCollection 2023 Aug.

Designed nanoparticles elicit cross-reactive antibody responses to conserved 
influenza virus hemagglutinin stem epitopes.

McCraw DM(1), Myers ML(1), Gulati NM(1), Prabhakaran M(2), Brand J(2), Andrews 
S(2), Gallagher JR(1), Maldonado-Puga S(1), Kim AJ(1), Torian U(1), Syeda H(2), 
Boyoglu-Barnum S(2), Kanekiyo M(2), McDermott AB(2), Harris AK(1).

Author information:
(1)Structural Informatics Unit, Laboratory of Infectious Diseases, National 
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.
(2)Vaccine Research Center, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of 
America.

Despite the availability of seasonal vaccines and antiviral medications, 
influenza virus continues to be a major health concern and pandemic threat due 
to the continually changing antigenic regions of the major surface glycoprotein, 
hemagglutinin (HA). One emerging strategy for the development of more 
efficacious seasonal and universal influenza vaccines is structure-guided design 
of nanoparticles that display conserved regions of HA, such as the stem. Using 
the H1 HA subtype to establish proof of concept, we found that tandem copies of 
an alpha-helical fragment from the conserved stem region (helix-A) can be 
displayed on the protruding spikes structures of a capsid scaffold. The stem 
region of HA on these designed chimeric nanoparticles is immunogenic and the 
nanoparticles are biochemically robust in that heat exposure did not destroy the 
particles and immunogenicity was retained. Furthermore, mice vaccinated with 
H1-nanoparticles were protected from lethal challenge with H1N1 influenza virus. 
By using a nanoparticle library approach with this helix-A nanoparticle design, 
we show that this vaccine nanoparticle construct design could be applicable to 
different influenza HA subtypes. Importantly, antibodies elicited by H1, H5, and 
H7 nanoparticles demonstrated homosubtypic and heterosubtypic cross-reactivity 
binding to different HA subtypes. Also, helix-A nanoparticle immunizations were 
used to isolate mouse monoclonal antibodies that demonstrated heterosubtypic 
cross-reactivity and provided protection to mice from viral challenge via 
passive-transfer. This tandem helix-A nanoparticle construct represents a novel 
design to display several hundred copies of non-trimeric conserved HA stem 
epitopes on vaccine nanoparticles. This design concept provides a new approach 
to universal influenza vaccine development strategies and opens opportunities 
for the development of nanoparticles with broad coverage over many antigenically 
diverse influenza HA subtypes.

Copyright: This is an open access article, free of all copyright, and may be 
freely reproduced, distributed, transmitted, modified, built upon, or otherwise 
used by anyone for any lawful purpose. The work is made available under the 
Creative Commons CC0 public domain dedication.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1011514
PMCID: PMC10491405
PMID: 37639457 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.