1. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2023 Nov 1;325(5):H1133-H1143. doi: 
10.1152/ajpheart.00306.2023. Epub 2023 Sep 8.

Accelerated atherosclerosis in beta-thalassemia.

Hurtado J(1), Sellak H(1), Joseph G(1), Lewis CV(1), Naudin CR(1), Garcia S(1), 
Wodicka JR(1), Archer DR(2), Taylor WR(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Emory University School of 
Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia, United States.
(2)Aflac Cancer and Blood Disorders Center at Children's Healthcare of Atlanta 
and the Department of Pediatrics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, 
Georgia, United States.
(3)Cardiology Division, Atlanta Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Atlanta, 
Georgia, United States.
(4)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Emory University School of Medicine and 
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia.

Children with beta-thalassemia (BT) present with an increase in carotid 
intima-medial thickness, an early sign suggestive of premature atherosclerosis. 
However, it is unknown if there is a direct relationship between BT and 
atherosclerotic disease. To evaluate this, wild-type (WT, littermates) and BT 
(Hbbth3/+) mice, both male and female, were placed on a 3-mo high-fat diet with 
low-density lipoprotein receptor suppression via overexpression of proprotein 
convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9) gain-of-function mutation (D377Y). 
Mechanistically, we hypothesize that heme-mediated oxidative stress creates a 
proatherogenic environment in BT because BT is a hemolytic anemia that has 
increased free heme and exhausted hemopexin, heme's endogenous scavenger, in the 
vasculature. We evaluated the effect of hemopexin (HPX) therapy, mediated via an 
adeno-associated virus, to the progression of atherosclerosis in BT and a 
phenylhydrazine-induced model of intravascular hemolysis. In addition, we 
evaluated the effect of deferiprone (DFP)-mediated iron chelation in the 
progression of atherosclerosis in BT mice. Aortic en face and aortic root lesion 
area analysis revealed elevated plaque accumulation in both male and female BT 
mice compared with WT mice. Hemopexin therapy was able to decrease plaque 
accumulation in both BT mice and mice on our phenylhydrazine (PHZ)-induced model 
of hemolysis. DFP decreased atherosclerosis in BT mice but did not provide an 
additive benefit to HPX therapy. Our data demonstrate for the first time that 
the underlying pathophysiology of BT leads to accelerated atherosclerosis and 
shows that heme contributes to atherosclerotic plaque development in BT.NEW & 
NOTEWORTHY This work definitively shows for the first time that beta-thalassemia 
leads to accelerated atherosclerosis. We demonstrated that intravascular 
hemolysis is a prominent feature in beta-thalassemia and the resulting increases 
in free heme are mechanistically relevant. Adeno-associated virus 
(AAV)-hemopexin therapy led to decreased free heme and atherosclerotic plaque 
area in both beta-thalassemia and phenylhydrazine-treated mice. 
Deferiprone-mediated iron chelation led to deceased plaque accumulation in 
beta-thalassemia mice but provided no additive benefit to hemopexin therapy.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpheart.00306.2023
PMCID: PMC10908407
PMID: 37682237 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No conflicts of interest, financial or 
otherwise, are declared by the authors.