1. J Mol Diagn. 2023 Nov;25(11):827-837. doi: 10.1016/j.jmoldx.2023.07.005. Epub 
2023 Sep 7.

Genetic Factors Contribute to the Phenotypic Variability in GJB2-Related Hearing 
Impairment.

Chiang YT(1), Lin PH(2), Lo MY(3), Chen HL(4), Lee CY(5), Tsai CY(1), Lin YH(3), 
Tsai SF(6), Liu TC(3), Hsu CJ(7), Chen PL(8), Hsu JS(9), Wu CC(5).

Author information:
(1)Graduate Institute of Medical Genomics and Proteomics, College of Medicine, 
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan; Graduate Institute of Clinical 
Medicine, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, National Taiwan 
University, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, 
National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, National Taiwan 
University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, National Taiwan 
University, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Surgical Oncology, National Taiwan 
University Cancer Center, Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, National Taiwan 
University, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Medical Research, National Taiwan 
University Hospital Hsin-Chu Branch, Hsinchu, Taiwan.
(6)Department of Life Sciences and Institute of Genome Sciences, National 
Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan; Institute of Molecular and Genomic 
Medicine, National Health Research Institutes, Miaoli, Taiwan.
(7)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, National Taiwan 
University, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Otolaryngology, Taichung Tzu Chi 
Hospital, Buddhist Tzu Chi Medical Foundation, Taichung, Taiwan.
(8)Graduate Institute of Medical Genomics and Proteomics, College of Medicine, 
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Otolaryngology Head 
and Neck Surgery, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan; 
Department of Medical Genetics, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(9)Graduate Institute of Medical Genomics and Proteomics, College of Medicine, 
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. Electronic address: 
jacobhsu@ntu.edu.tw.

Recessive variants in GJB2 are the most important genetic cause of sensorineural 
hearing impairment (SNHI) worldwide. Phenotypes vary significantly in 
GJB2-related SNHI, even in patients with identical variants. For instance, 
patients homozygous for the GJB2 p.V37I variant, which is highly prevalent in 
the Asian populations, usually present with mild-to-moderate SNHI; yet 
severe-to-profound SNHI is occasionally observed in approximately 10% of p.V37I 
homozygotes. To investigate the genomic underpinnings of the phenotypic 
variability, we performed next-generation sequencing of GJB2 and other deafness 
genes in 63 p.V37I homozygotes with extreme phenotypic severities. Additional 
pathogenic variants of other deafness genes were identified in five of the 35 
patients with severe-to-profound SNHI. Furthermore, case-control association 
analyses were conducted for 30 unrelated p.V37I homozygotes with 
severe-to-profound SNHI against 28 p.V37I homozygotes with mild-to-moderate 
SNHI, and 120 population controls from the Taiwan Biobank. The 
severe-to-profound group exhibited a higher frequency of the crystallin lambda 1 
(CRYL1) variant (rs14236), located upstream of GJB2, than the mild-to-moderate 
and Taiwan Biobank groups. Our results demonstrated that pathogenic variants in 
other deafness genes and a possible modifier, the CRYL1 rs14236 variant, may 
contribute to phenotypic variability in GJB2-realted SNHI, highlighting the 
importance of comprehensive genomic surveys to delineate the genotype-phenotype 
correlations.

Copyright © 2023 Association for Molecular Pathology and American Society for 
Investigative Pathology. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmoldx.2023.07.005
PMID: 37683890 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure Statement None declared.