1. Front Genet. 2023 Aug 24;14:1242711. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1242711. 
eCollection 2023.

The impact of gene polymorphism and hepatic insufficiency on voriconazole dose 
adjustment in invasive fungal infection individuals.

Li G(#)(1)(2), Li Q(#)(3), Zhang C(1)(2), Yu Q(4), Li Q(1)(5), Zhou X(1)(5), 
Yang R(1)(5), Yang X(1)(5), Liu H(#)(6), Yang Y(#)(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Sichuan Academy of Medical Sciences and Sichuan 
Provincial People's Hospital, School of Medicine, University of Electronic 
Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China.
(2)School of Basic Medicine and Clinical Pharmacy, China Pharmaceutical 
University, Nanjing, China.
(3)Department of Medical, Sichuan Academy of Medical Sciences and Sichuan 
Provincial People's Hospital, School of Medicine, University of Electronic 
Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China.
(4)College of Pharmacy, Southwest Medical University, Luzhou, China.
(5)Personalized Drug Therapy Key Laboratory of Sichuan Province, School of 
Medicine, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, 
China.
(6)Department of Pharmacy, The People's Hospital of Chongqing Liangjiang New 
Area, Chongqing, China.
(#)Contributed equally

Voriconazole (VRZ) is a broad-spectrum antifungal medication widely used to 
treat invasive fungal infections (IFI). The administration dosage and blood 
concentration of VRZ are influenced by various factors, posing challenges for 
standardization and individualization of dose adjustments. On the one hand, VRZ 
is primarily metabolized by the liver, predominantly mediated by the cytochrome 
P450 (CYP) 2C19 enzyme. The genetic polymorphism of CYP2C19 significantly 
impacts the blood concentration of VRZ, particularly the trough concentration 
(Ctrough), thereby influencing the drug's efficacy and potentially causing 
adverse drug reactions (ADRs). Recent research has demonstrated that 
pharmacogenomics-based VRZ dose adjustments offer more accurate and 
individualized treatment strategies for individuals with hepatic insufficiency, 
with the possibility to enhance therapeutic outcomes and reduce ADRs. On the 
other hand, the security, pharmacokinetics, and dosing of VRZ in individuals 
with hepatic insufficiency remain unclear, making it challenging to attain 
optimal Ctrough in individuals with both hepatic insufficiency and IFI, 
resulting in suboptimal drug efficacy and severe ADRs. Therefore, when using VRZ 
to treat IFI, drug dosage adjustment based on individuals' genotypes and hepatic 
function is necessary. This review summarizes the research progress on the 
impact of genetic polymorphisms and hepatic insufficiency on VRZ dosage in IFI 
individuals, compares current international guidelines, elucidates the current 
application status of VRZ in individuals with hepatic insufficiency, and 
discusses the influence of CYP2C19, CYP3A4, CYP2C9, and ABCB1 genetic 
polymorphisms on VRZ dose adjustments and Ctrough at the pharmacogenomic level. 
Additionally, a comprehensive summary and analysis of existing studies' 
recommendations on VRZ dose adjustments based on CYP2C19 genetic polymorphisms 
and hepatic insufficiency are provided, offering a more comprehensive reference 
for dose selection and adjustments of VRZ in this patient population.

Copyright © 2023 Li, Li, Zhang, Yu, Li, Zhou, Yang, Yang, Liu and Yang.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1242711
PMCID: PMC10484623
PMID: 37693307

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.