1. Pediatr Neurol. 2023 Nov;148:152-156. doi:
10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2023.08.018.  Epub 2023 Aug 19.

Electroclinical Features in Two Novel STRADA Patients and a Functional Yeast 
Assay for the Validation of Missense STRADA Mutations.

Ancora C(1), Marchi M(2), Bonardi CM(1), Sartori G(3), Lopreiato R(3), 
Zuccarello D(4), D'Errico I(5), Nosadini M(1), Sartori S(1), Boniver C(1), Toldo 
I(6), Salviati L(2).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Neurology and Neurophysiology Unit, Department of Women's and 
Children's Health, University of Padua, Padua, Italy.
(2)Clinical Genetics Unit, Department of Women's and Children's Health, 
University of Padua, Padua, Italy; Clinical Genetics Lab, Città della Speranza 
Pediatric Research Institute, Padua, Italy.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Padua, Padua, Italy.
(4)Clinical Genetics Unit, Department of Women's and Children's Health, 
University of Padua, Padua, Italy.
(5)Department of Neurosciences, University of Padua, Padua, Italy.
(6)Pediatric Neurology and Neurophysiology Unit, Department of Women's and 
Children's Health, University of Padua, Padua, Italy. Electronic address: 
irene.toldo@unipd.it.

Loss of function of the STRADA gene, an upstream mTOR inhibitor, causes a rare 
neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by polyhydramnios, megalencephaly, and 
symptomatic epilepsy (PMSE syndrome). Patients display a homogeneous phenotype 
including early-onset drug-resistant epilepsy, severe psychomotor delay, 
multisystemic comorbidities, and increased risk of premature death. The 
administration of sirolimus, an mTOR inhibitor, is helpful in controlling 
seizures in this syndrome. We report the electroclinical phenotype of two novel 
patients and the development of a yeast model to validate the pathogenicity of 
missense variants. Patient 1 harbored a missense STRADA variant and had a 
peculiar electroclinical phenotype with a relatively mild epilepsy course. 
Patient 2 harbored a truncating STRADA variant and showed a typical PMSE 
phenotype and a favorable response to early treatment with sirolimus. When we 
modeled the p.(Ser264Arg) STRADA change in its yeast homolog SPS1, it impaired 
SPS1 function. The results underlie the importance of a timely molecular 
diagnosis in these patients and show that yeast is a simple yet effective model 
to validate the pathogenicity of missense variants.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2023.08.018
PMID: 37722301

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest Leonardo 
Salviati reports financial support was provided by Città della Speranza 
Pediatric Research Institute. The remaining authors declare that there are no 
conflicts of interests regarding the publication of this article.