1. Turk J Gastroenterol. 2023 Nov;34(11):1171-1179. doi: 10.5152/tjg.2023.21218.

Propofol Pretreatment Inhibits Liver Damage in Mice with Hepatic 
Ischemia/Reperfusion Injury and Protects Human Hepatocyte in 
Hypoxia/Reoxygenation.

Li J(1), Wang R(1), Chen H(1), Yang Y(2), Yang X(2), Wang W(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Translational Medicine, Xi'an Jiaotong University Medical College 
First Affiliated Hospital, Xi'an, Shaanxi, China.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Xi'an Jiaotong University Medical 
College First Affiliated Hospital, Xi'an, Shaanxi, China.
(3)Department of Anesthesiology, Xi'an Jiaotong University Medical College First 
Affiliated Hospital, Xi'an, Shaanxi, China.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: The major complication of liver resection is hepatic 
ischemia/reperfusion injury. Propofol appears to have organprotective effects. 
Our study aimed to study the protective role of propofol against hepatic 
ischemia/reperfusion injury and the potential mechanisms.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Mice and human hepatocytes (LO2) were used to establish 2 
models: the ischemia/reperfusion injury model in vivo and the 
hypoxia/reoxygenation model in vitro, respectively. Alanine and aspartate 
aminotransferase serum levels were detected to evaluate the extent of hepatic 
cellular injury. Malondialdehyde, superoxide dismutase, glutathione, and 
catalase expression levels were measured to evaluate the oxidative damage in 
mice liver. Lactate dehydrogenase levels were detected for hepatocyte 
cytotoxicity severity. Nuclear factor, erythroid-like 2 and heme oxygenase 1 
expression levels were detected.
RESULTS: In the ischemia/reperfusion model, propofol pretreatment significantly 
reduced the alanine aminotransferase and aspartate aminotransferase expression 
levels, alleviating the hepatic cellular injury. Propofol also protected the 
mice liver from oxidative damage. In the hypoxia/reoxygenation model, propofol 
pretreatment reduced lactate dehydrogenase expression levels, suggesting its 
protective effects in LO2 cells. Furthermore, propofol increased the nuclear 
factor, erythroid-like 2 and heme oxygenase 1 expression levels both in vivo and 
in vitro.
CONCLUSION: Propofol acts through the nuclear factor, erythroid-like 2, and heme 
oxygenase 1 pathway to protect the mice liver against ischemia/reperfusion 
injury and hepatocytes against hypoxia/reoxygenation injury. Propofol should be 
used as an effective therapeutic drug for hepatic ischemia/reperfusion injury.

DOI: 10.5152/tjg.2023.21218
PMCID: PMC10724719
PMID: 37768306 [Indexed for MEDLINE]