1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Sep 11;24(18):13942. doi: 10.3390/ijms241813942.

Postprandial Hyperlipidemia: Its Pathophysiology, Diagnosis, Atherogenesis, and 
Treatments.

Yanai H(1), Adachi H(1), Hakoshima M(1), Katsuyama H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, National Center for 
Global Health and Medicine, Kohnodai Hospital, 1-7-1 Kohnodai, Ichikawa 
272-8516, Chiba, Japan.

Postprandial hyperlipidemia showing postprandial increases in serum triglyceride 
(TG) is associated with the development of atherosclerotic cardiovascular 
disease (ASCVD). To diagnose postprandial hyperlipidemia, the oral fat loading 
test (OFLT) should be performed; however, this test is very time-consuming and 
is difficult to perform. Elevated serum TG levels reflect an increase in TG-rich 
lipoproteins (TRLs), such as chylomicrons (CM), very low-density lipoproteins 
(VLDL), and their remnants (CM remnants [CMRs] and VLDL remnants [VLDLRs]). 
Understanding of elevation in CMR and/or VLDLR can lead us to understand the 
existence of postprandial hyperlipidemia. The measurement of apo B48, which is a 
constituent of CM and CMR; non-fasting TG, which includes TG content in all 
lipoproteins including CM and CMR; non-high-density lipoprotein cholesterol 
(non-HDL-C), which includes TRLs and low-density lipoprotein; and remnant 
cholesterol are useful to reveal the existence of postprandial hyperlipidemia. 
Postprandial hyperlipidemia is observed in patients with familial type III 
hyperlipoproteinemia, familial combined hyperlipidemia, chronic kidney disease, 
metabolic syndrome and type 2 diabetes. Postprandial hyperlipidemia is closely 
related to postprandial hyperglycemia, and insulin resistance may be an inducing 
and enhancing factor for both postprandial hyperlipidemia and postprandial 
hyperglycemia. Remnant lipoproteins and metabolic disorders associated with 
postprandial hyperlipidemia have various atherogenic properties such as 
induction of inflammation and endothelial dysfunction. A healthy diet, calorie 
restriction, weight loss, and exercise positively impact postprandial 
hyperlipidemia. Anti-hyperlipidemic drugs such pemafibrate, fenofibrate, 
bezafibrate, ezetimibe, and eicosapentaenoic acid have been shown to improve 
postprandial hyperlipidemia. Anti-diabetic drugs including metformin, 
alpha-glucosidase inhibitors, pioglitazone, dipeptidyl-peptidase-4 inhibitors 
and glucagon-like peptide 1 analogues have been shown to ameliorate postprandial 
hyperlipidemia. Although sodium glucose cotransporter-2 inhibitors have not been 
proven to reduce postprandial hyperlipidemia, they reduced fasting apo B48 and 
remnant lipoprotein cholesterol. In conclusion, it is important to appropriately 
understand the existence of postprandial hyperlipidemia and to connect it to 
optimal treatments. However, there are some problems with the diagnosis for 
postprandial hyperlipidemia. Postprandial hyperlipidemia cannot be specifically 
defined by measures such as TG levels 2 h after a meal. To study interventions 
for postprandial hyperlipidemia with the outcome of preventing the onset of 
ASCVD, it is necessary to define postprandial hyperlipidemia using reference 
values such as IGT.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms241813942
PMCID: PMC10530470
PMID: 37762244 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest in 
relation to the present review paper.