1. mSystems. 2023 Oct 26;8(5):e0067023. doi: 10.1128/msystems.00670-23. Epub 2023
 Sep 29.

Deep mutational scanning of influenza A virus neuraminidase facilitates the 
identification of drug resistance mutations in vivo.

Wang S(#)(1)(2), Zhang T-h(#)(3), Hu M(#)(1), Tang K(#)(4), Sheng L(5)(6), Hong 
M(1), Chen D(7), Chen L(8), Shi Y(5), Feng J(5), Qian J(9), Sun L(10), Ding 
K(10), Sun R(1)(5)(11), Du Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Cancer Institute (Key Laboratory of Cancer Prevention and Intervention, China 
National Ministry of Education), The Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang 
University School of Medicine , Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(2)Affiliated Hangzhou First People's Hospital, Zhejiang University School of 
Medicine , Hangzhou, China.
(3)Molecular Biology Institute, University of California , Los Angeles, 
California, USA.
(4)Department of Surgery, Women's Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang 
University , Hangzhou, China.
(5)Department of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology, University of California , 
Los Angeles, California, USA.
(6)School of Biomedical Sciences, LKS Faculty of Medicine, The Hong Kong 
University , Hong Kong, China.
(7)Department of Ultrasound in Medicine, The Second Affiliated Hospital of 
Zhejiang University School of Medicine , Hangzhou, China.
(8)Department of Medical Oncology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang 
University, School of Medicine , Hangzhou, China.
(9)Pharmaceutical Informatics Institute, College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Zhejiang University , Hangzhou, China.
(10)Department of Colorectal Surgery and Oncology, Key Laboratory of Cancer 
Prevention and Intervention, Ministry of Education, The Second Affiliated 
Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine , Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(11)Center for Infectious Disease Research, Westlake Laboratory of Life Sciences 
and Biomedicine , Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(#)Contributed equally

NA is a crucial surface antigen and drug target of influenza A virus. A 
comprehensive understanding of NA's mutational effect and drug resistance 
profiles in vivo is essential for comprehending the evolutionary constraints and 
making informed choices regarding drug selection to combat resistance in 
clinical settings. In the current study, we established an efficient deep 
mutational screening system in mouse lung tissues and systematically evaluated 
the fitness effect and drug resistance to three neuraminidase inhibitors of NA 
single-nucleotide mutations. The fitness of NA mutants is generally correlated 
with a natural mutation in the database. The fitness of NA mutants is influenced 
by biophysical factors such as protein stability, complex formation, and the 
immune response triggered by viral infection. In addition to confirming 
previously reported drug-resistant mutations, novel mutations were identified. 
Interestingly, we identified an allosteric drug-resistance mutation that is not 
located within the drug-binding pocket but potentially affects drug binding by 
interfering with NA tetramerization. The dual assessments performed in this 
study provide a more accurate assessment of the evolutionary potential of 
drug-resistant mutations and offer guidance for the rational selection of 
antiviral drugs.

DOI: 10.1128/msystems.00670-23
PMCID: PMC10654105
PMID: 37772870 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.