1. PLoS One. 2023 Oct 3;18(10):e0292180. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0292180. 
eCollection 2023.

Establishing an online resource to facilitate global collaboration and inclusion 
of underrepresented populations: Experience from the MJFF Global Genetic 
Parkinson's Disease Project.

Vollstedt EJ(1), Madoev H(1), Aasly A(2), Ahmad-Annuar A(3), Al-Mubarak B(4), 
Alcalay RN(5)(6), Alvarez V(7)(8), Amorin I(9), Annesi G(10), Arkadir D(11), 
Bardien S(12)(13), Barker RA(14), Barkhuizen M(15), Basak AN(16), Bonifati 
V(17), Boon A(18), Brighina L(19), Brockmann K(20)(21), Carmine Belin A(22), 
Carr J(13)(23), Clarimon J(24)(25), Cornejo-Olivas M(26)(27), Correia Guedes 
L(28)(29), Corvol JC(30), Crosiers D(31)(32)(33), Damásio J(34)(35), Das P(36), 
de Carvalho Aguiar P(37)(38), De Rosa A(39), Dorszewska J(40), Ertan S(41), 
Ferese R(42), Ferreira J(32)(43), Gatto E(44), Genç G(45), Giladi N(6), 
Gómez-Garre P(46)(25), Hanagasi H(47), Hattori N(48), Hentati F(49), 
Hoffman-Zacharska D(50), Illarioshkin SN(51), Jankovic J(52), Jesús S(46)(25), 
Kaasinen V(53)(54)(55), Kievit A(17), Klivenyi P(56), Kostic V(57), Koziorowski 
D(58), Kühn AA(59), Lang AE(60), Lim SY(61), Lin CH(62), Lohmann K(1), Markovic 
V(57), Martikainen MH(53)(55)(63), Mellick G(64), Merello M(63)(65)(66), 
Milanowski L(58), Mir P(46)(25), Öztop-Çakmak Ö(41), Pimentel MMG(67), Pulkes 
T(68), Puschmann A(69)(70), Rogaeva E(71), Sammler EM(72)(73), Skaalum Petersen 
M(74)(75), Skorvanek M(76)(77), Spitz M(78), Suchowersky O(79), Tan AH(61), 
Termsarasab P(68), Thaler A(6), Tumas V(80), Valente EM(81)(82), van de 
Warrenburg B(83), Williams-Gray CH(14), Wu RM(62), Zhang B(84), Zimprich A(85), 
Solle J(86), Padmanabhan S(86), Klein C(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neurogenetics, University of Luebeck, Luebeck, Germany.
(2)Department of Neuromedicine and Movement Science, Norwegian University of 
Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway.
(3)Department of Biomedical Science, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, 
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(4)Center for Genomic Medicine, Research Centre, King Faisal Specialist Hospital 
and Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(5)Department of Neurology, Columbia University, New York, New York, United 
States of America.
(6)Neurological Institute, Tel-Aviv Medical Center, Tel-Aviv, Israel; Sackler 
School of Medicine, Sagol School of Neuroscience, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, 
Israel.
(7)Laboratório de Genética, Hospital Universitario Central de Asturias, Oviedo, 
Asturias, Spain.
(8)Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria del Principado de Asturias (ISPA), 
Oviedo, Spain.
(9)Universidad de la Republica Uruguay, Montevideo, Uruguay.
(10)Institute of Biomedical Research and Innovation, National Research Council, 
Cosenza, Italy.
(11)Department of Neurology, Hadassah Medical Center and the Hebrew University, 
Jerusalem, Israel.
(12)Division of Molecular Biology and Human Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and 
Health Sciences, Stellenbosch University, Cape Town, South Africa.
(13)South African Medical Research Council/Stellenbosch University Genomics of 
Brain Disorders Research Unit, Stellenbosch University, Cape Town, South Africa.
(14)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, 
United Kingdom.
(15)DST/NWU Preclinical Drug Development Platform, North-West University, 
Potchefstroom, North-West, South Africa.
(16)Suna and Inan Kiraç Foundation, Neurodegeneration Research Laboratory, 
KUTTAM, School of Medicine, Koç University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(17)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC University Medical Center 
Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(18)Department of Neurology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam, 
Rotterdam, Netherlands.
(19)Department of Neurology, Milan Center for Neuroscience, University of 
Milano-Bicocca/San Gerardo Hospital, Monza, Monza Brianza, Italy.
(20)Department of Neurodegenerative Diseases, University of Tuebingen, 
Tuebingen, Baden Wuerttemberg, Germany.
(21)Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain Research and German Centre for 
Neurodegenerative Diseases, Tuebingen, Baden Wuerttemberg, Germany.
(22)Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(23)Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and 
Health Sciences, Stellenbosch University, Cape Town, South Africa.
(24)Department of Neurology, Biomedical Research Institute IIB-Sant Pau, 
Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain.
(25)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red sobre Enfermedades 
Neurodegenerativas (CIBERNED), Madrid, Spain.
(26)Neurogenetics Research Center, Instituto Nacional de Ciencias Neurologicas, 
Lima, Peru.
(27)Center for Global Health, Universidad Peruana Cayetano Heredia, Lima, Peru.
(28)Centro de Estudos Egas Moniz, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de Lisboa, 
Lisboa, Portugal.
(29)Instituto de Medicina Molecular João Lobo Antunes, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal.
(30)Paris Brain Institute-ICM, Inserm, CNRS, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de 
Paris, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Department of Neurology, Sorbonne University, 
Paris, France.
(31)Department of Neurology, Antwerp University Hospital, Edegem, Belgium.
(32)Translational Neurosciences, Born Bunge Institute, Faculty of Medicine and 
Health Sciences, University of Antwerp, Wilrijk, Antwerp, Belgium.
(33)Center for Molecular Neurology, VIB, Wilrijk, Antwerp, Belgium.
(34)Department of Neurology, Hospital de Santo António-Centro Hospitalar 
Universitário do Porto, Porto, Portugal.
(35)UnIGENe, Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular (IBMC), Instituto de 
Investigação e Inovação em Saúde (i3S), Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal.
(36)Centre for Genetic Disorders, Institute of Science, Banaras Hindu 
University, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India.
(37)Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein, São Paulo, Brazil.
(38)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, 
São Paulo, Brazil.
(39)Department of Neurosciences and Reproductive and Odontostomatological 
Sciences, Federico II University, Naples, Italy.
(40)Laboratory of Neurobiology, Department of Neurology, Poznan University of 
Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland.
(41)Department of Neurology, School of Medicine, Koç University, Istanbul, 
Turkey.
(42)IRCCS Neuromed, Localita' Camerelle, Pozzilli, Isernia, Italy.
(43)Laboratory of Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, University of Lisbon, 
Lisbon, Portugal.
(44)Movement Disorders, Department of Neurology, Instituto de Neurosciencias 
Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(45)Department of Neurology, University of Health Sciences, Şişli Hamidiye Etfal 
Training and Research Hospital, İstanbul, Turkey.
(46)Unidad de Trastornos del Movimiento, Servicio de Neurología y 
Neurofisiología Clínica, Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla, Hospital 
Universitario Virgen del Rocío/CSIC/Universidad de Sevilla, Seville, Spain.
(47)Department of Neurology, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University, 
Istanbul, Turkey.
(48)Department of Neurology, Juntendo University School of Medicine, Bunkyo, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(49)Mongi Ben Hmida National Institute of Neurology, Tunis, Tunisia.
(50)Institute of Genetics and Biotechnology, Faculty of Biology, University of 
Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.
(51)Department of Neurogenetics, Research Center of Neurology, Moscow, Russia.
(52)Parkinson's Disease Center and Movement Disorders Clinic, Department of 
Neurology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, United States of America.
(53)Neurocenter, Turku University Hospital, Turku, Finland.
(54)Department of Neurology, Satasairaala Hospital, Pori, Finland.
(55)Clinical Neurosciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of Turku, Turku, 
Finland.
(56)Department of Neurology, University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary.
(57)Department for Neurodegeneration, Clinic for Neurology UCCS, Medical 
Faculty, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia.
(58)Department of Neurology, Faculty of Health Science, Medical University in 
Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.
(59)Movement Disorder and Neuromodulation Unit, Charité, Department of 
Neurology, Campus Mitte, Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(60)Edmond J. Safra Program in Parkinson's Disease, Division of Neurology, 
Department of Medicine, Toronto Western Hospital, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(61)Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine, and the Mah Pooi Soo & Tan 
Chin Nam Centre for Parkinson's & Related Disorders, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(62)Department of Neurology, National Taiwan University Hospital, National 
Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.
(63)Pontificia Universidad Católica Argentina (UCA), Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(64)Griffith Institute for Drug Discovery (GRIDD), School of Environment and 
Science, Griffith University, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.
(65)Sección Movimientos Anormales, Departamento de Neurociencias, Fleni, Buenos 
Aires, Argentina.
(66)Argentine National Scientific and Technological Research Council (CONICET), 
Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(67)Department of Genetics, Institute of Biology Roberto Alcantara Gomes, State 
University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(68)Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine, Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol 
University, Rajthevi, Bangkok, Thailand.
(69)Department of Neurology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
(70)Department of Neurology, Skåne University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.
(71)Tanz Centre for Research in Neurodegenerative Diseases, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(72)Medical Research Council Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, 
University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom.
(73)Molecular and Clinical Medicine, Ninewells Hospital and Medical School, 
University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom.
(74)Centre of Health Science, University of the Faroe Islands, Tórshavn, Faroe 
Islands.
(75)Department of Occupational Medicine and Public Health, The Faroese Hospital 
System, Tórshavn, Faroe Islands.
(76)Pavol Jozef Šafárik University in Košice, Košice, Slovakia.
(77)Department of Neurology, University Hospital L. Pasteur, Kosice, Slovakia.
(78)Neurology Service, State University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Rio 
de Janeiro, Brazil.
(79)Department of Medicine, Medical Genetics and Pediatrics, University of 
Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(80)Behavioral and Movement Disorders Section, Ribeirão Preto Medical School, 
University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(81)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
(82)Neurogenetics Research Centre, IRCCS Mondino Foundation, Pavia, Italy.
(83)Department of Neurology, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition, and 
Behavior, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(84)Department of Neurology, Second Affiliated Hospital, College of Medicine, 
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(85)Department of Neurology, Medical University, Vienna, Austria.
(86)The Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson's Research, New York, NY, United 
States of America.

Parkinson's disease (PD) is the fastest-growing neurodegenerative disorder, 
currently affecting ~7 million people worldwide. PD is clinically and 
genetically heterogeneous, with at least 10% of all cases explained by a 
monogenic cause or strong genetic risk factor. However, the vast majority of our 
present data on monogenic PD is based on the investigation of patients of 
European White ancestry, leaving a large knowledge gap on monogenic PD in 
underrepresented populations. Gene-targeted therapies are being developed at a 
fast pace and have started entering clinical trials. In light of these 
developments, building a global network of centers working on monogenic PD, 
fostering collaborative research, and establishing a clinical trial-ready cohort 
is imperative. Based on a systematic review of the English literature on 
monogenic PD and a successful team science approach, we have built up a network 
of 59 sites worldwide and have collected information on the availability of 
data, biomaterials, and facilities. To enable access to this resource and to 
foster collaboration across centers, as well as between academia and industry, 
we have developed an interactive map and online tool allowing for a quick 
overview of available resources, along with an option to filter for specific 
items of interest. This initiative is currently being merged with the Global 
Parkinson's Genetics Program (GP2), which will attract additional centers with a 
focus on underrepresented sites. This growing resource and tool will facilitate 
collaborative research and impact the development and testing of new therapies 
for monogenic and potentially for idiopathic PD patients.

Copyright: © 2023 Vollstedt et al. This is an open access article distributed 
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0292180
PMCID: PMC10547150
PMID: 37788254 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: I have read the journal’s policy and the authors 
of this manuscript have the following competing interests: Roy N. Alcalay 
received consulting fees from Avrobio, Caraway, Ono Therapeutics, GSK, Merck, 
Sanofi, Janssen and grants from the Michael J. Fox Foundation, DOD, the 
Parkinson’s Disease Foundation, and the NIH. Melinda Barkhuizen received a PhD 
scholarship from the National Research Foundation of South Africa (grant numbers 
89230 and 98217) and internal funding from the research center where the study 
was conducted (DST/NWU Preclinical Drug Development Platform, North-West 
University, South Africa); Ampath Pathology laboratories in South Africa donated 
services in the form of drawing participant blood for DNA extractions, Several 
neurologists in South Africa assisted the authors with identifying patients with 
Parkinson`s disease and referring them to the genotyping study; the North-West 
University, South Africa provided Ethical oversight and approval of the 
genotyping project. Vincenzo Bonifati received grants from Stichting Parkinson 
Fonds (Netherlands) and Alzheimer Nederland, he received honoraria from the 
International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society (MDS), for lectures and as 
Chair of the International Congress Scientific Program Committee (2020-2021), 
and from Elsevier Ltd. as co-Editor in Chief of the journal Parkinsonism & 
Related Disorders (2018-current); he is unpaid member of the Stichting Parkinson 
Fonds (Netherlands). Kathrin Brockmann received grants from the German Federal 
Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF; PDStrat; FKZ 031L0137B) and from the 
German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), consulting fees from 
Abbvie, Lundbeck, UCB, Zambon, Roche, and honoraria from Abbvie and UCB. Jordi 
Clarimon is full-time employee at Lundbeck A/S (Denmark). Mario Cornejo-Olivas 
has subcontracts with Cleveland Clinic and San Marcos Foundation for recruiting 
participants for the LARGE PD study in Peru. Jean-Christophe Corvol received 
grants from Sanofi and the Michael J. Fox Foundation, consulting fees from 
Biogen, UCB, Denali, Idorsia, Prevail therapeutics, Theranexus, and honoraria 
from Biogen. Joana Damásio received honoraria from Zambon Pharmaceuticals. Anna 
De Rosa received grants for ROPAD – the Rostock International Parkinson’s 
Disease Study, sponsored by Centogene and grants from Zambon and AIFA (Italian 
Agency of Drug), and she is member of the advisory board at BIAL. Joaquim 
Ferreira received grants from Fundação MSD (Portugal), Novartis, Medtronic, and 
Abbvie, and lecture fees from Lundbeck, Abbvie, BIAL, Biogen, Sunovion 
Pharmaceuticals, ONO, Affiris, and Zambon, payment for expert testimony from 
Novartis, and he participates in advisory boards of Lundbeck, Abbvie, BIAL, 
Affiris, Sunovion Pharmaceuticals, and Zambon; he is employed by CNS (Campus 
Néurologico Sénior) and the Medical Faculty of Lisbon. Emilia Gatto received 
consulting fees from Bago Argentina, honoraria from Bago Argentina,UCB, IPMDS, 
and Europharm, and participates in advisory boards of Bago Argentina and UCB. 
Nir Giladi received grants from the Michael J Fox Foundation, The National 
Parkinson Foundation, The European Union, The Israel Science Foundation Teva, 
NNE program, Biogen, Ionis, Sieratzki Family Foundation, and The Aufzien 
Academic Center in Tel-Aviv University; he holds royalties or licenses at 
Lysosomal Therapeutics (LTI); he received consulting fees from Sionara, 
NeuroDerm, Pharma2B, Denali, Neuron23, Sanofi-Genzyme, Biogen, and Abbvie; he 
received honoraria from Abbvie, Sanofi-Genzyme, and the Movement Disorder 
Society. Nobutaka Hattori received grants from the Japan Society for the 
Promotion of Science (JSPS; 18H04043, 21H04820, 19K22603), the Japan Agency for 
Medical Research and Development (AMED; JP20dm0307101, JP20dm0207070, 
JP20ek0109358, JP19ek0109393, JP19gm0710011, JP19km0405206), Health Labour 
Sciences Research Grant (20FC1049, H29-FC1-062, H29-FC1-033), and the Japan 
Science and Technology Agency (JPMJMS2024-5); he participates in advisory boards 
at Dai-Nippon Sumitomo Pharma, Takeda Pharmaceutical, Kyowa Kirin, TEIJIN PHARMA 
LIMITED, Novartis Pharma, Ono Pharmaceutical, Biogen Idec Japan, and Kissei 
Pharmaceutical; he receives consulting fees from Hisamitsu Pharma; he received 
honoraria from Dai-Nippon Sumitomo Pharma, Takeda Pharmaceutical, Kyowa Kirin, 
AbbVie GK, Nippon Boehringer Ingelheim, Otsuka Pharmaceutical, Novartis Pharma, 
Bristol-Myers Squibb, Ono Pharmaceutical, FP Pharmaceutical, Eisai, Kissei 
Pharmaceutical, Nihon Medi-physics, and Daiichi Sankyo; he received payment for 
expert testimony from Mitsubishi Tanabe Pharma; he received support for 
attending meeting from Takeda Pharmaceutical, and Kyowa Kirin; he has 17 patents 
planned or pending and 5 issued; he is Team Leader at the Neurodegenerative 
Disorders Collaborative Laboratory, RIKEN Center for Brain Science; he holds 
equity stock (8%) of PARKINSON Laboratories Co. Ltd., unrelated to the submitted 
work. Silvia Jesús has received grants from “Consejería de Salud y Familias” 
PI-0459-2018, “acción B Clínicos-Investigdores” B-0007-2019 and from the 
“instituto de Salud Carlos III” PI-18/01898; she received honoraria from Abbvie, 
Bial, Merz, UCB, Italfarmaco, Zambon and Server. Valtteri Kaasinen received 
grants from Turku University Foundation, Päivikki and Sakari Sohlberg 
Foundation, and the Finnish Cultural Foundation; he received consulting fees 
from Nordic Infucare, Abbvie, and Adamant Health; he received honoraria from 
Nordic Infucare and Abbvie; he received Support for attending meetings and/or 
travel from Nordic Infucare; he participates on a Data Safety Monitoring Board 
or Advisory Board at Nordic Infucare and Abbvie; he is board member of the 
Finnish Neurological Society. Christine Klein received royalties from Oxford 
University Press; she received consulting fees from Centogene and Retromer 
Therapeutics; she received payment or honoraria from Desitin Pharma; she 
received support to attend meetings from the Movement Disorder Society; she 
participates on a Data Safety Monitoring Board or Advisory Board at the Else 
Kroener Fresenius Foundation. Peter Klivenyi received honoraria from Abbvie and 
Medtronic. Vladimir Kostic received Grant 17590 from the Ministry of Education, 
Science and Technological Development of Serbia; he received honoraria from 
Novartis and Boehringer Ingelheim. Shen-Yang Lim received the following grants, 
(i) Stipend - Global Parkinson’s Genetics Program (GP2) Working Group Co-Lead 
Award, from the Michael J. Fox Foundation, (ii) Michael J. Fox Foundation (Grant 
18305: "Identifying leucocyte and urine biomarkers in PD patients with LRRK2 
G2385R variant"). George Mellick received grants from the National Health and 
Medical Research Foundation, Australia (APP1151854, APP1084560). Lukasz 
Milanowski received grants from the Polish National Agency for Academic Exchange 
Iwanowska’s Fellowship PPN/IWA/2018/1/00006/U/00001/01, the APDA, the Foundation 
for Polish Science (FNP) and the Haworth Family Professorship in 
Neurodegenerative Diseases Fund. Pablo mir received grants from the Spanish 
Ministry of Science and Innovation (RTC2019-007150-1), the Instituto de Salud 
Carlos III-Fondo Europeo de Desarrollo Regional (ISCIII-FEDER, PI19/01576), and 
the Consejería de Salud y Bienestar Social de la Junta de Andalucía 
(PE-0210-2018); he received payment or honoraria for lectures from Abbvie, 
Abbott, and Zambon; he received Support for attending meetings and travel from 
Abbvie. Shalini Padmanabhan is employed by the Michael J. Fox Foundation. 
Andreas Puschmann received grants from Region Skåne, Sweden, Skåne University 
Hospital, Sweden, The Swedish Parkinson Academy, The Swedish Parkinson 
Foundation (Parkinsonfonden), MultiPark – a strategic research environment at 
Lund University, and Bundy Academy, Sweden; he received honoraria from Elsevier 
(Associate editor for Parkinsonism and Related Disorders), from the 
International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society (MDS), and from the 
International Association of Parkinsonism and Related Disorders; he received 
support for travels from the International Association of Parkinsonism and 
Related Disorders; he is board member of the International Association of 
Parkinsonism and Related Disorders. Mariana Spitz received funding from 
Centogene for the ROPAD study; she received support for travels from Roche. 
Justin Solle is employed by the Michel J. Fox Foundation. Oksana Suchowersky 
received grants from Roche and WaveLifeSciences; she holds royalties or licenses 
at UpToDate; she received consulting fees from Abbvie and Sunovion; she received 
honoraria from the World Parkinson Conference; she participates in advisory 
boards at Alexion; she is board member of the Parkinson Society Alberta. Pichet 
Termsarasab received book royalties from Elsevier and Springer Nature 
Switzerland; he received honoraria for manuscript writing from MedLink Neurology 
and for lectures from Viatris. Bart van de Warrenburg received grants from 
Radboudumc, ZonMW, Hersenstichting, Gossweiler Foundation, and the Michael J Fox 
Foundation; he holds royalties or licenses at BSL Springer Nature; he received 
consulting fees from uniQure; he received honoraria from UKM Medical Center 
Kuala Lumpur; he participates in Medical advisory board of patient organizations 
(unpaid); he is unpaid member of Steering committees or executive boards of 
various research consortia; he received a wearable sensor set by Brugling 
Fund/Hersenstichting. Caroline H. Williams-Gray collaborates with Astra-Zeneca 
on the microbiome in Parkinson’s disease; she received consultancy fees from 
Modus Outcomes and Evidera, Inc./GlaxoSmithKline; she received honoraria from 
Profile Pharma Limited. Eva-Juliane Vollstedt, Harutyun Madoev, Anna Aasly, 
Azlina Ahmad-Annuar, Bashayer Al-Mubarak, Victoria Alvarez, Ignacio Amorin, 
Grazia Annesi, David Arkadir, Soraya Bardien, Roger A. Barker, A. Nazli Basak, 
Agnita Boon, Laura Brighina, Andrea Carmine Belin, Jonathan Carr, Leonor Correia 
Guedes, David Crosiers, Parimal Das, Patricia de Carvalho Aguiar, Jolanta 
Dorszewska, Sibel Ertan, Rosangela Ferese, Gençer Genç, Pilar Gómez-Garre, 
Hasmet Hanagasi, Faycal Hentati, Dorota Hoffman-Zacharska, Sergey N. 
Illarioshkin, Joseph Jankovic, Anneke Kievit, Dariusz Koziorowski, Andrea A. 
Kühn, Anthony E. Lang, Chin-Hsien Lin, Katja Lohmann, Vladana Markovic, Mika 
Henrik Martikainen, Marcelo Merello, Özgür Öztop-Çakmak, Márcia Mattos Gonçalves 
Pimentel, Teeratorn Pulkes, Ekaterina Rogaeva, Esther M. Sammler, Maria Skaalum 
Petersen, Matej Skorvanek, Ai Huey Tan, Avner Thaler, Vitor Tumas, Enza Maria 
Valente, Ruey-Mei Wu, Baorong Zhang, and Alexander Zimprich report no conflict 
of interest. This does not alter our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing 
data and materials.