1. Cancer Med. 2023 Oct;12(20):20353-20364. doi: 10.1002/cam4.6621. Epub 2023 Oct
 16.

Efficacy and safety of abemaciclib alone and with PI3K/mTOR inhibitor LY3023414 
or galunisertib versus chemotherapy in previously treated metastatic pancreatic 
adenocarcinoma: A randomized controlled trial.

Chiorean EG(1)(2), Picozzi V(3), Li CP(4)(5)(6)(7), Peeters M(8)(9), Maurel 
J(10), Singh J(11), Golan T(12), Blanc JF(13), Chapman SC(14), Hussain AM(14), 
Johnston EL(14), Hochster HS(15).

Author information:
(1)University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(2)Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(3)Virginia Mason Hospital and Medical Center, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(4)Division of Clinical Skills Training, Department of Medical Education, Taipei 
Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine, Taipei 
Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(6)Therapeutic and Research Center of Pancreatic Cancer, Taipei Veterans General 
Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(7)School of Medicine, College of Medicine, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung 
University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(8)Department of Oncology, Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium.
(9)Department of Oncology, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, University 
of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(10)Medical Oncology Department, Hospital Clinic of Barcelona, Translational 
Genomics and Targeted Therapeutics in Solid Tumors Group, IDIBAPS, University of 
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(11)Sarah Cannon Cancer Institute at Research Medical Center, Kansas City, 
Missouri, USA.
(12)Oncology Institute, Sheba M9edical Center at Tel-Hashomer, Tel Aviv 
University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(13)Service d'Hépato-Gastroentérologie et d'Oncologie Digestive, Groupe 
Hospitalier Haut-Lévêque, CHU Bordeaux, Pessac, France.
(14)Eli Lilly and Company, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.
(15)Rutgers Cancer Institute of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey, USA.

BACKGROUND: Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas (PDAC) are characterized by 
frequent cell cycle pathways aberrations. This study evaluated safety and 
efficacy of abemaciclib, a cyclin-dependent kinase 4 and 6 inhibitor, as 
monotherapy or in combination with PI3K/mTOR dual inhibitor LY3023414 or TGFβ 
inhibitor galunisertib versus standard of care (SOC) chemotherapy in patients 
with pretreated metastatic PDAC.
METHODS: This Phase 2 open-label study enrolled patients with metastatic PDAC 
who progressed after 1-2 prior therapies. Patients were enrolled in a safety 
lead-in (abemaciclib plus galunisertib) followed by a 2-stage randomized design. 
Stage 1 randomization was planned 1:1:1:1 for abemaciclib, abemaciclib plus 
LY3023414, abemaciclib plus galunisertib, or SOC gemcitabine or capecitabine. 
Advancing to Stage 2 required a disease control rate (DCR) difference ≥0 in 
abemaciclib-containing arms versus SOC. Primary objectives for Stages 1 and 2 
were DCR and progression-free survival (PFS), respectively. Secondary objectives 
included response rate, overall survival, safety, and pharmacokinetics.
RESULTS: One hundred and six patients were enrolled. Abemaciclib plus 
galunisertib did not advance to Stage 1 for reasons unrelated to safety or 
efficacy. Stage 1 DCR was 15.2% with abemaciclib monotherapy, 12.1% with 
abemaciclib plus LY3023414, and 36.4% with SOC. Median PFS was 1.7 months (95% 
CI: 1.4-1.8), 1.8 months (95% CI: 1.3-1.9), and 3.3 months (95% CI: 1.1-5.7), 
respectively. No arms advanced to Stage 2. No new safety signals were 
identified.
CONCLUSION: In patients with pretreated metastatic PDAC, abemaciclib-based 
therapy did not improve DCRs or PFS compared with SOC chemotherapy. No treatment 
arms advanced to Stage 2. Abemaciclib remains investigational in patients with 
PDAC.

© 2023 The Authors. Cancer Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/cam4.6621
PMCID: PMC10652308
PMID: 37840530 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: E. Gabriela Chiorean reports personal fees from 
AstraZeneca, Bayer, Celgene, Eisai, Ipsen, Legend, Merck, Novartis, Noxxon, 
Pfizer, Seattle Genetics, Sobi, and Stemline, and grants from 
Boehringer–Ingelheim, Bristol–Myers Squibb, Celgene, Clovis, Corcept, Fibrogen, 
Halozyme, Incyte, Lonza, Lilly, MacroGenics, Merck, Rafael, Roche, and Stemline. 
V. Picozzi reports research funding from Abbvie, FibroGen, Ipsen, Merus, NGM 
Biopharmaceuticals, and Novocure and a consulting or advisory role with TriSalus 
Life Sciences, and stock and other ownership interests with Amgen and Johnson & 
Johnson. C‐P. Li reports no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article. M. Peeters reports no 
potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or 
publication of this article. J. Maurel reports research funding from Carlos III 
Health Institute; Catalan Agency for Management of University and Research 
Grants; Fundació la Marató de TV3; Olga Torres Foundation, and a consulting or 
advisory role with Advance Medical; Amgen; AstraZeneca; Bayer; Biocartis; Cancer 
Expert Now; Fundación Clínica Universitaria; Incyte; Merck; NanoString 
Technologies; Pierre Fabre; Roche; Sanofi; SERVIER; Shire; Sirtex Medical. J. 
Singh reports no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, 
authorship, and/or publication of this article. T. Golan reports honoraria from 
MSD, consulting or advisory roles with Abbvie, AstraZeneca, MSD, and Teva, 
speakers' bureau from Abbvie, AstraZeneca, and institute research funding from 
AstraZeneca and MSD. J‐F. Blanc reports consulting or advisory roles for Bayer, 
Ipsen, Eisai, Bristol–Myers Squibb, Roche and AstraZeneca, Servier, Incyte. S. 
C. Chapman, A. M. Hussain, and E. L. Johnston are full‐time employees of Eli 
Lilly and Company and are Eli Lilly and Company shareholders. H. Hochster 
reports personal fees from Bayer and Genentech and personal fees and 
nonfinancial support from Elion and TRIGR.