1. J Virol. 2023 Nov 30;97(11):e0096323. doi: 10.1128/jvi.00963-23. Epub 2023 Oct
 17.

Heterologous prime-boost immunization induces protection against dengue virus 
infection in cynomolgus macaques.

Keelapang P(#)(1), Ketloy C(#)(2)(3), Puttikhunt C(4)(5), Sriburi R(1), 
Prompetchara E(2)(3), Sae-Lim M(1), Siridechadilok B(5)(6), Duangchinda T(4)(5), 
Noisakran S(4)(5), Charoensri N(7), Suriyaphol P(8), Suparattanagool P(9), 
Utaipat U(10), Masrinoul P(11), Avirutnan P(4)(5), Mongkolsapaya J(5)(12), 
Screaton G(12), Auewarakul P(13), Malaivijitnond S(14), Yoksan S(11), Malasit 
P(4)(5), Ruxrungtham K(2), Pulmanausahakul R(15), Sittisombut N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Chiang Mai University , 
Chiang Mai, Thailand.
(2)Center of Excellence in Vaccine Research and Development, Faculty of 
Medicine, Chulalongkorn University , Bangkok, Thailand.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn 
University , Bangkok, Thailand.
(4)Molecular Biology of Dengue and Flaviviruses Research Team, Medical Molecular 
Biotechnology Research Group, National Center for Genetic Engineering and 
Biotechnology, National Science and Technology Development Agency , Pathumthani, 
Thailand.
(5)Division of Dengue Hemorrhagic Fever Research, Siriraj Center of Research 
Excellence in Dengue and Emerging Pathogens, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj 
Hospital, Mahidol University , Bangkok, Thailand.
(6)Frontier Biodesign and Bioengineering Research Team, National Center for 
Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology , Pathumthani, Thailand.
(7)Center for Research and Development of Medical Diagnostic Laboratories, 
Faculty of Associated Medical Sciences, Khon Kaen University , Khon Kaen, 
Thailand.
(8)Siriraj Informatics and Data Innovation Center, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj 
Hospital, Mahidol University , Bangkok, Thailand.
(9)Clinical Epidemiology Unit, Faculty of Medicine, Khon Kaen University , Khon 
Kaen, Thailand.
(10)Research Institute for Health Sciences, Chiang Mai University , Chiang Mai, 
Thailand.
(11)Center for Vaccine Development, Institute of Molecular Biosciences, Mahidol 
University at Salaya , Nakhon Pathom, Thailand.
(12)Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics, Nuffield Department of Medicine, 
University of Oxford , Oxford, United Kingdom.
(13)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol 
University , Bangkok, Thailand.
(14)National Primate Research Center of Thailand, Chulalongkorn University , 
Bangkok, Thailand.
(15)Princess Srisavangavadhana College of Medicine, Chulabhorn Royal Academy , 
Bangkok, Thailand.
(#)Contributed equally

Currently licensed dengue vaccines do not induce long-term protection in 
children without previous exposure to dengue viruses in nature. These vaccines 
are based on selected attenuated strains of the four dengue serotypes and 
employed in combination for two or three consecutive doses. In our search for a 
better dengue vaccine candidate, live attenuated strains were followed by 
non-infectious virus-like particles or the plasmids that generate these 
particles upon injection into the body. This heterologous prime-boost 
immunization induced elevated levels of virus-specific antibodies and helped to 
prevent dengue virus infection in a high proportion of vaccinated macaques. In 
macaques that remained susceptible to dengue virus, distinct mechanisms were 
found to account for the immunization failures, providing a better understanding 
of vaccine actions. Additional studies in humans in the future may help to 
establish whether this combination approach represents a more effective means of 
preventing dengue by vaccination.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.00963-23
PMCID: PMC10688363
PMID: 37846984 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: N.S., P.K., N.C., and M.S.-L. were listed as 
inventors in patents and patent applications involving the mature virus-like 
particles of flaviviruses. Other authors declare that they do not have conflicts 
of interest.