1. Lab Anim (NY). 2023 Nov;52(11):269-277. doi: 10.1038/s41684-023-01268-0. Epub 
2023 Oct 19.

Plasma metabolomics supports non-fasted sampling for metabolic profiling across 
a spectrum of glucose tolerance in the Nile rat model for type 2 diabetes.

Anderson BJ(1), Curtis AM(2)(3), Jen A(4), Thomson JA(2)(3)(5), Clegg DO(2)(3), 
Jiang P(6)(7)(8), Coon JJ(1)(4)(5), Overmyer KA(9)(10), Toh H(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, University of 
California, Santa Barbara, CA, USA.
(3)Neuroscience Research Institute, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA, 
USA.
(4)Department of Biomolecular Chemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 
Madison, WI, USA.
(5)Morgridge Institute for Research, Madison, WI, USA.
(6)Department of Biological, Geological and Environmental Sciences, Cleveland 
State University, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(7)Center for Gene Regulation in Health and Disease, Cleveland State University, 
Cleveland, OH, USA.
(8)Center for RNA Science and Therapeutics, School of Medicine, Case Western 
Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(9)Department of Biomolecular Chemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 
Madison, WI, USA. kovermyer@wisc.edu.
(10)Morgridge Institute for Research, Madison, WI, USA. kovermyer@wisc.edu.
(11)Neuroscience Research Institute, University of California, Santa Barbara, 
CA, USA. toh@ucsb.edu.

Type 2 diabetes is a challenge in modern healthcare, and animal models are 
necessary to identify underlying mechanisms. The Nile rat (Arvicanthis 
niloticus) develops diet-induced diabetes rapidly on a conventional rodent chow 
diet without genetic or chemical manipulation. Unlike common laboratory models, 
the outbred Nile rat model is diurnal and has a wide range of overt diabetes 
onset and diabetes progression patterns in both sexes, better mimicking the 
heterogeneous diabetic phenotype in humans. While fasted blood glucose has 
historically been used to monitor diabetic progression, postprandial blood 
glucose is more sensitive to the initial stages of diabetes. However, there is a 
long-held assumption that ad libitum feeding in rodent models leads to increased 
variance, thus masking diabetes-related metabolic changes in the plasma. Here we 
compared repeatability within triplicates of non-fasted or fasted plasma samples 
and assessed metabolic changes relevant to glucose tolerance in fasted and 
non-fasted plasma of 8-10-week-old male Nile rats. We used liquid 
chromatography-mass spectrometry lipidomics and polar metabolomics to measure 
relative metabolite abundances in the plasma samples. We found that, compared to 
fasted metabolites, non-fasted plasma metabolites are not only more strongly 
associated with glucose tolerance on the basis of unsupervised clustering and 
elastic net regression model, but also have a lower replicate variance. Between 
the two sampling groups, we detected 66 non-fasted metabolites and 32 fasted 
metabolites that were associated with glucose tolerance using a combined 
approach with multivariable elastic net and individual metabolite linear models. 
Further, to test if metabolite replicate variance is affected by age and sex, we 
measured non-fasted replicate variance in a cohort of mature 30-week-old male 
and female Nile rats. Our results support using non-fasted plasma metabolomics 
to study glucose tolerance in Nile rats across the progression of diabetes.

© 2023. This is a U.S. Government work and not under copyright protection in the 
US; foreign copyright protection may apply.

DOI: 10.1038/s41684-023-01268-0
PMCID: PMC10611569
PMID: 37857753 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: J.J.C. is a consultant for Thermo Fisher 
Scientific, and a member of the scientific advisory boards for Seer, and 908 
Devices. The other authors declare no competing interests.