1. Cureus. 2023 Sep 21;15(9):e45707. doi: 10.7759/cureus.45707. eCollection 2023 
Sep.

Late Recurrence of Renal Cell Carcinoma in Unusual Sites 23 Years After 
Nephrectomy.

Castillo E(1), Martinez K(2).

Author information:
(1)Medicine, Universidad Latina de Panama, Panama City, PAN.
(2)Internal Medicine, Hospital Santo Tomás, Panama City, PAN.

Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is a common malignancy in the elderly population and 
it is notorious for its mechanism of late metastasis to unusual anatomical 
sites. Late recurrences are common following curative treatment, such as radical 
nephrectomy. Pancreatic metastases and hepatic metastatic lesions make the 
diagnosis and classification of a primary tumor challenging. This necessitates a 
high index of suspicion and an extensive interrogation. We present the case of a 
68-year-old Hispanic female with progressive pain in the right upper quadrant, 
weight loss, and decreased appetite. She has a history of renal cell carcinoma 
treated with radical nephrectomy and radiotherapy. A pancreatic biopsy was 
performed based on the ultrasound and computed tomography findings at a private 
clinic. Subsequently, the patient was referred to the Instituto Oncologico 
Nacional (ION) due to immunohistochemical features suggestive of a 
well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumor. At ION, a more comprehensive medical 
history was obtained, and the immunohistochemistry panel was extended, 
confirming the diagnosis of late recurrence of RCC. One possible explanation for 
the very late relapse of our patient is the presence of malignant cells that 
were spared or seeded during the surgical intervention and remained dormant or 
latent, subsequently spreading via hematogenous dissemination or via the 
lymphatic system. We highlight the importance of medical history, pathological 
examination, and immunohistochemical analysis in establishing a differential 
diagnosis, given the nature of RCC, which can often present asymptomatically and 
has a propensity for late recurrence. Further research should focus on 
developing standardized surveillance protocols for such cases.

Copyright © 2023, Castillo et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.45707
PMCID: PMC10590181
PMID: 37868443

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.