1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2023 Oct 5:2023.10.05.561040. doi: 
10.1101/2023.10.05.561040.

The overlapping genetic architecture of psychiatric disorders and cortical brain 
structure.

Sha Z(1)(2), Warrier V(3)(4), Bethlehem RAI(4), Schultz LM(5)(6), Merikangas 
A(5)(6)(7), Sun KY(1)(2)(6), Gur RC(1)(8)(9), Gur RE(1)(8)(9), Shinohara 
RT(10)(11), Seidlitz J(1)(2)(6), Almasy L(5)(6)(7), Andreassen OA(12), 
Alexander-Bloch AF(1)(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Behavioral Science, The 
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(4)Department of Psychology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(5)Department of Biomedical and Health Informatics, Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(6)Lifespan Brain Institute, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia and Penn 
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(7)Department of Genetics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(8)Department of Neurology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA.
(9)Department of Radiology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Pennsylvania, PA, 19104, USA.
(10)Penn Statistics in Imaging and Visualization Endeavor (PennSIVE), Department 
of Biostatistics, Epidemiology, and Informatics, Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, 423 Guardian Dr, Philadelphia, PA 19104, United 
States.
(11)Center for Biomedical Image Computing and Analytics (CBICA), Department of 
Radiology, Perelman School of Medicine, United States.
(12)NORMENT Centre, Division of Mental Health and Addiction, Oslo University 
Hospital & Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.

Both psychiatric vulnerability and cortical structure are shaped by the 
cumulative effect of common genetic variants across the genome. However, the 
shared genetic underpinnings between psychiatric disorders and brain structural 
phenotypes, such as thickness and surface area of the cerebral cortex, remains 
elusive. In this study, we employed pleiotropy-informed conjunctional false 
discovery rate analysis to investigate shared loci across genome-wide 
association scans of regional cortical thickness, surface area, and seven 
psychiatric disorders in approximately 700,000 individuals of European ancestry. 
Aggregating regional measures, we identified 50 genetic loci shared between 
psychiatric disorders and surface area, as well as 26 genetic loci shared with 
cortical thickness. Risk alleles exhibited bidirectional effects on both 
cortical thickness and surface area, such that some risk alleles for each 
disorder increased regional brain size while other risk alleles decreased 
regional brain size. Due to bidirectional effects, in many cases we observed 
extensive pleiotropy between an imaging phenotype and a psychiatric disorder 
even in the absence of a significant genetic correlation between them. The 
impact of genetic risk for psychiatric disorders on regional brain structure did 
exhibit a consistent pattern across highly comorbid psychiatric disorders, with 
80% of the genetic loci shared across multiple disorders displaying consistent 
directions of effect. Cortical patterning of genetic overlap revealed a 
hierarchical genetic architecture, with the association cortex and sensorimotor 
cortex representing two extremes of shared genetic influence on psychiatric 
disorders and brain structural variation. Integrating multi-scale functional 
annotations and transcriptomic profiles, we observed that shared genetic loci 
were enriched in active genomic regions, converged on neurobiological and 
metabolic pathways, and showed differential expression in postmortem brain 
tissue from individuals with psychiatric disorders. Cumulatively, these findings 
provide a significant advance in our understanding of the overlapping polygenic 
architecture between psychopathology and cortical brain structure.

DOI: 10.1101/2023.10.05.561040
PMCID: PMC10592957
PMID: 37873315

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest AFA-B receives consulting 
income from Octave Bioscience. AFA-B, JS, and RAIB hold equity in and serve on 
the board of Centile Bioscience. RTS receives consulting income from Octave 
Bioscience and compensation for scientific reviewing from the American Medical 
Association. OAA is a consultant to cortechs.ai, and has received speaker’s 
honorarium from Lundbeck, Janssen, Sunovion.