1. Front Psychiatry. 2023 Oct 11;14:1234220. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2023.1234220. 
eCollection 2023.

BDNF gene Val66Met polymorphisms as a predictor for clinical presentation in 
schizophrenia - recent findings.

Farcas A(1)(2), Hindmarch C(3)(4)(5), Iftene F(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Neuroscience Studies, Queen's University, Kingston, ON, Canada.
(2)Providence Care Hospital, Kingston, ON, Canada.
(3)Department of Biomedical and Molecular Sciences, Queen's University, 
Kingston, ON, Canada.
(4)Department of Medicine, Queen's University, Kingston, ON, Canada.
(5)Queen's Cardiopulmonary Unit, Translational Institute of Medicine, Queen's 
University, Kingston, ON, Canada.

Schizophrenia is a highly heritable, severe psychiatric disorder that involves 
dysfunctions in thinking, emotions, and behavior, with a profound impact on a 
person's ability to function normally in their daily life. Research efforts 
continue to focus on elucidating possible genetic underlying mechanisms of the 
disorder. Although the genetic loci identified to date to be significantly 
associated with schizophrenia risk do not represent disease-causing factors, 
each one of them could be seen as a possible incremental contributor. 
Considering the importance of finding new and more efficient pharmacological 
approaches to target the complex symptomatology of this disorder, in this 
scoping review, we are focusing on the most recent findings in studies aiming to 
elucidate the contribution of one of the genetic factors involved - the BDNF 
gene Val66Met polymorphisms. Here we performed a systematic search in Pubmed, 
Embase, and Web of Science databases with the search terms: (BDNF gene 
polymorphism) AND (schizophrenia) for articles published in the last 5 years. To 
be selected for this review, articles had to report on studies where genotyping 
for the BDNF Val66Met polymorphism was performed in participants diagnosed with 
schizophrenia (or schizophrenia spectrum disorders or first-episode psychosis). 
The search provided 35 results from Pubmed, 134 results from Embase, and 118 
results from the Web of Science database. Twenty-two articles were selected to 
be included in this review, all reporting on studies where an implication of the 
BDNF Val66Met polymorphisms in the disorder's pathophysiology was sought to be 
elucidated. These studies looked at BDNF gene Val66Met polymorphism variants, 
their interactions with other genes of interest, and different facets of the 
illness. The Met/Met genotype was found to be associated with higher PANSS 
positive scores. Furthermore, Met/Met homozygous individuals appear to present 
with worse cognitive function and lower levels of serum BDNF. In the Val/Val 
genotype carriers, increased BDNF levels were found to correlate with weight 
gain under Risperidone treatment. However, due to heterogeneous results, the 
diversity in study populations and studies' small sample sizes, generalizations 
cannot be made. Our findings emphasize the need for further research dedicated 
to clarifying the role of gene polymorphisms in antipsychotic treatment to 
enhance specificity and efficacy in the treatment of schizophrenia.

Copyright © 2023 Farcas, Hindmarch and Iftene.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyt.2023.1234220
PMCID: PMC10598753
PMID: 37886115

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.