1. J Biol Chem. 2023 Dec;299(12):105400. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2023.105400. Epub
2023  Oct 26.

The universe of galectin-binding partners and their functions in health and 
disease.

Troncoso MF(1), Elola MT(1), Blidner AG(2), Sarrias L(1), Espelt MV(1), 
Rabinovich GA(3).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Química Biológica, Facultad de Farmacia y Bioquímica, 
Universidad de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina; Instituto de Química y 
Fisicoquímica Biológicas (IQUIFIB) Prof Alejandro C. Paladini, 
CONICET-Universidad de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(2)Laboratorio de Glicomedicina, Instituto de Biología y Medicina Experimental 
(IBYME-CONICET), Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(3)Laboratorio de Glicomedicina, Instituto de Biología y Medicina Experimental 
(IBYME-CONICET), Buenos Aires, Argentina; Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y 
Naturales, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina. Electronic 
address: gabyrabi@gmail.com.

Galectins, a family of evolutionarily conserved glycan-binding proteins, play 
key roles in diverse biological processes including tissue repair, adipogenesis, 
immune cell homeostasis, angiogenesis, and pathogen recognition. Dysregulation 
of galectins and their ligands has been observed in a wide range of pathologic 
conditions including cancer, autoimmune inflammation, infection, fibrosis, and 
metabolic disorders. Through protein-glycan or protein-protein interactions, 
these endogenous lectins can shape the initiation, perpetuation, and resolution 
of these processes, suggesting their potential roles in disease monitoring and 
treatment. However, despite considerable progress, a full understanding of the 
biology and therapeutic potential of galectins has not been reached due to their 
diversity, multiplicity of cell targets, and receptor promiscuity. In this 
article, we discuss the multiple galectin-binding partners present in different 
cell types, focusing on their contributions to selected physiologic and 
pathologic settings. Understanding the molecular bases of galectin-ligand 
interactions, particularly their glycan-dependency, the biochemical nature of 
selected receptors, and underlying signaling events, might contribute to 
designing rational therapeutic strategies to control a broad range of pathologic 
conditions.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2023.105400
PMCID: PMC10696404
PMID: 37898403 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest M. F. T., M. T. E., A. G. 
B., L. S. and M. V. E. declare that they have no conflict of interest regarding 
the content of this article. G. A. R. reports a relationship with Galtec SAS 
that includes equities.