1. Psychiatry Investig. 2023 Oct;20(10):930-939. doi: 10.30773/pi.2023.0105. Epub
 2023 Oct 24.

Association Between Metabolic Risk Factors and Cognitive Impairment in 
Schizophrenia Based on Sex.

Huang H(1)(2), Du L(1)(2), Pu Z(1)(2), Shi Y(2), Xiao Z(2), Chen X(1)(2), Yao 
S(2), Wang L(2), Li Z(3), Xue T(2), Cui D(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Shanghai Mental Health Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of 
Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(2)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Psychotic Disorders, Shanghai, China.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, The Affiliated Brain Hospital of Guangzhou Medical 
University, Guangzhou, China.

OBJECTIVE: Sex differences have been observed in many aspects of schizophrenia, 
including cognitive deficits. Despite extensive research into the relationship 
between metabolic factors and cognitive deficits in schizophrenia, few studies 
have explored the potential sex difference in their association.
METHODS: We recruited 358 schizophrenia patients and 231 healthy controls. The 
participants underwent measurements of body mass index (BMI), waist 
circumference, blood pressure, triglycerides, high-density lipoprotein 
cholesterol, and fasting blood glucose. Metabolic risk factors included 
abdominal obesity, hypertension, hyperglycemia, and dyslipidemia. A collection 
of these metabolic risk factors has been defined as metabolic syndrome. These 
diagnoses were based on the criteria of the National Cholesterol Education 
Program's Adult Treatment Panel III. Cognitive performance was measured using 
the Repeatable Battery for the Assessment of Neuropsychological Status (RBANS). 
A descriptive analysis, difference analysis, and linear regression model were 
used to identify the metabolic risk factors for cognitive function in 
schizophrenia.
RESULTS: Our findings revealed sex differences in the rate of abdominal obesity 
and hypertension in schizophrenic patients. Additionally, we observed sex 
differences in the association between metabolic risk factors and cognitive 
impairment in schizophrenia. Specifically, hyperglycemia was associated with the 
immediate memory index score of RBANS in male patients, while dyslipidemia was 
associated with language, attention, delayed memory index scores, and RBANS 
total score in female patients.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that sex should be considered when evaluating 
the impact of metabolic disorders on the cognitive function of schizophrenic 
patients. Moreover, our study identifies hyperglycemia and dyslipidemia as 
potential targets for precise treatment by sex stratification, which could 
benefit the improvement of cognitive impairment in schizophrenic patients.

DOI: 10.30773/pi.2023.0105
PMCID: PMC10620336
PMID: 37899216

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest The authors have no 
potential conflicts of interest to disclose.