1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2023 Oct 18;14:1258340. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2023.1258340. eCollection 2023.

Case Report: Osteosclerotic metaphyseal dysplasia with optic nerve involvement 
and progressive osteonecrosis of the jaw due to a novel LRRK1 mutation.

Pieridou C(1), Sabir A(2), Lancashire J(3), Liang Y(4), McMillan K(5), Shaw 
N(1)(6), Uday S(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Birmingham Women's and Children's 
Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Clinical Genetics, Birmingham Women's and Children's Hospital, 
Birmingham, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Hematology, Birmingham Women's and Children's Hospital, 
Birmingham, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Paediatric Palliative Medicine, Birmingham Women's and 
Children's and Community Healthcare Trusts, Birmingham, United Kingdom.
(5)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Birmingham Women's and 
Children's Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom.
(6)Institute of Metabolism and Systems Research, University of Birmingham, 
Birmingham, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Osteosclerotic metaphyseal dysplasia (OSMD, OMIM 615198) is an 
extremely rare autosomal recessive osteopetrosis disorder resulting in a 
distinctive pattern of osteosclerosis of the metaphyseal margins of long tubular 
bones. To date, only thirteen cases have been reported (eight molecularly 
confirmed). Five homozygous sequence variants in the leucine-rich repeat kinase 
1 (LRRK1) gene have been identified to cause OSMD. We present two male siblings 
with OSMD with a novel LRRK1 variant.
CASES: The index case, now aged 6 years, was referred aged 9 months when diffuse 
sclerosis of the ribs and vertebral bodies, suggestive of osteopetrosis, was 
incidentally identified on a chest radiograph for suspected lower respiratory 
tract infection. Parents were consanguineous and of Pakistani origin. Further 
evaluation revealed developmental delay, nystagmus with bilateral optic nerve 
hypoplasia and severe visual impairment. Skeletal survey confirmed typical 
changes of OSMD, with widespread diffuse sclerosis and Erlenmeyer flask 
deformity of long bones. His older sibling, now aged 12 years, was 7 years at 
the time of referral and had similar clinical course and skeletal findings. 
Additionally, he had a chronic progressive osteonecrosis of the left mandible 
that required debridement, debulking and long-term antibiotics. Skeletal survey 
revealed findings similar to his sibling. Neither sibling had significant 
skeletal fractures or seizures. Unlike most previous reports suggesting sparing 
of the skull and lack of visual impairment, our patients had evidence of 
osteosclerosis of the cranium. Genetic screening for the common autosomal 
recessive and dominant pathogenic variants of osteopetrosis was negative. Whole 
Exome Sequencing (WES) followed by Sanger sequencing, identified a novel 
homozygous LRRK1 c.2506C>T p. (Gln836Ter) nonsense variant predicted to result 
in premature truncation of LRRK1 transcript.
CONCLUSION: Our cases confirm the autosomal recessive inheritance and expand the 
spectrum of genotype and phenotype of OSMD reported in the literature. 
Increasing reports of LRRK1 variants in this phenotype raise the question of 
whether LRRK1 should be included in targeted osteopetrosis panels. Bone 
histology in previous cases has shown this to be an osteoclast rich form of 
osteopetrosis raising the possibility that haematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation may be an appropriate treatment modality.

Copyright © 2023 Pieridou, Sabir, Lancashire, Liang, McMillan, Shaw and Uday.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2023.1258340
PMCID: PMC10619726
PMID: 37920250 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.