1. Osong Public Health Res Perspect. 2023 Oct;14(5):333-346. doi: 
10.24171/j.phrp.2022.0323. Epub 2023 Oct 18.

Strategies to combat Gram-negative bacterial resistance to conventional 
antibacterial drugs: a review.

Bhowmik P(1), Modi B(2), Roy P(1), Chowdhury A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, School of Life Science & Biotechnology, 
Adamas University, Kolkata, India.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Techno India University, Kolkata, India.

The emergence of antimicrobial resistance raises the fear of untreatable 
diseases. Antimicrobial resistance is a multifaceted and dynamic phenomenon that 
is the cumulative result of different factors. While Gram-positive pathogens, 
such as methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus and Clostridium difficile, 
were previously the most concerning issues in the field of public health, 
Gram-negative pathogens are now of prime importance. The World Health 
Organization's priority list of pathogens mostly includes multidrug-resistant 
Gram-negative organisms particularly carbapenem-resistant Enterobacterales, 
carbapenem-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and extensively drug-resistant 
Acinetobacter baumannii. The spread of Gram-negative bacterial resistance is a 
global issue, involving a variety of mechanisms. Several strategies have been 
proposed to control resistant Gram-negative bacteria, such as the development of 
antimicrobial auxiliary agents and research into chemical compounds with new 
modes of action. Another emerging trend is the development of naturally derived 
antibacterial compounds that aim for targets novel areas, including engineered 
bacteriophages, probiotics, metal-based antibacterial agents, odilorhabdins, 
quorum sensing inhibitors, and microbiome-modifying agents. This review focuses 
on the current status of alternative treatment regimens against 
multidrug-resistant Gram-negative bacteria, aiming to provide a snapshot of the 
situation and some information on the broader context.

DOI: 10.24171/j.phrp.2022.0323
PMCID: PMC10626324
PMID: 37920891

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest The authors have no 
conflicts of interest to declare.