1. Stem Cell Res Ther. 2023 Nov 6;14(1):318. doi: 10.1186/s13287-023-03556-5.

Cell-based passive immunization for protection against SARS-CoV-2 infection.

Sawula E(#)(1)(2), Miersch S(#)(3), Jong ED(1)(2), Li C(2), Chou FY(1)(2), Tang 
JK(2)(4), Saberianfar R(3), Harding J(2), Sidhu SS(3), Nagy A(5)(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(2)Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Sinai Health System, Toronto, ON, 
Canada.
(3)The Anvil Institute, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada.
(4)Department of Physiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(5)Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. 
nagy@lunenfeld.ca.
(6)Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Sinai Health System, Toronto, ON, 
Canada. nagy@lunenfeld.ca.
(7)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, 
Canada. nagy@lunenfeld.ca.
(8)Australian Regenerative Medicine Institute, Monash University, Melbourne, 
VIC, Australia. nagy@lunenfeld.ca.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Immunologically impaired individuals respond poorly to vaccines, 
highlighting the need for additional strategies to protect these vulnerable 
populations from COVID-19. While monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) have emerged as 
promising tools to manage infectious diseases, the transient lifespan of 
neutralizing mAbs in patients limits their ability to confer lasting, passive 
prophylaxis from SARS-CoV-2. Here, we attempted to solve this problem by 
combining cell and mAb engineering in a way that provides durable immune 
protection against viral infection using safe and universal cell therapy.
METHODS: Mouse embryonic stem cells equipped with our FailSafe™ and induced 
allogeneic cell tolerance technologies were engineered to express factors that 
potently neutralize SARS-CoV-2, which we call 'neutralizing biologics' (nBios). 
We subcutaneously transplanted the transgenic cells into mice and longitudinally 
assessed the ability of the cells to deliver nBios into circulation. To do so, 
we quantified plasma nBio concentrations and SARS-CoV-2 neutralizing activity 
over time in transplant recipients. Finally, using similar cell engineering 
strategies, we genetically modified FailSafe™ human-induced pluripotent stem 
cells to express SARS-CoV-2 nBios.
RESULTS: Transgenic mouse embryonic stem cells engineered for safety and 
allogeneic-acceptance can secrete functional and potent SARS-CoV-2 nBios. As a 
dormant, subcutaneous tissue, the transgenic cells and their differentiated 
derivatives long-term deliver a supply of protective nBio titers in vivo. Moving 
toward clinical relevance, we also show that human-induced pluripotent stem 
cells, similarly engineered for safety, can secrete highly potent nBios.
CONCLUSIONS: Together, these findings show the promise and potential of using 
'off-the-shelf' cell products that secrete neutralizing antibodies for sustained 
protective immunity against current and future viral pathogens of public health 
significance.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13287-023-03556-5
PMCID: PMC10629160
PMID: 37932852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: A.N. is a co-founder of panCELLa Inc. that has 
exclusive licences for the FailSafe™ and iACT technologies developed by the Nagy 
lab. A.N. is an inventor of these technologies, and J.H. is an inventor of the 
iACT technology. All other authors have no competing interests.