1. Front Physiol. 2023 Oct 24;14:1266444. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2023.1266444. 
eCollection 2023.

Development of a novel Guinea Pig model producing transgenerational endothelial 
transcriptional changes driven by maternal food restriction and a second 
metabolic insult of high fat diet.

Le HH(1), Hagen MW(1), Louey S(2)(3), Tavori H(3), Thornburg KL(2)(3)(4), Giraud 
GD(2)(3)(4)(5), Hinds MT(1)(2), Barnes AP(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Oregon Health and Science University, 
Portland, OR, United States.
(2)Center for Developmental Health, Portland, OR, United States.
(3)Knight Cardiovascular Institute, Portland, OR, United States.
(4)Department of Chemical Physiology and Biochemistry, Oregon Health and Science 
University, Portland, OR, United States.
(5)VA Portland Health Care System, Portland, OR, United States.

Developmental programming of chronic adverse cardiovascular health outcomes has 
been studied both using numerous human populations and an array of animal 
models. However, the mechanisms that produce transgenerational effects have been 
difficult to study due to a lack of developmentally relevant models. As such, 
how increased disease risk is carried to the second generation has been poorly 
studied. We hypothesized that the endothelium which mediates many acute and 
chronic vascular inflammatory responses is a key player in these effects, and 
epidemiological studies implicate transgenerational nutritional effects on 
endothelial health. To study the mutigenerational effects of maternal 
undernutrition on offspring endothelial health, we developed a model of 
transgenerational nutritional stress in guinea pigs, a translationally relevant 
precocial species with a relatively short lifespan. First- and second-generation 
offspring were subjected to a high fat diet in adolescence to exacerbate 
negative cardiovascular health. To assess transcriptional changes, we performed 
bulk RNA-sequencing in carotid artery endothelial cells, with groups stratified 
as prenatal control or food restricted, and postnatal control or high fat diet. 
We detected statistically significant gene alterations for each dietary 
permutation, some of which were unique to treatments and other transcriptional 
signatures shared by multiple or all conditions. These findings highlight a core 
group of genes altered by high fat diet that is shared by all cohorts and a 
divergence of transgenerational effects between the prenatal ad libitum and 
dietary restriction groups. This study establishes the groundwork for this model 
to be used to better understand the interplay of prenatal stress and genetic 
reprogramming.

Copyright © 2023 Le, Hagen, Louey, Tavori, Thornburg, Giraud, Hinds and Barnes.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2023.1266444
PMCID: PMC10628814
PMID: 37942229

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.