1. Pediatr Rheumatol Online J. 2023 Nov 23;21(1):140. doi: 
10.1186/s12969-023-00925-5.

Is it possible to extend the dose interval of canakinumab treatment in children 
with familial Mediterranean fever? PeRA group experience.

Kavrul Kayaalp G(1), Çağlayan Ş(2), Demirkan FG(1), Guliyeva V(1), Otar Yener 
G(3), Öztürk K(4), Demir F(5), Özdel S(6), Çakan M(2), Sönmez HE(7), Sözeri 
B(2), Aktay Ayaz N(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Rheumatology, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul 
University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(2)Department of Pediatric Rheumatology, University of Health Sciences, Umraniye 
Research and Training Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey.
(3)Department of Pediatric Rheumatology, Sanliurfa Research and Training 
Hospital, Sanliurfa, Turkey.
(4)Department of Pediatric Rheumatology, Goztepe Prof. Dr. Süleyman Yalçın 
Research and Training Hospital, Istanbul Medeniyet University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(5)Department of Pediatric Rheumatology, Acıbadem Health Groups Hospital, 
Istanbul, Turkey.
(6)Department of Pediatric Rheumatology, University of Health Sciences, Ankara 
Dr. Sami Ulus Research and Training Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
(7)Department of Pediatric Rheumatology, Kocaeli University Faculty of Medicine, 
Kocaeli, Turkey.
(8)Department of Pediatric Rheumatology, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul 
University, Istanbul, Turkey. nurayaktay@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: There is no clear data on the optimal duration of treatment with 
anti-interleukin-1 drugs in colchicine-resistant familial Mediterranean fever 
patients, as well as on the dose interval. This study aimed to assess patients 
whose canakinumab dose interval was adjusted according to a specific protocol, 
with the objective of evaluating the effectiveness of implementing this protocol 
for the patient care.
METHODS: The files of 45 patients whose canakinumab treatment interval was 
opened with a standard protocol previously determined by the Delphi method were 
retrospectively reviewed.
RESULTS: Canakinumab treatment was initiated once a month for all patients. In 
the sixth month of canakinumab treatment, a dose interval extension was 
introduced; however, 7 patients (15.5%) experienced an attack, and consequently, 
no further interval extension was administered to them. For 29 patients, the 
dose interval was successfully extended to once every three months, as they 
remained attack-free for a year after the first interval extension. Nine 
patients continued receiving the drug every 2 months, as they had not yet 
completed one year since the first extension. The study found no significant 
correlation between experiencing an attack during the dose interval extension 
protocol and the number, duration of attacks, or autoinflammatory diseases 
activity index score.
CONCLUSION: Extending treatment intervals with canakinumab in 
colchicine-resistant familial Mediterranean fever shows promise for favorable 
outcomes.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12969-023-00925-5
PMCID: PMC10666318
PMID: 37996934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.