1. Front Immunol. 2023 Nov 10;14:1288794. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1288794. 
eCollection 2023.

Systematical assessment of the impact of single spike mutations of SARS-CoV-2 
Omicron sub-variants on the neutralization capacity of post-vaccination sera.

Katzmarzyk M(1), Clesle DC(1), van den Heuvel J(2), Hoffmann M(3)(4), Garritsen 
H(5)(6), Pöhlmann S(3)(4), Jacobsen H(#)(1), Čičin-Šain L(#)(1)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Viral Immunology, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, 
Braunschweig, Germany.
(2)Research Group Recombinant Protein Expression, Helmholtz Centre for Infection 
Research, Braunschweig, Germany.
(3)Infection Biology Unit, German Primate Center, Göttingen, Germany.
(4)Faculty of Biology and Psychology, Georg-August-University Göttingen, 
Göttingen, Germany.
(5)Institute for Clinical Transfusion Medicine, Klinikum Braunschweig GmbH, 
Braunschweig, Germany.
(6)Fraunhofer Institute for Surface Engineering and Thin Films IST, 
Braunschweig, Germany.
(7)German Centre for Infection Research (DZIF), Partner Site 
Hannover-Braunschweig, Braunschweig, Germany.
(8)Centre for Individualized Infection Medicine (CIIM), Joint Venture of 
Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research and Medical School Hannover, 
Braunschweig, Germany.
(#)Contributed equally

INTRODUCTION: The evolution of novel SARS-CoV-2 variants significantly affects 
vaccine effectiveness. While these effects can only be studied retrospectively, 
neutralizing antibody titers are most used as correlates of protection. However, 
studies assessing neutralizing antibody titers often show heterogeneous data.
METHODS: To address this, we investigated assay variance and identified virus 
infection time and dose as factors affecting assay robustness. We next measured 
neutralization against Omicron sub-variants in cohorts with hybrid or vaccine 
induced immunity, identifying a gradient of immune escape potential. To evaluate 
the effect of individual mutations on this immune escape potential of Omicron 
variants, we systematically assessed the effect of each individual mutation 
specific to Omicron BA.1, BA.2, BA.2.12.1, and BA.4/5.
RESULTS: We cloned a library of pseudo-viruses expressing spikes with single 
point mutations, and subjected it to pooled sera from vaccinated hosts, thereby 
identifying multiple mutations that independently affect neutralization potency.
DISCUSSION: These data might help to predict antigenic features of novel viral 
variants carrying these mutations and support the development of broad 
monoclonal antibodies.

Copyright © 2023 Katzmarzyk, Clesle, van den Heuvel, Hoffmann, Garritsen, 
Pöhlmann, Jacobsen and Čičin-Šain.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1288794
PMCID: PMC10667444
PMID: 38022629 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The author(s) declared that 
they were an editorial board member of Frontiers, at the time of submission. 
This had no impact on the peer review process and the final decision.