1. Heliyon. 2023 Nov 2;9(11):e21541. doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e21541. 
eCollection 2023 Nov.

Family aggregation and prevalence of other autoimmune diseases in SAPHO 
syndrome.

Li C(1)(2), Wang H(3), Jiang H(4), Shao Y(5), Huang G(3), Yuan K(3), Wei S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Fangshan Hospital Beijing University of Chinese 
Medicine, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Peking Union Medical College 
Hospital, Peking Union Medical College and Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, 
Beijing, China.
(3)School of Life Sciences, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine, Beijing, 
China.
(4)School of Chinese Materia, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine, Beijing, 
China.
(5)Institute of Clinical Medicine, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Peking 
Union Medical College and Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, China.

OBJECTIVE: SAPHO (Synovitis, Acne, Pustulosis, Hyperostosis and Osteitis) 
syndrome is a heterogeneous disease that clinically manifests as chronic 
inflammatory osteoarticular and dermatological lesions. Few reports have 
described familial clustering of SAPHO syndrome cases. This research aimed to 
illustrate the family aggregation of SAPHO syndrome and investigate the 
prevalence of autoimmune disorders among SAPHO syndrome patients and 
first-degree relatives in a large cohort.
METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed the medical records of 233 SAPHO patients 
diagnosed at Peking Union Medical College Hospital. Direct phone calls were made 
to each first-degree relatives. All relatives of the patients who reported SAPHO 
syndrome were asked for a detailed outpatient evaluation.
RESULTS: A total of 233 patients and 1227 first-degree relatives were recruited. 
Six (2.6 %) patients had positive SAPHO family history, including four 
mother-daughter pairs and two sister pairs. Twenty-one (9.0 %) patients 
presented at least one kind of autoimmune disease, including 12 rheumatoid 
arthritis and 4 ulcerative colitis cases. Fifty-eight (24.9 %) SAPHO syndrome 
patients had 68 (5.5 %) first-degree relatives with at least one autoimmune 
disorder. The palmoplantar pustulosis, psoriasis vulgaris, and rheumatoid 
arthritis prevalence in our subjects were each higher than reference rates.
CONCLUSION: This is the first evaluation of familial aggregation for SAPHO 
syndrome in a large cohort. SAPHO syndrome has a weak familial aggregation. 
There is a relatively high prevalence of coexisting autoimmune disease among 
patients with SAPHO syndrome and their first-degree relatives. These results 
would prompt physicians to screen SAPHO syndrome patients and their family 
members for concomitant autoimmune diseases.
KEYPOINTS: This study suggesting a potential genetic component in the 
pathogenesis of SAPHO syndrome. This study is the first to evaluate the family 
aggregation of SAPHO syndrome in a large cohort.

© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e21541
PMCID: PMC10654150
PMID: 38027688

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. CL, 
HSW, HXJ and YMS contributed equally to this work.