1. Front Immunol. 2023 Nov 16;14:1161832. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1161832. 
eCollection 2023.

High cell-free DNA is associated with disease progression, inflammasome 
activation and elevated levels of inflammasome-related cytokine IL-18 in 
patients with myelofibrosis.

De Luca G(1)(2), Lev PR(1)(2), Camacho MF(3), Goette NP(1), Sackmann F(4), 
Castro Ríos MA(5), Moiraghi B(6), Cortes Guerrieri V(7), Bendek G(8), Carricondo 
E(9), Enrico A(10), Vallejo V(11), Varela A(6), Khoury M(12), Gutierrez M(13), 
Larripa IB(3), Marta RF(1)(2), Glembotsky AC(1)(2), Heller PG(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)División Hematología Investigación, Instituto de Investigaciones Médicas Dr. 
Alfredo Lanari, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Buenos Aires (UBA), Buenos 
Aires, Argentina.
(2)Instituto de Investigaciones Médicas (IDIM), UBA-Consejo Nacional de 
Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(3)Laboratorio de Genética Hematológica, Instituto de Medicina Experimental, 
IMEX-CONICET/Academia Nacional de Medicina, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(4)Centro de Hematologia Pavlovsky, Fundaleu, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(5)Consultorios Hematológicos, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(6)Departamento de Hematología, Hospital Ramos Mejía, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(7)División Hematología Clínica, IDIM Dr. Alfredo Lanari, Facultad de Medicina, 
Universidad de Buenos Aires (UBA), Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(8)Departamento de Hematología, Hospital Italiano de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, 
Argentina.
(9)Departamento de Hematología, Hospital Universitario Austral, Buenos Aires, 
Argentina.
(10)Departamento de Hematología, Hospital Italiano de La Plata, Buenos Aires, 
Argentina.
(11)Departamento de Hematología, Instituto Cardiovascular de Buenos Aires, 
Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(12)Departamento de Docencia e Investigación, IDIM Dr. Alfredo Lanari, Facultad 
de Medicina, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(13)Unidad Genómica, Laboratorio Stamboulian, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Myelofibrosis (MF) is a clonal hematopoietic stem cell disorder classified among 
chronic myeloproliferative neoplasms, characterized by exacerbated myeloid and 
megakaryocytic proliferation and bone marrow fibrosis. It is induced by driver 
(JAK2/CALR/MPL) and high molecular risk mutations coupled to a sustained 
inflammatory state that contributes to disease pathogenesis. Patient outcome is 
determined by stratification into risk groups and refinement of current 
prognostic systems may help individualize treatment decisions. Circulating 
cell-free (cf)DNA comprises short fragments of double-stranded DNA, which 
promotes inflammation by stimulating several pathways, including inflammasome 
activation, which is responsible for IL-1β and IL-18 maturation and release. In 
this work, we assessed the contribution of cfDNA as a marker of disease 
progression and mediator of inflammation in MF. cfDNA was increased in MF 
patients and higher levels were associated with adverse clinical outcome, a 
high-risk molecular profile, advanced disease stages and inferior overall 
survival, indicating its potential value as a prognostic marker. Cell-free DNA 
levels correlated with tumor burden parameters and markers of systemic 
inflammation. To mimic the effects of cfDNA, monocytes were stimulated with 
poly(dA:dT), a synthetic double-stranded DNA. Following stimulation, patient 
monocytes released higher amounts of inflammasome-processed cytokine, IL-18 to 
the culture supernatant, reflecting enhanced inflammasome function. Despite 
overexpression of cytosolic DNA inflammasome sensor AIM2, IL-18 release from MF 
monocytes was shown to rely mainly on the NLRP3 inflammasome, as it was 
prevented by NLRP3-specific inhibitor MCC950. Circulating IL-18 levels were 
increased in MF plasma, reflecting in vivo inflammasome activation, and 
highlighting the previously unrecognized involvement of this cytokine in MF 
cytokine network. Monocyte counts were higher in patients and showed a trend 
towards correlation with IL-18 levels, suggesting monocytes represent a source 
of circulating IL-18. The close correlation shown between IL-18 and cfDNA 
levels, together with the finding of enhanced DNA-triggered IL-18 release from 
monocytes, suggest that cfDNA promotes inflammation, at least in part, through 
inflammasome activation. This work highlights cfDNA, the inflammasome and IL-18 
as additional players in the complex inflammatory circuit that fosters MF 
progression, potentially providing new therapeutic targets.

Copyright © 2023 De Luca, Lev, Camacho, Goette, Sackmann, Castro Ríos, Moiraghi, 
Cortes Guerrieri, Bendek, Carricondo, Enrico, Vallejo, Varela, Khoury, 
Gutierrez, Larripa, Marta, Glembotsky and Heller.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1161832
PMCID: PMC10687201
PMID: 38035089 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.