1. Front Immunol. 2023 Nov 15;14:1277243. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1277243. 
eCollection 2023.

Harnessing the power of traditional Chinese medicine monomers and compound 
prescriptions to boost cancer immunotherapy.

Miao K(#)(1), Liu W(#)(2), Xu J(3), Qian Z(4), Zhang Q(5).

Author information:
(1)Medical College, Soochow University, Suzhou, Jiangsu, China.
(2)Department of Thoracic Surgery, The Affiliated Wuxi People's Hospital of 
Nanjing Medical University, Wuxi People's Hospital, Wuxi Medical Center, Nanjing 
Medical University, Wuxi, Jiangsu, China.
(3)The First School of Clinical Medicine, Nanjing Medical University. Nanjing, 
Jiangsu, China.
(4)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Changshu Medicine Examination Institute, 
Changshu, Jiangsu, China.
(5)Department of Gastroenterology, The Affiliated Wuxi People's Hospital of 
Nanjing Medical University, Wuxi People's Hospital, Wuxi Medical Center, Nanjing 
Medical University, Wuxi, Jiangsu, China.
(#)Contributed equally

At present, cancer is the largest culprit that endangers human health. The 
current treatment options for cancer mainly include surgical resection, adjuvant 
radiotherapy and chemotherapy, but their therapeutic effects and long-term 
prognosis are unsatisfactory. Immunotherapy is an emerging therapy that has 
completely transformed the therapeutic landscape of advanced cancers, and has 
tried to occupy a place in the neoadjuvant therapy of resectable tumors. 
However, not all patients respond to immunotherapy due to the immunological and 
molecular features of the tumors. Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM) provides a 
new perspective for cancer treatment and is considered to have the potential as 
promising anti-tumor drugs considering its immunoregulatory properties. This 
review concludes commonly used TCM monomers and compounds from the perspective 
of immune regulatory pathways, aiming to clearly introduce the basic mechanisms 
of TCM in boosting cancer immunotherapy and mechanisms of several common TCM. In 
addition, we also summarized closed and ongoing trials and presented prospects 
for future development. Due to the significant role of immunotherapy in the 
treatment of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), TCM combined with immunotherapy 
should be emphasized in NSCLC.

Copyright © 2023 Miao, Liu, Xu, Qian and Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1277243
PMCID: PMC10684919
PMID: 38035069 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.