1. Biol Proced Online. 2023 Dec 1;25(1):32. doi: 10.1186/s12575-023-00222-1.

Musashi-2 Deficiency Triggers Colorectal Cancer Ferroptosis by Downregulating 
the MAPK Signaling Cascade to Inhibit HSPB1 Phosphorylation.

Meng X(#)(1)(2)(3)(4), Peng X(#)(4), Ouyang W(#)(1)(4), Li H(#)(3), Na R(1)(4), 
Zhou W(1)(4), You X(1)(3), Li Y(1)(3), Pu X(1)(3), Zhang K(1)(3), Xia J(1), Wang 
J(4), Zhuang G(5), Tang H(6)(7), Peng Z(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Organ Transplantation Institute of Xiamen University, Fujian Provincial Key 
Laboratory of Organ and Tissue Regeneration, School of Medicine, Xiamen 
University, Xiamen, China.
(2)National Institute for Data Science in Health and Medicine, Xiamen 
University, Xiamen, China.
(3)Department of Pathology, Xiang'an Hospital of Xiamen University, School of 
Medicine, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China.
(4)Department of General Surgery, Organ Transplantation Clinical Medical Center 
of Xiamen University, Xiang'an Hospital of Xiamen University, School of 
Medicine, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China.
(5)Organ Transplantation Institute of Xiamen University, Fujian Provincial Key 
Laboratory of Organ and Tissue Regeneration, School of Medicine, Xiamen 
University, Xiamen, China. zhgh@xmu.edu.cn.
(6)Organ Transplantation Institute of Xiamen University, Fujian Provincial Key 
Laboratory of Organ and Tissue Regeneration, School of Medicine, Xiamen 
University, Xiamen, China. tanghuamei2014@163.com.
(7)Department of Pathology, Xiang'an Hospital of Xiamen University, School of 
Medicine, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China. tanghuamei2014@163.com.
(8)Organ Transplantation Institute of Xiamen University, Fujian Provincial Key 
Laboratory of Organ and Tissue Regeneration, School of Medicine, Xiamen 
University, Xiamen, China. zhpeng@xah.xmu.edu.cn.
(9)Department of General Surgery, Organ Transplantation Clinical Medical Center 
of Xiamen University, Xiang'an Hospital of Xiamen University, School of 
Medicine, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China. zhpeng@xah.xmu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Musashi-2 (MSI2) is a critical RNA-binding protein (RBP) whose 
ectopic expression drives the pathogenesis of various cancers. Accumulating 
evidence suggests that inducing ferroptosis of tumor cells can inhibit their 
malignant biological behavior as a promising therapeutic approach. However, it 
is unclear whether MSI2 regulates cell death in colorectal cancer (CRC), 
especially the underlying mechanisms and biological effects in CRC ferroptosis 
remain elusive.
METHODS: Experimental methods including qRT‒PCR, immunofluorescence, flow 
cytometry, western blot, co-immunoprecipitation, CCK-8, colony formation assay, 
in vitro cell transwell migration and invasion assays, in vivo xenograft tumor 
experiments, liver and lung CRC metastasis models, CAC mice models, transmission 
electron microscopy, immunohistochemistry, histopathology, 4D label-free 
proteomics sequencing, bioinformatic and database analysis were used in this 
study.
RESULTS: Here, we investigated that MSI2 was upregulated in CRC and positively 
correlated with ferroptosis inhibitor molecules. MSI2 deficiency suppressed CRC 
malignancy by inhibiting cell proliferation, viability, migration and invasion 
in vitro and in vivo; and MSI2 deficiency triggered CRC ferroptosis by changing 
the intracellular redox state (ROS levels and lipid peroxidation), erastin 
induced cell mortality and viability, iron homeostasis (intracellular total 
irons and ferrous irons), reduced glutathione (GSH) levels and mitochondrial 
injury. Mechanistically, through 4D-lable free proteomics analysis on SW620 
stable cell lines, we demonstrated that MSI2 directly interacted with p-ERK and 
MSI2 knockdown downregulated the p-ERK/p38/MAPK axis signaling pathway, which 
further repressed MAPKAPK2 and HPSB1 phosphorylation, leading to decreased 
expression of PCNA and Ki67 and increased expression of ACSL4 in cancer cells. 
Furthermore, HSPB1 could rescue the phenotypes of MSI2 deficiency on CRC 
ferroptosis in vitro and in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: This study indicates that MSI2 deficiency suppresses the growth and 
survival of CRC cells and promotes ferroptosis by inactivating the MAPK 
signaling pathway to inhibit HSPB1 phosphorylation, which leads to 
downregulation of PCNA and Ki67 and upregulation of ACSL4 in cancer cells and 
subsequently induces redox imbalance, iron accumulation and mitochondrial 
shrinkage, ultimately triggering ferroptosis. Therefore, targeted inhibition of 
MSI2/MAPK/HSPB1 axis to promote ferroptosis might be a potential treatment 
strategy for CRC.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12575-023-00222-1
PMCID: PMC10691036
PMID: 38041016

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.