1. J Biol Chem. 2024 Jan;300(1):105509. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2023.105509. Epub 2023
 Dec 1.

N-acetyl cysteine turns EPAC activators into potent killers of acute 
lymphoblastic leukemia cells.

Richartz N(1), Pietka W(1), Yadav A(1), Bostad M(2), Bhagwat S(1), Naderi S(3), 
Naderi EH(4), Stokke T(2), Ruud E(5), Blomhoff HK(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, 
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(2)Department of Core Facilities, Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo University 
Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(3)Division of Laboratory Medicine, Department of Pharmacology, Oslo University 
Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(4)Section of Head and Neck Oncology, Department of Oncology, Oslo University 
Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(5)Division of Paediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Oslo University Hospital, 
Oslo, Norway; Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of 
Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(6)Department of Molecular Medicine, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, 
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. Electronic address: 
h.k.blomhoff@medisin.uio.no.

Today, the majority of patients with pediatric B cell precursor acute 
lymphoblastic leukemia (BCP-ALL, hereafter ALL) survive their disease, but many 
of the survivors suffer from life-limiting late effects of the treatment. ALL 
develops in the bone marrow, where the cells are exposed to cAMP-generating 
prostaglandin E2. We have previously identified the cAMP signaling pathway as a 
putative target for improved efficacy of ALL treatment, based on the ability of 
cAMP signaling to reduce apoptosis induced by DNA damaging agents. In the 
present study, we have identified the antioxidant N-acetyl cysteine (NAC) as a 
powerful modifier of critical events downstream of the cell-permeable cAMP 
analog 8-(4-chlorophenylthio) adenosine-3', 5'- cyclic monophosphate (8-CPT). 
Accordingly, we found NAC to turn 8-CPT into a potent killer of ALL cells 
in vitro both in the presence and absence of DNA damaging treatment. 
Furthermore, we revealed that NAC in combination with 8-CPT is able to delay the 
progression of ALL in a xenograft model in NOD-scid IL2Rγnull mice. NAC was 
shown to rely on the ability of 8-CPT to activate the guanine-nucleotide 
exchange factor EPAC, and we demonstrated that the ALL cells are killed by 
apoptosis involving sustained elevated levels of calcium imposed by the 
combination of the two drugs. Taken together, we propose that 8-CPT in the 
presence of NAC might be utilized as a novel strategy for treating pediatric ALL 
patients, and that this powerful combination might be exploited to enhance the 
therapeutic index of current ALL targeting therapies.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2023.105509
PMCID: PMC10772734
PMID: 38042493 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.