1. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2024 Jan 17;388(2):613-623. doi:
10.1124/jpet.123.001666.

Pharmacologic Inhibition of Transient Receptor Potential Ion Channel Ankyrin 1 
Counteracts 2-Chlorobenzalmalononitrile Tear Gas Agent-Induced Cutaneous 
Injuries.

Achanta S(1), Chintagari NR(2), Balakrishna S(2), Liu B(2), Jordt SE(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Translational Pain Medicine, Department of Anesthesiology (S.A., 
B.L., S.-E.J.) and Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology (S.-E.J.), Duke 
University School of Medicine, Durham, North Carolina; Department of 
Pharmacology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
(N.R.C., S.B.); and Integrated Toxicology and Environmental Health Program 
(ITEHP), Nicholas School of the Environment, Duke University, Durham, North 
Carolina (S.-E.J.) satya.achanta@duke.edu sven.jordt@duke.edu.
(2)Center for Translational Pain Medicine, Department of Anesthesiology (S.A., 
B.L., S.-E.J.) and Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology (S.-E.J.), Duke 
University School of Medicine, Durham, North Carolina; Department of 
Pharmacology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
(N.R.C., S.B.); and Integrated Toxicology and Environmental Health Program 
(ITEHP), Nicholas School of the Environment, Duke University, Durham, North 
Carolina (S.-E.J.).

Deployment of the tear gas agent 2-chlorobenzalmalononitrile (CS) for riot 
control has significantly increased in recent years. The effects of CS have been 
believed to be transient and benign. However, CS induces severe pain, 
blepharospasm, lachrymation, airway obstruction, and skin blisters. Frequent 
injuries and hospitalizations have been reported after exposure. We have 
identified the sensory neuronal ion channel, transient receptor potential 
ankyrin 1 (TRPA1), as a key CS target resulting in acute irritation and pain and 
also as a mediator of neurogenic inflammation. Here, we examined the effects of 
pharmacologic TRPA1 inhibition on CS-induced cutaneous injury. We modeled 
CS-induced cutaneous injury by applying 10 μl CS agent [200 mM in dimethyl 
sulfoxide (DMSO)] to each side of the right ears of 8- to 9-week-old C57BL/6 
male mice, whereas left ears were applied with solvent only (DMSO). The TRPA1 
inhibitor HC-030031 or A-967079 was administered after CS exposure. CS exposure 
induced strong tissue swelling, plasma extravasation, and a dramatic increase in 
inflammatory cytokine levels in the mouse ear skin. We also showed that the 
effects of CS were not transient but caused persistent skin injuries. These 
injury parameters were reduced with TRPA1 inhibitor treatment. Further, we 
tested the pharmacologic activity of advanced TRPA1 antagonists in vitro. Our 
findings showed that TRPA1 is a crucial mediator of CS-induced nociception and 
tissue injury and that TRPA1 inhibitors are effective countermeasures that 
reduce key injury parameters when administered after exposure. Additional 
therapeutic efficacy studies with advanced TRPA1 antagonists and decontamination 
strategies are warranted. SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: 2-Chlorobenzalmalononitrile 
(CS) tear gas agent has been deployed as a crowd dispersion chemical agent in 
recent times. Exposure to CS tear gas agents has been believed to cause 
transient acute toxic effects that are minimal at most. Here we found that CS 
tear gas exposure causes both acute and persistent skin injuries and that 
treatment with transient receptor potential ion channel ankyrin 1 (TRPA1) 
antagonists ameliorated skin injuries.

Copyright © 2024 by The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.123.001666
PMCID: PMC10801748
PMID: 38050077 [Indexed for MEDLINE]