1. J Phys Chem B. 2023 Dec 21;127(50):10749-10765. doi: 10.1021/acs.jpcb.3c04337.
 Epub 2023 Dec 6.

Uncovering the Structural and Binding Insights of Dual Inhibitors Simultaneously 
Targeting Two Distinct Sites on EGFR Kinase.

Bhanja KK(1), Sharma M(1), Patra N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry & Chemical Biology, Indian Institute of Technology 
(ISM) Dhanbad, Dhanbad 826004, India.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is the first growth factor receptor 
identified in normal cells that is related to the receptor tyrosine kinase, 
which causes regular cell division. A point mutation in EGFR intracellular 
kinase domain forces the abnormal cell divisions throughout time, leading to 
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) transformation. Thus, competitive inhibitors 
that bind to the ATP binding pocket have been developed as a targeted therapy 
for NSCLC. The third-generation kinase inhibitor Osimertinib is currently 
playing a very vital role in the treatment of NSCLC. However, it is not 
effective toward the C797S kinase domain mutation. For this reason, 
fourth-generation kinase noncompetitive inhibitors are introduced which work 
through binding to an allosteric pocket near the ATP binding region and act as a 
better binding agent for this mutated kinase domain. However, the problem is 
that these single fourth-generation kinase inhibitors may not be as effective as 
a single agent. The aim of this work was to apply combinations of these two 
inhibitors together in different binding regions of EGFR without overlapping the 
resistance mechanism to obtain the key direct and indirect interactions 
occurring between them. Moreover, the free energy of dissociation of an 
inhibitor from its binding sites in the presence of a second inhibitor 
immobilized in another binding site was also the focus of the study. To realize 
this aim, we performed conventional molecular dynamics simulations and principal 
component analysis and dynamic cross-correlation matrices along with umbrella 
sampling. Our results demonstrated that binding of dual inhibitors triggered 
conformational changes of the protein more toward the inactive state. 
Furthermore, allosteric inhibitors bound more strongly to protein kinase EGFR 
than the orthosteric inhibitors in the presence of dual inhibitors. Finally, the 
binding mechanism and important hydrogen-bonding residues during unbinding of 
the inhibitors were fully elucidated. This study provides insight into the 
binding of the receptor-orthosteric inhibitor-allosteric inhibitor, which can be 
helpful for further design of novel inhibitors that have a better inhibitory 
action.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jpcb.3c04337
PMID: 38055900 [Indexed for MEDLINE]