1. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim. 1994 Aug;30A(8):539-46.

Differentiation of immortalized epithelial cells derived from cystic fibrosis 
airway submucosal glands.

Chopra DP(1), Reddy L, Gupta SK, Wan L, Mathieu PA, Shoemaker RL, Rhim JS.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Chemical Toxicology, Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan 
48201.

Cystic fibrosis (CF) involves abnormalities in mucus production and secretion of 
the airway. Studies of the regulation of airway mucin production and secretion 
has been difficult due to the lack of in vitro models of the airway epithelial 
cells which express functional differentiation. Because the majority of the 
mucin in the airway is apparently produced by the submucosal glands, we have 
focused our attention on the development of cell culture models of human airway 
submucosal glands. This report describes the propagation of CF airway submucosal 
gland epithelial cells which continue to express mucin production. The CF 
bronchus was obtained from a 31-yr-old patient who received a double lung 
transplant. The glands were dissected out and primary cultures prepared by the 
explant/outgrowth procedure. The cells were immortalized by infection with 
Ad12-SV40 hybrid virus. The cultures are maintained in serum-free keratinocyte 
basal medium supplemented with insulin (5 micrograms/ml), hydrocortisone (0.5 
microgram/ml), epidermal growth factor (10 ng/ml), bovine pituitary extract (25 
micrograms/ml), and antibiotics. Cultures were passaged using 0.125% trypsin in 
Ca+2 and Mg(+2)-free Hanks', balanced salt solution. Polymerase chain reaction 
(PCR) analysis demonstrated that the cells were homozygous for the delta F508 
mutation. Morphologic observations showed that the cells were epithelial and 
were interconnected by sparsely distributed desmosomes. Their cytoplasm 
contained secretory-type structures including abundant Golgi, rough endoplasmic 
reticulum, and secretory vesicles. Immunofluorescent studies determined that all 
cells were positive for cytokeratins, mucin glycoconjugates, and cystic fibrosis 
transmembrane conductance regulator. The cultures secreted substantial amounts 
of mucin glycoproteins and expressed the MUC-2 mucin gene.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 
250 WORDS)

PMID: 7527286 [Indexed for MEDLINE]