1. J Biol Chem. 1994 Dec 2;269(48):30386-92.

Assembly of synthetic laminin peptides into a triple-stranded coiled-coil 
structure.

Nomizu M(1), Otaka A, Utani A, Roller PP, Yamada Y.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Biology, NIDR, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

Laminin, a large multidomain glycoprotein specific to basement membranes, is a 
heterotrimer with alpha, beta, and gamma chains held together in an 
alpha-helical coiled-coil structure. Synthetic peptides comprising two 51-mers 
(B1 and B2) from the beta 1 and gamma 1 subunits and a 55-mer (M) from alpha 2 
were used to study the molecular mechanisms in laminin chain assembly. Using the 
synthetic peptides in various mixing experiments, the heterotrimer (B1-B2-M) was 
preferentially produced. The thermal stability of the heterotrimer increased 
dramatically (by approximately 20 degrees C) over that of the B1-B2 heterodimer 
as measured by circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy. The B1-B1 homodimer (Tm = 
60 degrees C) showed higher thermal stability when compared to B1-B2 and B2-B2 
dimers. However, the B1 + B2 mixture produced principally the B1-B2 heterodimer. 
These results suggested that the preferential formations of heterodimer was 
regulated by kinetic interactions between each chain. The B2 and M peptides have 
many hydrophobic isoleucine residues which were replaced by leucines. These 
substitutions were predicted to favor an alpha-helical conformation and a higher 
propensity for zipper formation. B2L and ML, in which all isoleucine residues 
were replaced by leucine, showed significantly increased alpha-helicities. While 
B2L was able to form heterodimers and heterotrimers similar to B2, ML was not 
able to participate in heterotrimer formation as efficiently as the M peptide. 
The thermal stability of B1-B2L was comparable to that of B1-B2, but B2L and/or 
ML containing trimers showed lower thermal stability than B1-B2-M. These results 
suggest that the isoleucine residues in the alpha 2 and gamma 1 chains are 
critical for stabilizing the heteromeric triple-stranded coiled-coil structure.

PMID: 7982952 [Indexed for MEDLINE]