1. J Biol Chem. 1994 Dec 9;269(49):30946-52.

Mutations in the thioredoxin sites of protein disulfide isomerase reveal 
functional nonequivalence of the N- and C-terminal domains.

Lyles MM(1), Gilbert HF.

Author information:
(1)Verna and Marrs McLean Department of Biochemistry, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030.

Protein disulfide isomerase (PDI), a foldase of the endoplasmic recticulum, is a 
multifunctional protein that catalyzes the formation and isomerization of 
disulfide bonds during protein folding. The wild-type protein contains two redox 
active thiol/disulfide sites near the N and C terminus that are homologous to 
the redox center of thioredoxin. Using site-directed mutagenesis, both cysteines 
of each of the thioredoxin-like centers, (C35S,C38S) and (C379S,C382S) were 
replaced by serines. In addition, a mutant PDI was constructed with all four of 
the active cysteines mutated to serine (C35S,C38S,C379S,C382S). The activity of 
the wild-type and mutant proteins in the oxidative renaturation of reduced, 
denatured RNase was analyzed over a wide range of RNase concentrations, PDI 
concentrations, and glutathione redox buffers compositions. All mutants, 
including the construct with no functional thioredoxin centers, have measurable 
disulfide isomerase activity. Both of the thioredoxin-like sites contribute some 
to apparent steady-state binding (Km) and catalysis at saturating substrate 
concentrations (kcat); however, their contributions are not equivalent. At 
saturating concentrations of RNase, the mutant with an inactivated C-terminal 
active site (kcat = 0.72 +/- 0.06 min-1) retains near wild-type activity (kcat = 
0.76 +/- 0.02 min-1), while the N-terminal mutant exhibits a significantly lower 
kcat (0.24 +/- 0.01 min-1). The Km for RNase is elevated for the C-terminal 
mutant (Km = 29 +/- 4 microM) while the N-terminal mutant (Km = 7.1 +/- 1.1 
microM) exhibits a wild-type Km (6.9 +/- 0.8 microM). The larger Km for the 
C-terminal mutant (4.2 times wild-type) and the lower kcat of N-terminal mutant 
(32% of wild-type) suggest that the C-terminal region contributes more to 
apparent steady-state substrate binding, and the N-terminal region contributes 
more to catalysis at saturating concentrations of substrate. Despite their 
complementary roles in catalysis, the thioredoxin-like centers exhibit the same 
dependence on the glutathione redox buffer composition as evidenced by the 
equivalent K(ox) values for the wild-type (47 +/- 1 microM), N-terminal mutant 
(43 +/- 3 microM), and C-terminal mutant (44 +/- 1 microM). The mutant with both 
thioredoxin sites mutated displays a low but detectable level of 
disulfide-isomerase activity (0.5% of wild-type) that can be observed at high 
PDI concentrations. At high RNase concentrations (> or = 26 microM), wild-type 
PDI and all of the mutants catalyze intermolecular RNase aggregation in a 
nucleation growth reaction that is first order in PDI but fourth order with 
respect to RNase.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

PMID: 7983029 [Indexed for MEDLINE]