1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Sep 13;91(19):9062-6. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.91.19.9062.

Genomic organization and structure of Bruton agammaglobulinemia tyrosine kinase: 
localization of mutations associated with varied clinical presentations and 
course in X chromosome-linked agammaglobulinemia.

Ohta Y(1), Haire RN, Litman RT, Fu SM, Nelson RP, Kratz J, Kornfeld SJ, de la 
Morena M, Good RA, Litman GW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of South Florida College of Medicine, 
All Children's Hospital, St. Petersburg 33701.

X chromosome-linked agammaglobulinemia is a life-threatening disease that 
involves a failure in normal development of B lymphocytes and is associated with 
missense mutations in BTK, a gene encoding a cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase (Bruton 
agammaglobulinemia tyrosine kinase, EC 2.7.1.112), a member of the Tec family of 
protein-tyrosine kinases. The genomic organization has been determined by using 
conventional restriction fragment mapping, extended DNA sequencing, and PCR 
fragment-sizing approaches. The DNA sequences of the 18 coding exons composing 
BTK and their flanking-region sequences are reported; an additional exon(s) 
encodes a 5' untranslated segment. Single-base-pair substitutions and 4-nt 
deletions resulted in amino acid replacement, premature termination, frameshift, 
and exon deletion in a group of X chromosome-linked agammaglobulinemia patients 
exhibiting different clinical presentations and courses. The nature of the 
mutations is interpreted in terms of the genomic organization of the BTK gene 
and the disease course in individual patients. Several examples are found in 
which the same mutation occurs in unrelated patients, and one of these mutations 
occurs at the same codon that is substituted in the murine form of BTK, 
resulting in X chromosome-linked immunodeficiency disease. Considerable 
variation in presentation and disease course in X chromosome-linked 
agammaglobulinemia appears associated with the nature and position of different 
missense mutations.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.91.19.9062
PMCID: PMC44747
PMID: 8090769 [Indexed for MEDLINE]