1. Cancer Res. 1994 Apr 1;54(7 Suppl):1999s-2005s.

Prevention of carcinogenesis by protease inhibitors.

Kennedy AR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Pennsylvania School of 
Medicine, Philadelphia 19104.

Protease inhibitors are very effective in their ability to suppress 
carcinogenesis in many different in vivo and in vitro assay systems. One 
particularly effective protease inhibitor, the soybean-derived Bowman-Birk 
inhibitor, has been extensively studied in our laboratory. Our results have 
indicated that Bowman-Birk inhibitor suppresses carcinogenesis 1) induced by 
several different types of carcinogens, 2) in three different species (mice, 
rats, and hamsters), 3) in several different tissues/organs [colon, liver, lung, 
esophagus, and cheek pouch (oral epithelium)], 4) when administered to animals 
by several different routes (including the diet), 5) involving several different 
types of tumors (squamous cell carcinomas, adenocarcinomas, angiosarcomas, etc.) 
and 6) in different cell types [epithelial cells (in the colon, liver, lung, 
esophagus, and cheek pouch) as well as connective tissue cells (fibroblasts, 
both in vitro and those in the liver which give rise to angiosarcomas)]. Thus, 
the remarkable ability of Bowman-Birk inhibitor to serve as an anticarcinogenic 
agent has been demonstrated in a variety of different carcinogenesis assay 
systems. Although the mechanism of action of protease inhibitors as 
anticarcinogenic agents is unknown, many hypotheses have been presented. Our 
results suggest that anticarcinogenic protease inhibitors are capable of 
reversing the initiating event in carcinogenesis, presumably by stopping an 
ongoing process begun by carcinogen exposure. We have observed several effects 
of protease inhibitors which are thought to be related to their anticarcinogenic 
activity; these include 1) the ability to affect the expression of certain 
oncogenes (e.g., c-myc and c-fos) and 2) the ability to affect the levels of 
certain types of proteolytic activities (e.g., 
N-t-butoxycarbonyl-Val-Pro-Arg-7-amino-4-methylcoumarin-hydrolyzing activity) 
which are elevated in carcinogen-exposed tissues. We have also observed other 
effects of anticarcinogenic protease inhibitors which may be related to 
carcinogenesis. For example, we have reported that the inhibitors can reduce the 
carcinogen-induced, elevated levels of gene amplification to nearly normal 
levels. While all of these effects of protease inhibitors may contribute to the 
prevention of carcinogenesis, the mechanism by which protease inhibitors prevent 
cancer cannot be determined with certainty until the mechanisms involved in 
cancer induction are known. While the mechanism remains unclear, it is clear 
that protease inhibitors can reverse a number of carcinogen-induced cellular 
changes which may play important roles in carcinogenesis.

PMID: 8137328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]