1. Mol Pharmacol. 1994 Apr;45(4):690-5.

Localization of the ligand binding site of the neurokinin-1 receptor: 
interpretation of chimeric mutations and single-residue substitutions.

Huang RR(1), Yu H, Strader CD, Fong TM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Biochemistry, Merck Research 
Laboratories, Rahway, New Jersey 07065.

Previous studies have indicated that substitution of the third or fourth 
extracellular segment of the human neurokinin-1 receptor with the equivalent 
segment from the neurokinin-3 receptor affects the binding affinities of peptide 
agonists and/or nonpeptide antagonists. To elucidate the roles of the divergent 
residues within these domains in ligand binding, single-residue substitutions in 
these regions were analyzed. Neurokinin B affinity was increased by one 
single-residue substitution (E172K) in the third extracellular segment and one 
double-residue replacement (L279R+K280W) in the fourth extracellular segment, 
and the affinity for the antagonist L-703,606 was reduced by one single-residue 
substitution (Y272A) in the fourth extracellular segment. The effect of these 
three specific substitutions is consistent with the prediction of chimeric 
mutations. However, the substantial reduction in ligand binding affinity 
observed upon multiple-residue substitutions in the third extracellular segment 
(residues 176-183 or 187-195) has not been reproduced by eliminating potential 
electrostatic interactions or substituting with the corresponding residues from 
the neurokinin-3 receptor, suggesting that the reduction in ligand binding 
affinity observed with some chimeric receptors is not due to the loss of direct 
electrostatic interactions. These data indicate that other factors such as 
conformational effects may complicate the interpretation of data obtained with 
chimeric receptors, and they demonstrate the need to evaluate chimeric receptors 
along with single-residue substitutions in the same region to localize specific 
residues involved in ligand binding. Furthermore, the available data suggest 
that one major determinant of peptide selectivity in the neurokinin-1 receptor 
may be the conformational compatibility between a peptide and the receptor.

PMID: 8183248 [Indexed for MEDLINE]