1. Mol Pharmacol. 1994 May;45(5):1036-42.

A single species of A1 adenosine receptor expressed in Chinese hamster ovary 
cells not only inhibits cAMP accumulation but also stimulates phospholipase C 
and arachidonate release.

Akbar M(1), Okajima F, Tomura H, Shimegi S, Kondo Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physical Biochemistry, Gunma University, Maebashi, Japan.

Chinese hamster ovary cells were transfected with both A1 adenosine receptor and 
muscarinic type 3 acetylcholine receptor cDNAs. The muscarinic receptor agonist 
carbachol stimulated phospholipase C activity, resulting in Ca2+ mobilization 
and arachidonate release. N6-Cyclopentyladenosine (CPA), an A1 receptor agonist, 
did not activate Ca(2+)-related signal transduction systems by itself but 
instead inhibited cAMP accumulation. In the presence of carbachol, however, the 
A1 receptor agonist enhanced muscarinic receptor agonist-induced phospholipase 
C/Ca2+ responses. In addition, the arachidonate release caused by Ca2+ 
ionophores or thapsigargin was also amplified by CPA, without a change in 
phospholipase C activity. Thus, CPA augments Ca(2+)-mediated phospholipase A2 
activation in addition to and separate from its ability to amplify phospholipase 
C-mediated Ca2+ mobilization. Because the permissive actions of CPA on 
phospholipase C and phospholipase A2 activation were each reversed by pertussis 
toxin treatment, in a manner similar to that of the CPA-induced inhibition of 
cAMP accumulation, we conclude that a single species of A1 receptor expressed in 
Chinese hamster ovary cells can couple to multiple signal transduction systems 
stemming from phospholipase C stimulation, phospholipase A2-mediated and 
Ca(2+)-dependent arachidonate release, and inhibition of cAMP accumulation. A 
pertussis toxin-sensitive G protein (or proteins) mediates the permissive 
actions of the A1 receptor in the stimulation of phospholipase C- and 
phospholipase A2-mediated arachidonate release.

PMID: 8190094 [Indexed for MEDLINE]