1. J Biol Chem. 1993 Nov 15;268(32):24041-6.

Factor IX Fukuoka. Substitution of ASN92 by His in the second epidermal growth 
factor-like domain results in defective interaction with factors VIIa/X.

Nishimura H(1), Takeya H, Miyata T, Suehiro K, Okamura T, Niho Y, Iwanaga S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Graduate School of Medical Science, Kyushu 
University, Fukuoka, Japan.

Hemophilia B Fukuoka, a moderately severe bleeding disorder, is a naturally 
occurring mutant of factor IX. Plasma from our patient had 3% clotting activity 
even though 64% of factor IX antigen was present. The purified mutant protein 
was cleaved normally by factor Xla, factor VIIa-tissue factor complex, or RVV-X 
(factor X-activating enzyme from Russell's viper venom), yielding a two-chain 
factor IXa. Amino acid composition and sequence analyses of one of the lysyl 
endopeptidase peptides derived from factor IX Fukuoka revealed that Asn92 in the 
second epidermal growth factor (EGF)-like domain had been replaced by His. The 
active site of the factor IXa Fukuoka was normally competent for the 
incorporation of p-aminobenzamidine and for the hydrolysis of a synthetic 
substrate, N alpha-benzyloxycarbonyl-L-arginine p-nitrobenzyl ester. Factor Xa 
formation by factor IXa Fukuoka was only 8% of the normal factor IXa, even in 
the presence of polylysine, and only 0.2% of the normal in the system containing 
phospholipids, Ca2+, and factor VIIIa, thereby indicating a functional defect in 
interaction of the mutant with factors VIIIa/X. Furthermore, catalytic 
efficiency (kcat/Km) of factor IXa Fukuoka toward factor X in the presence of 
Ca2+, phospholipids, and factor VIIIa was only 2.3% of the normal factor IXa. 
These results suggest that an Asn-to-His substitution at position 92 in the 
second EGF-like domain of factor IX Fukuoka would have an untoward effect on the 
specific conformational state of factor IX for binding with factors VIIIa/X.

PMID: 8226948 [Indexed for MEDLINE]