1. Medicine (Baltimore). 1993 Sep;72(5):326-42.

Spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia: clinical and radiologic investigation of a 
large kindred manifesting autosomal dominant inheritance, and a review of the 
literature.

Patel AC(1), McAlister WH, Whyte MP.

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Research Unit, Shriners Hospital for Crippled Children, St. Louis, 
MO 63131.

Spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasias (SEMDs) are a heterogeneous group of skeletal 
disorders that can have a genetic basis, but their classification and 
prognostication suffer because few families have been extensively studied. We 
describe a large kindred affected by a unique type of SEMD that is transmitted 
as an autosomal dominant trait. The propositus and his affected brother and 
first cousin were evaluated as inpatients. Other kindred members were screened 
by telephone interviews and lateral thoraco-lumbar spine radiographs, and then, 
in most cases, investigated by additional x-ray studies. Of the 29 living 
members of the kindred, 22 were studied radiologically. Among the 22 subjects 
investigated, 15 were affected, and the status of 1 individual with minor 
changes on x-ray was indeterminate. The deceased patriarch was presumed to be 
affected. These 16 affected subjects could usually, but not invariably, be 
distinguished from their unaffected sex-matched siblings by their smaller 
heights. Nevertheless, it was only affected children who had short stature; the 
heights of all affected adults were normal. Often, affected individuals had 
rhizomelic shortening, especially of the lower extremities, and genu varum (not 
always evident clinically, but present on radiographs). Occasionally, they also 
manifested limited extension of their upper limbs. Radiologic study showed 
abnormal metaphyses, epiphyses, and vertebrae in affected children, but these 3 
skeletal regions became less remarkable by late childhood and most affected 
adults had normal epiphyses. One obligate affected man had only spinal changes. 
Despite their normal heights, severely affected adults who had bowing deformity 
of their legs developed disabling degenerative joint disease limited to the 
knees in the 7th decade of life--disease severe enough to require knee 
replacement surgery.

PMID: 8412645 [Indexed for MEDLINE]