1. J Urol. 1996 Apr;155(4):1357-60.

Randomized study of neoadjuvant testicular androgen ablation therapy before 
radical prostatectomy in men with clinically localized prostate cancer.

Dalkin BL(1), Ahmann FR, Nagle R, Johnson CS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Arizona College of Medicine, Tucson, 
Arizona, USA.

PURPOSE: We determined whether 12 weeks of neoadjuvant testicular androgen 
ablation therapy using a luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone agonist could 
improve pathological outcomes in men undergoing radical retropubic prostatectomy 
for clinically localized (stages T1C, T2A and T2B) prostatic carcinoma.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 56 participants was randomized to receive 
either monthly injections of a luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone agonist at 
4-week intervals followed by radical retropubic prostatectomy (28) or to undergo 
immediate radical retropubic prostatectomy alone (28). Operations were performed 
via similar technique and all prostatic specimens were processed histologically 
in their entirety.
RESULTS: There was no improvement in pathological outcome using luteinizing 
hormone-releasing hormone agonist preoperatively compared to surgery alone. Of 
28 men undergoing immediate radical retropubic prostatectomy 23 had 
organ-confined (17) or specimen-confined (6) disease versus 22 of 28 who 
received luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone neoadjuvant therapy for 12 weeks 
preoperatively (16 with organ-confined and 6 with specimen-confined disease, p = 
1.00). In addition, when the study population was analyzed by pretreatment 
prostate specific antigen (PSA) levels (10 ng./ml. or less, or greater than 10 
ng./ml/) there was also no difference in pathological outcome (p = 0.65 for PSA 
greater than 10 and p = 0.32 for PSA less than 10).
CONCLUSIONS: Neoadjuvant androgen ablation therapy for 12 weeks before radical 
prostatectomy in patients with clinically localized adenocarcinoma of the 
prostate does not result in improved pathological outcomes.

PMID: 8632574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]