1. J Lipid Res. 1996 Mar;37(3):651-61.

Homozygosity for two point mutations in the lipoprotein lipase (LPL) gene in a 
patient with familial LPL deficiency: LPL(Asp9-->Asn, Tyr262-->His).

Rouis M(1), Lohse P, Dugi KA, Lohse P, Beg OU, Ronan R, Talley GD, Brunzell JD, 
Santamarina-Fojo S.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Disease Branch, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Familial lipoprotein lipase (LPL) deficiency is an inherited disorder of 
lipoprotein metabolism characterized by hypertriglyceridemia and recurrent 
episodes of abdominal pain and pancreatitis. We have studied the genetic basis 
of LPL deficiency in a 62-year-old black male with undetectable pre- and 
post-heparin plasma LPL mass and activity, DNA sequence analysis of the 
patient's LPL cDNA and gene as well as digestion with Bcl I and Asu I revealed 
that the proband is a homozygote for two separate gene defects. One mutation 
changed a G to an A, resulting in the conversion of amino acid 9 of the mature 
protein, aspartic acid (GAC), to asparagine (AAC). The second substitution, a C 
for a T, replaced tyrosine (TAC) at residue 262 with histidine (CAC). Northern 
blot analysis of monocyte-derived macrophage RNA demonstrated the presence of 
LPL mRNA of approximately normal size and quantity when compared to control. 
Expression of both mutations separately (pCMV-9 and pCMV-262) or in combination 
(pCMV-9+262) in human embryonal kidney-293 cells demonstrated that LPL-9 had 
approximately 80% the specific activity of wild type LPL, but LPL-262 and 
LPL-9+262 had no enzymic activity, thus establishing the functional significance 
of the LPL-262 defect. Despite an absolute deficiency of LPL mass and activity 
demonstrated by analysis of patient post-heparin plasma, in vitro expression of 
both LPL mutants was normal, suggesting that the absence of LPL in patient 
post-heparin plasma was a result of altered in vivo processing. Analysis of the 
heparin binding properties of the mutant enzymes by heparin-Sepharose affinity 
chromatography indicated that most of the LPL-262 mass was present in an 
inactive peak, which like the normal LPL monomer, eluted at 0.8 M NaCl. Thus, 
the Tyr262 --> His mutation may alter the stability of the LPL dimer, leading to 
the formation of inactive LPL-262 monomer which exhibits reduced heparin 
affinity. Based on these results, we propose that, in vivo, enhanced formation 
of LPL-9+262 monomer leads to abnormal binding of the mutant lipase to 
endothelial glycosaminoglycans ultimately resulting in enhanced catabolism of 
the mutant enzyme and lower enzyme mass in post-heparin plasma.

PMID: 8728326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]