1. Blood. 1996 Sep 1;88(5):1666-75.

A Cys374Tyr homozygous mutation of platelet glycoprotein IIIa (beta 3) in a 
Chinese patient with Glanzmann's thrombasthenia.

Grimaldi CM(1), Chen F, Scudder LE, Coller BS, French DL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY 10029, 
USA.

A 20-year-old woman from a consanguineous family in the Hunan Province of the 
People's Republic of China was diagnosed as having Glanzmann's thrombasthenia 
based on (1) nearly a lifelong history of epistaxis, gum bleeding, petechiae, 
and purpura; (2) severe menorrhagia resulting in anemia and need for whole-blood 
transfusion; (3) normal coagulation assays; (4) prolonged bleeding time; (5) 
absent clot retraction; (6) decreased glass bead retention; (7) absent platelet 
aggregation in response to adenine diphosphate, epinephrine, and collagen; and 
(8) normal initial slope of platelet aggregation in response to ristocetin, but 
with a diminished maximal extent. The patient's platelets had a decreased level 
of platelet fibrinogen, but the deficiency was not as severe as in other 
Glanzmann's thrombasthenia patients. As judged by monoclonal antibody binding 
studies, surface glycoprotein (GP) IIb/IIIa (alpha IIb beta 3) expression was 
less than 15% of normal and alpha v beta 3 vitronectin receptor expression was 
15% to 19% of normal, suggesting that the defect was in GPIIIa (beta 3). 
Immunoblotting of platelet lysates demonstrated decreased levels of GPIIb 
(approximately 30% to 35% of normal) and GPIIIa (approximately 10% of normal), 
and the GPIIb had undergone normal maturational processing into GPIIb heavy and 
light chains. Sequence analysis of the patient's GPIIIa RNA identified a G to A 
mutation at nucleotide 1219, predicting a Cys to Tyr substitution at residue 
374. The patient's parents, who are first cousins, are asymptomatic and have 
only minor reductions in platelet aggregation. Direct sequencing of polymerase 
chain reaction-amplified cDNA and GPIIIa exon VIII indicated that the patient is 
homozygous and her parents are heterozygous for the mutation. Transient 
transfection studies in Chinese hamster ovary cells indicated that the mutation 
results in an 85% to 90% reduction in GPIIb/IIIa surface expression, but these 
cells retain the ability to mediate adhesion to immobilized fibrinogen. The 
relative preservation of platelet fibrinogen despite the very low level of 
platelet surface GPIIb/IIIa expression in this patient raises some interesting 
questions regarding the mechanism of fibrinogen uptake and the pathophysiology 
of Glanzmann's thrombasthenia.

PMID: 8781422 [Indexed for MEDLINE]