1. Curr Biol. 1996 Mar 1;6(3):305-14. doi: 10.1016/s0960-9822(02)00481-5.

Nonclassical HLA-G molecules are classical peptide presenters.

Diehl M(1), Münz C, Keilholz W, Stevanović S, Holmes N, Loke YW, Rammensee HG.

Author information:
(1)Abteilung Tumorvirus-Immunologie (0620), Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Im 
Neuenheimer Feld 242, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The physiological functions of the classical HLA (human leukocyte 
antigen) molecules, HLA-A, HLA-B and HLA-C, are to present peptides to T cells 
and to inhibit the activity of natural killer cells. In contrast, the functions 
of nonclassical HLA-molecules, such as HLA-E, HLA-F and HLA-G, remain to be 
established. The expression of HLA-G is largely limited to the placental 
trophoblast, where it might mediate protection of the fetus from rejection by 
the mother. Achieving the aim of understanding the function of HLA-G should be 
facilitated by information on the biochemical properties of HLA-G molecules, 
especially on their potential ability to act as peptide receptors.
RESULTS: To study peptide presentation by HLA-G, we used stably transfected 
LCL721.221 cells as a source of HLA-G molecules and analysed the spectrum of 
extracted peptides by individual and pool sequencing. Our results indicate that 
HLA-G molecules, like classical HLA molecules, are associated with a wide array 
of peptides derived from cellular proteins. Peptides presented by HLA-G usually 
consisted of 9 amino acids, and adhered to a specific sequence motif, with 
anchor residues at position 2 (isoleucine or leucine), position 3 (proline) and 
the carboxy-terminal position 9 (leucine). Thus, the HLA-G peptide ligand motif 
follows the principles of classical HLA motifs, although it displays its own 
unique features. Peptide-binding assays indicated that two of the three anchor 
residues were sufficient for binding, and that the three natural HLA-G ligands 
that we identified bound, not only to HLA-G, but also to HLA-A2. This was not 
surprising, because the binding pockets of HLA-A2 and HLA-G overlap in their 
ability to recognize anchor residues at positions 2 and 9. Likewise, some, but 
not all, HLA-A2 peptide ligands could also bind to HLA-G.
CONCLUSIONS: Nonclassical HLA-G molecules present peptides essentially in the 
same way as classical HLA molecules do. We determined the peptide motif that is 
specifically recognized by HLA-G; its basic features are described by the 
sequence XI/LPXXXXXL: This information should help to elucidate the 
physiological role of HLA-G molecules at the fetal-maternal interface. Most 
likely, this role is to protect fetal cells from lysis by natural killer cells, 
and possibly to present foreign peptides to a class of T cells that has not yet 
been identified.

DOI: 10.1016/s0960-9822(02)00481-5
PMID: 8805247 [Indexed for MEDLINE]