1. Biochemistry. 1996 Sep 17;35(37):12015-28. doi: 10.1021/bi960834n.

Dynamic structure of the calmodulin-binding domain of the plasma membrane 
Ca-ATPase in native erythrocyte ghost membranes.

Yao Y(1), Gao J, Squier TC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Kansas, Lawrence 66045-2106, USA.

We have used frequency-domain fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) and 
anisotropy measurements to identify the structural properties of wheat germ 
calmodulin (CaM) bound to either the plasma membrane Ca-ATPase (PM-Ca-ATPase) in 
native erythrocyte ghost membranes or a peptide (C25W) that has an identical 
sequence to the CaM-binding domain on the PM-Ca-ATPase. Cross-linking 
experiments using benzophenone labeled CaM in conjunction with immunoblots using 
antibodies specific for either CaM or the PM-Ca-ATPase indicate that one 
molecule of CaM selectively binds one PM-Ca-ATPase polypeptide chain in native 
erythrocyte ghost membranes. There are no other proteins in the erythrocyte 
membrane that bind CaM with high affinity, permitting the measurement of the 
structural properties of CaM bound to the PM-Ca-ATPase in native erythrocyte 
ghost membranes. FRET measurements between the fluorophore pyrene maleimide 
(PMal) located at Cys27 in calcium binding loop I and nitrotyrosine139 in 
calcium binding loop IV on wheat germ CaM indicate that the average spatial 
separation and conformational heterogeneity associated with the two opposing 
globular domains of CaM are virtually identical upon CaM binding to either the 
PM-Ca-ATPase or C25W. Measurements of the solvent accessibility and segmental 
rotational dynamics of PMal-CaM bound to either the PM-Ca-ATPase or C25W further 
indicate that the local environment around the pyrene label located at Cys27 is 
very similar. However, the overall rotational dynamics of CaM bound to the 
PM-Ca-ATPase is much slower (phi 2 = 83 +/- 14 ns) than observed when CaM binds 
C25W (phi 2 = 10.3 +/- 0.5 ns). This implies that CaM is tightly associated with 
the CaM-binding domain of the PM-Ca-ATPase and that the observed rotational 
motion of pyrenylmaleimide labeled CaM is characteristic of the global motion of 
the CaM-binding domain on the PM-Ca-ATPase. The similar conformational 
heterogeneity and local environment of CaM bound to either the PM-Ca-ATPase or 
C25W indicates that CaM binds to a contiguous sequence of amino acids on the 
Ca-ATPase that are analogous to C25W and that there are no significant 
interactions with other structural elements within the PM-Ca-ATPase. The rate of 
rotational motion associated with CaM bound to the PM-Ca-ATPase is consistent 
with hydrodynamic calculation in which the calmodulin-binding domain located at 
the carboxyl-terminus of the PM-Ca-ATPase has a stable and defined tertiary 
structure that is independent of the other cytoplasmic domains of the 
PM-Ca-ATPase.

DOI: 10.1021/bi960834n
PMID: 8810906 [Indexed for MEDLINE]