1. Genome Res. 1997 Jul;7(7):693-704. doi: 10.1101/gr.7.7.693.

Resistance to salmonellosis in the chicken is linked to NRAMP1 and TNC.

Hu J(1), Bumstead N, Barrow P, Sebastiani G, Olien L, Morgan K, Malo D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, Canada.

Natural resistance to infection with Salmonella typhimurium in mice is 
controlled by two major loci, Bcg and Lps, located on mouse chromosomes 1 and 4, 
respectively. Both Bcg and Lps exert pleiotropic effects and contribute to 
cytostatic/cytocidal activities of the macrophage. Bcg encodes for a membrane 
phosphoglycoprotein designated Nrampl (natural resistance-associated macrophage 
protein 1), which belongs to an ancient family of membrane proteins, Lps has not 
been cloned yet, but its location on mouse chromosome 4 has been refined for 
positional cloning. As in mice, chicken inbred lines differ in their 
susceptibility to infection with Salmonella typhimurium. We have tested the 
candidacy of the chicken homologs of Nrampl and Tnc (a locus closely linked to 
Lps), in the differential resistance of chicken inbred lines to infection with 
S. typhimurium. We have first analyzed six inbred chicken lines of 
Salmonella-resistant or Salmonella-susceptible phenotypes for the presence of 
nucleotide sequence variations within the coding portion of NRAMP1. We have 
identified 11 sequence variations within NRAMP1 in the chicken inbred lines 
tested: 10 of these represented either silent mutations or conservative changes. 
However, one G-->A substitution at nucleotide 696 resulted in the 
nonconservative replacement of Arg223 to Gln223 within the predicted TM5-6 
region. This allelic variant was specific to the susceptible line C and not 
observed in any of the resistant strains. To investigate the effect of NRAMP1 
and TNC on resistance to infection with S. typhimurium, 425 (W1 x C)F1 x C 
chicken progeny were examined during a period of 15 days postinfection. 
Together, NRAMP1 and TNC explain 33% of the early differential resistance to 
infection with S. typhimurium of parental lines C and W1. Our data established 
that resistance to infection with S. typhimurium in chickens is inherited as a 
complex trait and that comparative mapping has proven to be useful to identify 
Salmonella-resistance genes in the chicken.

DOI: 10.1101/gr.7.7.693
PMID: 9253598 [Indexed for MEDLINE]