1. Cancer Res. 1997 Sep 1;57(17):3798-803.

Genomic DNA-based hMSH2 and hMLH1 mutation screening in 32 Eastern United States 
hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer pedigrees.

Weber TK(1), Conlon W, Petrelli NJ, Rodriguez-Bigas M, Keitz B, Pazik J, Farrell 
C, O'Malley L, Oshalim M, Abdo M, Anderson G, Stoler D, Yandell D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, New York 
14263, USA.

Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) is an autosomal dominant 
cancer syndrome characterized by early age of onset colorectal cancer (mean 45 
years) as well as endometrial, urinary tract, and upper gastrointestinal 
adenocarcinomas. The HNPCC phenotype has been shown to segregate with germline 
mutations in the human homologues of the DNA mismatch repair genes MSH2, MLH1, 
PMS1, and PMS2. However, the majority of published DNA mismatch repair gene 
mutation surveys associated with HNPCC kindreds report multiple levels of 
preselection, including 2p and 3p chromosomal linkage analysis and the 
evaluation of microsatellite instability of proband colorectal cancers prior to 
mutation analysis. For this reason, the concise contribution of each of the 
known DNA mismatch repair genes to the HNPCC phenotype remains unknown. We 
report the results of a genomic DNA-based analysis of hMSH2 and hMLH1 germline 
mutations in 32 unrelated Eastern United States HNPCC kindreds. These families 
were selected for study on the basis of phenotype only. We identified three 
hMSH2 and six hMLH1 mutations in eight families, for a positive mutation rate of 
25%. Two mutations were identified in one of the families. Four of the mutations 
detected have not been reported in the literature previously. One of the 
mutation-positive families is African American; the others were of 
European-American ancestry. These results provide a clarification of the 
contribution of hMSH2 and hMLH1 to the HNPCC phenotype and suggest that in the 
majority of Eastern United States HNPCC kindreds selected by phenotype alone, 
the molecular genetic basis for the disease remains unknown.

PMID: 9288790 [Indexed for MEDLINE]