1. J Cell Biol. 1997 Nov 3;139(3):613-23. doi: 10.1083/jcb.139.3.613.

The number and location of glycans on influenza hemagglutinin determine folding 
and association with calnexin and calreticulin.

Hebert DN(1), Zhang JX, Chen W, Foellmer B, Helenius A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut 06520-8002, USA.

Calnexin and calreticulin are homologous molecular chaperones that promote 
proper folding, oligomeric assembly, and quality control of newly synthesized 
glycoproteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Both are lectins that bind to 
substrate glycoproteins that have monoglucosylated N-linked oligosaccharides. 
Their binding to newly translated influenza virus hemagglutinin (HA), and 
various mutants thereof, was analyzed in microsomes after in vitro translation 
and expression in live CHO cells. A large fraction of the HA molecules was found 
to occur in ternary HA- calnexin-calreticulin complexes. In contrast to 
calnexin, calreticulin was found to bind primarily to early folding 
intermediates. Analysis of HA mutants with different numbers and locations of 
N-linked glycans showed that although the two chaperones share the same 
carbohydrate specificity, they display distinct binding properties; calreticulin 
binding depends on the oligosaccharides in the more rapidly folding top/hinge 
domain of HA whereas calnexin is less discriminating. Calnexin's binding was 
reduced if the HA was expressed as a soluble anchor-free protein rather than 
membrane bound. When the co- and posttranslational folding and trimerization of 
glycosylation mutants was analyzed, it was observed that removal of stem domain 
glycans caused accelerated folding whereas removal of the top domain glycans 
(especially the oligosaccharide attached to Asn81) inhibited folding. In 
summary, the data established that individual N-linked glycans in HA have 
distinct roles in calnexin/calreticulin binding and in co- and posttranslational 
folding.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.139.3.613
PMCID: PMC2141715
PMID: 9348279 [Indexed for MEDLINE]