1. J Biol Chem. 1997 Nov 28;272(48):30455-62. doi: 10.1074/jbc.272.48.30455.

Fluid shear stress activation of focal adhesion kinase. Linking to 
mitogen-activated protein kinases.

Li S(1), Kim M, Hu YL, Jalali S, Schlaepfer DD, Hunter T, Chien S, Shyy JY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Bioengineering and Institute for Biomedical Engineering, 
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093, USA. 
shyy@bioeng.ucsd.edu

Shear stress, the tangential component of hemodynamic forces, activates the 
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase (JNK) 
signal transduction pathways in cultured vascular endothelial cells to induce 
the transcriptional activation of many immediate early genes. It appears that 
integrins, protein-tyrosine kinases, and the structural integrity of actin are 
important factors involved in these shear stress-induced responses. The 
underlying molecular events were investigated by the application of a shear 
stress of 12 dyn/cm2 on bovine aortic endothelial cells (BAEC). We found that 
such a shear stress increased the tyrosine phosphorylation and the kinase 
activity of focal adhesion kinase (FAK) and its association with growth factor 
receptor binding protein 2 (Grb2) in a rapid and transient manner, suggesting 
that FAK may be linked to these mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling 
pathways through a Grb2. Son of sevenless (Sos) complex. FAK(F397Y), which 
encodes a dominant negative mutant of FAK, attenuated the shear stress-induced 
kinase activity of Myc epitope-tagged ERK2 and hemagglutinin epitope-tagged 
JNK1. DeltamSos1, encoding a dominant negative mutant of Sos in which the 
guanine nucleotide exchange domain has been deleted, also attenuated shear 
stress activation of Myc-ERK2 and hemagglutinin-JNK1. Pretreating the confluent 
BAEC monolayers with a blocking type anti-vitronectin receptor monoclonal 
antibody had similar inhibitory effects in these shear stress-activated ERKs and 
JNKs. Confocal microscopic observation further demonstrated that FAK tended to 
cluster with vitronectin receptor near the abluminal side of the sheared BAEC. 
These results demonstrate that FAK signaling is critical in the shear 
stress-induced dual activation of ERK and JNK.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.272.48.30455
PMID: 9374537 [Indexed for MEDLINE]