1. J Mol Biol. 1998 Jan 23;275(3):419-25. doi: 10.1006/jmbi.1997.1458.

Wild-type alpha 1-antitrypsin is in the canonical inhibitory conformation.

Elliott PR(1), Abrahams JP, Lomas DA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, UK.

alpha 1-Antitrypsin is the archetypal member of the serine proteinase inhibitor 
or serpin superfamily. Members of the family show structural homology based on a 
dominant A beta-sheet and a mobile reactive centre loop. Our recent crystal 
structure of alpha 1-antitrypsin stabilized with a point mutation showed the 
loop to be in a canonical inhibitory conformation in the absence of significant 
insertion into the A beta-sheet. It could be argued that the stabilizing 
mutation may induce the reactive centre loop to adopt an artificial, and 
unrepresentative, conformation and the finding seems to be at variance with 
studies assessing rates of peptide insertion into the A beta-sheet and limited 
proteolysis of the reactive loop. Here we present a 2.9 A structure of 
recombinant wild-type alpha 1-antitrypsin with no stabilizing mutations. Again, 
the reactive loop is in a canonical conformation in the absence of significant 
insertion into the A beta-sheet. A stabilizing salt bridge between P5 glutamate 
and arginine residues 196, 223 and 281, already identified in the mutant, 
provides strong evidence that this conformation is not an artefact of 
crystallization but represents the conformation of the circulating inhibitor in 
vivo. Comparison with the structure of alpha 1-antitrypsin stabilized with the 
Phe51Leu mutation indicates that the increased thermal stability of the mutant 
results from enhanced packing of aromatic residues in the hydrophobic core of 
the molecule. The structure of wild-type alpha 1-antitrypsin reveals a 
hydrophobic pocket between s2A and helices D and E that is filled on reactive 
loop insertion and the formation of biologically relevant loop-sheet polymers. 
This pocket may provide a target for rational drug design to prevent the 
formation of polymers and the associated plasma deficiency, liver cirrhosis and 
emphysema.

DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.1997.1458
PMID: 9466920 [Indexed for MEDLINE]