1. Anticancer Drug Des. 1998 Jun;13(4):307-15.

Comparison of ternary crystal complexes of F31 variants of human dihydrofolate 
reductase with NADPH and a classical antitumor furopyrimidine.

Cody V(1), Galitsky N, Luft JR, Pangborn W, Blakley RL, Gangjee A.

Author information:
(1)Hauptman-Woodward Medical Research Institute, Inc., NY 14203, USA. 
cody@hwi.buffalo.edu

The novel furopyrimidine, 
N-[4-[(2,4-diaminofuro[2,3-d]pyrimidin-5-yl)-methyl]-methylamino] 
-benzoyl]-L-glutamate (MTXO), a classical antifolate with weak antitumor 
activity compared with methotrexate (MTX), has been studied as inhibitorcofactor 
ternary crystal complexes with recombinant Phe-31 to Ser (F31S) and Phe-31 to 
Gly (F31G) variant human dihydrofolate reductase (hDHFR). Kinetic data show that 
the binding affinity of MTXO is significantly weaker for the variant hDHFR 
enzyme than for the wild type enzyme. Structural data for the Phe-31 variants, 
along with wild type hDHFR, provide the first direct comparison of the binding 
interactions of a single antifolate in a family of variant hDHFR. These ternary 
hDHFR complexes crystallize in the rhombohedral space group R3, isomorphous to 
that reported for wild type hDHFR MTXO-NADPH ternary complex. MTXO binds with 
its 2,4-diaminofuropyrimidine ring interacting with Glu-30 in hDHFR. The 
greatest change on modification of the side chain at position 31 is loss of 
hydrophobic contacts to the inhibitor, which results in the significant decrease 
in binding affinity of MTXO for the Phe-31 variants. The presence of the 6-5 
furopyrimidine ring instead of the 6-6 pteridine ring causes a different bridge 
conformation compared with MTX, and in the case of the wild type MTXO complex 
also results in weaker hydrophobic contacts to Phe-31 than observed for MTXT. 
For the design of antitumor agents related to MTXO, increasing the bridge of 
MTXO from two to three or four atoms should provide increased DHFR inhibitory 
potency and antitumor activity.

PMID: 9627670 [Indexed for MEDLINE]