1. J Lipid Res. 1999 Feb;40(2):221-8.

Molecular defects underlying Wolman disease appear to be more heterogeneous than 
those resulting in cholesteryl ester storage disease.

Lohse P(1), Maas S, Sewell AC, van Diggelen OP, Seidel D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Grosshadern Clinic, University of Munich, 
Munich, Germany.

Human lysosomal acid lipase/cholesteryl ester hydrolase (hLAL) is essential for 
the intralysosomal metabolism of cholesteryl esters and triglycerides taken up 
by receptor-mediated endocytosis of lipoprotein particles. The key role of the 
enzyme in intracellular lipid homeostasis is illustrated by two lysosomal 
storage diseases inherited as autosomal recessive traits. Wolman disease, 
associated with deficient hLAL activity, leads to massive intracellular 
substrate accumulation and is always fatal in early infancy. Cholesteryl ester 
storage disease (CESD), in contrast, is characterized by very low levels of 
enzymic activity sufficient to allow survival of the affected patients into 
adulthood. In order to elucidate the underlying molecular defects in Wolman 
disease, we have characterized the hLAL gene in two female Wolman patients of 
German and Turkish origin by SSCP and DNA sequence analysis. Our results 
demonstrate that the German proband was compound heterozygous for an 8-bp 
deletion in exon 3 and a 2-bp deletion in exon 4 of the hLAL gene. These 
frameshift mutations lead to protein truncation at amino acid positions 24 and 
116 and to complete loss of hydrolytic activity. The Turkish proband, in 
contrast, was homozygous for a G(1064)-->T substitution in exon 10 of the hLAL 
gene which converts the completely conserved glycine (GGG) residue at position 
321 of the mature enzyme to tryptophan (TGG). In vitro expression of the 
hLAL(Gly(321)-->Trp) cDNA construct revealed that the amino acid replacement 
results in a more than 99% reduction of neutral lipid hydrolysis. The mutations 
provide new insights into the molecular basis of Wolman disease which is 
apparently more heterogeneous at the genetic level than cholesteryl ester 
storage disease.-Lohse, P., S. Maas, P. Lohse, A. C. Sewell, O. P. van Diggelen, 
and D. Seidel. Molecular defects underlying Wolman disease appear to be more 
heterogeneous than those resulting in cholesteryl ester storage disease.

PMID: 9925650 [Indexed for MEDLINE]