1. Thromb Haemost. 1999 Apr;81(4):547-52.

DNA-polymorphisms and plasma levels of vascular disease risk factors in 
Greenland Inuit--is there a relation with the low risk of cardiovascular disease 
in the Inuit?

de Maat MP(1), Bladbjerg EM, Johansen LG, de Knijff P, Gram J, Kluft C, 
Jespersen J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Thrombosis Research, University of Southern Denmark, Ribe 
County Hospital, Esbjerg. M.deMaat@pg.tno.nl

Greenland Inuit are a population with a low risk of cardiovascular disease. 
Recently, we stated that frequencies of potentially high risk alleles of the 
apolipoproteins, fibrinogen, factor V, glycoprotein IIIa and factor VII (FVII) 
genes have different allele frequencies in the Inuit when compared with 
Caucasian populations. We have extended this study and evaluated whether or not 
this was also true for the genetic polymorphisms of tissue-type plasminogen 
activator (t-PA), plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1), 
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) and angiotensinogen in a group of 133 
Greenland Inuit, aged 30-34 gamma. In addition, we compared the plasma levels of 
these factors and those of C-reactive protein (CRP) and D-Dimer in Inuit and in 
Danes, comparable for age and gender. Frequencies (f) were assessed of the 
alleles that are known as the potential high risk alleles in Caucasians. In the 
Inuit, the f(insertion allele) of the t-PA intron8ins311 polymorphism was 0.37 
(CI 0.32-0.43), the f(4G allele) of the PAI-1 promoter polymorphism was 0.88 (CI 
0.83-0.91), the f(deletion allele) of the ACE intron16ins287 polymorphism was 
0.40 (CI 0.33-0.47) and the f(M-allele) of the angiotensinogen M/T353 
polymorphism was 0.30(CI 0.25-0.38). As for fibrinogen and FVII polymorphisms, 
these frequencies are all significantly different from what is reported for 
Caucasian populations. In the Inuit, plasma levels of fibrinogen and D-Dimer 
were higher than in the Danes, the PAI-1 levels were lower and FVII, t-PA and 
CRP levels were comparable. The observed allele frequencies of the polymorphisms 
of t-PA, fibrinogen, FVII, ACE, angiotensinogen and the plasma levels of PAI-1 
and D-Dimer were in accordance with the low CVD risk in the Inuit, considering 
the observed associations between these measures and CVD risk in Caucasian 
populations, but for other measures this was not the case (allele frequencies of 
the PAI-1 polymorphism, and plasma levels of fibrinogen, FVII and t-PA). In 
conclusion there are clear differences in genetic background and plasma levels 
of risk factors in Greenland Inuit compared with Caucasian populations, and 
these differences were sometimes, but not always, in accordance with the 
observed low cardiovascular disease risk of the Inuit population.

PMID: 10235437 [Indexed for MEDLINE]