1. Neurology. 1999 Jul 13;53(1):181-8. doi: 10.1212/wnl.53.1.181.

An inherited prion disease with a PrP P105L mutation: clinicopathologic and PrP 
heterogeneity.

Yamada M(1), Itoh Y, Inaba A, Wada Y, Takashima M, Satoh S, Kamata T, Okeda R, 
Kayano T, Suematsu N, Kitamoto T, Otomo E, Matsushita M, Mizusawa H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Faculty of Medicine, Medical Research Institute, 
Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Japan. m-yamada.nuro@med.tmd.ac.jp

OBJECTIVE: To clarify a clinical and neuropathologic phenotype of an inherited 
prion disease associated with a missense mutation at codon 105 in the prion 
protein (PrP) gene that was originally described as a variant of 
Gerstmann-Sträussler-Scheinker disease demonstrating spastic paraparesis.
METHODS: Two siblings from a Japanese family are described. PrP gene analyses, 
neuropathologic studies with immunohistochemistry, and Western blot analysis of 
the PrP were performed.
RESULTS: Both patients showed a missense (proline-->leucine) mutation at codon 
105 and a methionine/valine polymorphism at codon 129 of the PrP gene. 
Clinically, Patient 1 presented with progressive spastic paraparesis, ataxia, 
and dementia. Patient 2, the sister of Patient 1, showed prominent action 
myoclonus and dementia. Neuropathologically, multiple PrP-positive amyloid 
plaques and diffuse PrP deposition in the deep cortical layers were found in the 
cerebral cortex with primarily frontal dominant atrophy in both patients. 
Tau-positive pathologic structures including neurofibrillary tangles, neuropil 
threads, and dystrophic neurites around the plaques were abundant in the brain 
of Patient 2. In contrast, the tau pathology was scarce in Patient 1. Western 
blot analysis of the brain showed different patterns of detergent-insoluble PrP 
fragments between the patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite the identical codon 105 mutation and codon 129 polymorphism 
of the PrP gene, remarkable clinical and neuropathologic differences, and PrP 
heterogeneity were present between the affected siblings. The phenotypic 
variability might be related to PrP heterogeneity.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.53.1.181
PMID: 10408557 [Indexed for MEDLINE]