1. J Mol Biol. 1999 Aug 20;291(3):703-13. doi: 10.1006/jmbi.1999.2994.

Unfolding and refolding of Escherichia coli chaperonin GroES is expressed by a 
three-state model.

Higurashi T(1), Nosaka K, Mizobata T, Nagai J, Kawata Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology Faculty of Engineering, Tottori University, 
Tottori, 680-0945, Japan.

The guanidine-hydrochloride (Gdn-HCl) induced unfolding and refolding 
characteristics of the co-chaperonin GroES from Escherichia coli, a homoheptamer 
of subunit molecular mass 10,000 Da, were studied by using intrinsic 
fluorescence, 1-anilino-8-naphthalene sulfonate (ANS) binding, and 
size-exclusion HPLC. When monitored by tyrosine fluorescence, the unfolding 
reaction of GroES consisted of a single transition, with a transition midpoint 
at around 1.0 M Gdn-HCl. Interestingly, however, ANS binding and size-exclusion 
HPLC experiments strongly suggested the existence of an intermediate state in 
the transition. In order to confirm the existence of an intermediate state 
between the native heptameric and unfolded monomeric states, a tryptophan 
residue was introduced into the interface of GroES subunits as a fluorescent 
probe. The unfolding reaction of GroES I48W as monitored by tryptophyl 
fluorescence showed a single transition curve with a transition midpoint at 0.5 
M Gdn-HCl. This unfolding transition curve as well as the refolding kinetics 
were dependent on the concentration of GroES protein. CD spectrum and 
size-exclusion HPLC experiments demonstrated that the intermediates assumed a 
partially folded conformation at around 0.5 M Gdn-HCl. The refolding of GroES 
protein from 3 M Gdn-HCl was probed functionally by measuring the extent of 
inhibition of GroEL ATPase activity and the enhancement of lactate dehydrogenase 
refolding yields in the presence of GroEL and ADP. These results clearly 
demonstrated that the GroES heptamer first dissociated to monomers and then 
unfolded completely upon increasing the concentration of Gdn-HCl, and that both 
transitions were reversible. From the thermodynamic analysis of the dissociation 
reaction, it was found that the partially folded monomer was only marginally 
stable and that the stability of GroES protein is governed mostly by the 
association of the subunits.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.1999.2994
PMID: 10448048 [Indexed for MEDLINE]