1. Clin Chem. 2001 Feb;47(2):153-63.

Effects of hemoglobin variants and chemically modified derivatives on assays for 
glycohemoglobin.

Bry L(1), Chen PC, Sacks DB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham & Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
75 Francis St., Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Erratum in
    Clin Chem 2001 Jun;47(6):1141.

BACKGROUND: Glycohemoglobin (gHb), measured as hemoglobin (Hb) A(1c) or as total 
gHb, provides a common means for assessing long-term glycemic control in 
individuals with diabetes mellitus. Genetic variants and chemically modified 
derivatives of Hb can profoundly affect the accuracy of these measurements, 
although effects vary considerably among commercially available methods. The 
prevalence of genetic variants such as HbS, HbC, and HbE, and chemically 
modified derivatives such as carbamyl-Hb among patient populations undergoing 
testing is not insignificant. Clinical laboratories and sites responsible for 
point-of-care testing of gHb need to be aware of the interferences produced in 
assays by these Hbs.
APPROACH: We conducted a review of the literature describing the effects of 
variant Hbs on gHb assay methods commonly used in clinical laboratories.
CONTENT: This review summarizes the documented effects of both common and 
uncommon Hb variants and derivatives on the measurement of gHb. Where known, we 
discuss mechanisms of interference on specific assays and methodologies. We 
specifically address effects of commonly encountered Hbs, such as carbamyl-Hb, 
HbS, HbC, HbE, and HbF, on assays that use cation-exchange chromatography, 
immunoassays, or boronate affinity methods for measuring gHb.
SUMMARY: A variety of patient- and laboratory-related factors can adversely 
affect the measurement of gHb in patients harboring Hb variants or derivatives. 
Identification of the variant or derivative Hb before or during testing may 
allow accurate measurement of gHb by the selection of a method unaffected by the 
given variant or derivative. However, laboratories should make available 
alternative, non-Hb-based methods for assessing long-term glycemic control in 
individuals with HbCC, HbSS, or HbSC disease, or with other underlying disorders 
where the concentration of gHb does not accurately reflect long-term glycemic 
control.

PMID: 11159762 [Indexed for MEDLINE]