1. Eur J Pediatr. 2000 Dec;159 Suppl 3:S208-12. doi: 10.1007/pl00014405.

Genetic determinants of hyperhomocysteinaemia: the roles of cystathionine 
beta-synthase and 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase.

Blom HJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, University Hospital Nijmegen, The Netherlands. 
h.blom@ckslkn.azn.nl

Over the last decade mild hyperhomocysteinaemia has widely been recognised as a 
new risk factor for arteriosclerosis and thrombosis. Main regulating enzymes of 
homocysteine (Hcy) metabolism are cystathionine beta-synthase (CBS), methionine 
synthase and methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR). Early studies on 
patients with vascular disease described elevated Hcy concentrations after 
methionine loading and decreased CBS activity, resembling heterozygotes for CBS 
deficiency. Therefore, heterozygosity for CBS deficiency was proposed as the 
main cause of mild hyperhomocysteinaemia. However, more recent enzymatic and 
molecular genetic studies have demonstrated that heterozygosity for CBS 
deficiency is not or only a very minor cause of mild hyperhomocysteinaemia in 
vascular disease. We discovered two common genetic causes of mild 
hyperhomocysteinaemia, the 677C > T and the 1298A > C mutations in the coding 
region of MTHFR. The 677C > T mutation causes reduced enzyme activity with 
thermolabile protein properties, elevated Hcy and low-normal or decreased plasma 
folate levels. The 1298A > C mutation relates also to decreased enzyme activity, 
but not to thermolabile protein, and Hcy and folate levels are not influenced. 
However, compound heterozygosity for these two mutations, i.e. individuals with 
the 677CT/1298AC genotype, have elevated Hcy and decreased plasma folate levels. 
Gene-enviroment interactions between 677C > T and folate is demonstrated in 
individuals with the 677TT genotype. Those with low-normal folate have elevated 
Hcy, whereas those with high-normal folate have normal Hcy concentrations. The 
elevated Hcy levels due to these mutations can be normalised by administration 
of folate, but whether folate reduces the risk of cardiovascular disease remains 
to be established.
CONCLUSION: Heterozygosity for cystathionine beta-synthase deficiency is a minor 
cause of hyperhomocysteinaemia. The current data on mutations in the 
methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase gene do not tell us whether elevated plasma 
homocysteine plays a causal role in vascular disease. Low cellular vitamin 
status may be a possible cause and homocysteine may just be a marker for this 
situation.

DOI: 10.1007/pl00014405
PMID: 11216902 [Indexed for MEDLINE]