1. Protein Eng. 2001 Feb;14(2):135-40. doi: 10.1093/protein/14.2.135.

Asn to Lys mutations at three sites which are N-glycosylated in the mammalian 
protein decrease the aggregation of Escherichia coli-derived erythropoietin.

Narhi LO(1), Arakawa T, Aoki K, Wen J, Elliott S, Boone T, Cheetham J.

Author information:
(1)Amgen Inc., Thousand Oaks, CA 91320, USA. lnarhi@amgen.com

Erythropoietin (EPO) derived from Escherichia coli is unstable to elevated 
temperature and tends to aggregate with time, making it unsuitable for 
high-resolution structure analysis. The mammalian EPO contains about 40% 
carbohydrate, which makes this protein more stable and less prone to aggregate 
than non-glycosylated E.coli-derived EPO, but makes it unsuitable for 
high-resolution analysis owing to its size and flexibility. In an attempt to 
decrease the aggregation of E.coli-derived EPO, the three asparagine residues at 
positions 24, 38 and 83 were mutated to lysine residues. In the native protein, 
these residues are the sites of N-linked glycosylation, which suggests that they 
should be located on the surface of the protein and should not be involved in 
interactions in the hydrophobic protein core. Therefore, the substitution of 
basic amino acids for these neutral asparagine residues is not expected to 
affect the protein structure, but should increase the isoelectric point of the 
protein and its net positive charge, decreasing its tendency to aggregate at or 
below neutral pH due to electrostatic interactions. No apparent alterations in 
receptor binding, as determined by both cell-surface receptor competition assay 
and in vitro receptor dimerization experiments, were observed when these 
mutations were introduced into the EPO sequence. However, this mutant protein 
displayed a significant increase in stability to heat treatment and to storage, 
relative to the wild-type molecule. This resulted in a greater number of 
observable cross peaks in the mutant EPO in 2D NOESY experiments. However, the 
mutant was similar to the wild-type in stability when urea was used as a 
denaturant. This indicates that the introduced mutations resulted in a decrease 
in aggregation with heating or with prolonged incubation at ambient temperature, 
without changing the conformational stability or the receptor binding affinity 
of the mutant protein. This approach of placing charged residues at sites where 
N-glycosylation occurs in vivo could be applied to other systems as well.

DOI: 10.1093/protein/14.2.135
PMID: 11297671 [Indexed for MEDLINE]