1. Hum Mutat. 2001 Oct;18(4):264-81. doi: 10.1002/humu.1189.

Molecular genetics of mucopolysaccharidosis type IIIA and IIIB: Diagnostic, 
clinical, and biological implications.

Yogalingam G(1), Hopwood JJ.

Author information:
(1)Lysosomal Diseases Research Unit, Department of Chemical Pathology, Women's 
and Children's Hospital, North Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.

Mucopolysaccharidosis (MPS) types IIIA, B, C, and D are a group of autosomal 
recessive lysosomal storage diseases caused by mutations in one of four genes 
which encode enzyme activities required for the lysosomal degradation of heparan 
sulfate. The progressive lysosomal storage of heparan sulfate eventually results 
in the clinical onset of disease, which is predominantly characterized by severe 
central nervous system degeneration. MPS-IIIA and MPS-IIIB involve deficiencies 
of heparan sulfate sulfamidase (SGSH) and alpha-N-acetylglucosaminidase (NAGLU), 
respectively. Both the SGSH and NAGLU genes have been cloned and characterized, 
thereby permitting mutation analysis of MPS-IIIA and MPS-IIIB patients. A total 
of 62 mutations have now been defined for MPS-IIIA consisting of 46 
missense/nonsense mutations, 15 small insertions/deletions, and one splice site 
mutation. A total of 86 mutations have been identified in the NAGLU gene of 
MPS-IIIB patients; 58 missense/nonsense mutations, 27 insertions/deletions, and 
one splice site mutation. Most of the identified mutations in the SGSH and NAGLU 
genes are associated with severe clinical phenotypes. Many of the missense, 
nonsense, and insertion/deletion mutations have been expressed in mammalian cell 
lines to permit the characterization of their effects on SGSH and NAGLU activity 
and intracellular processing and trafficking. For MPS-IIIA and MPS-IIIB many of 
the reported mutations are unique making screening the general population 
difficult. However, molecular characterization of MPS-IIIA patients has revealed 
a high incidence of particular mutations of different geographical origins, 
which will be beneficial for the molecular diagnosis of MPS-IIIA.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.1189
PMID: 11668611 [Indexed for MEDLINE]