1. Hum Mol Genet. 2002 Mar 1;11(5):547-57. doi: 10.1093/hmg/11.5.547.

Identification of an IMPDH1 mutation in autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa 
(RP10) revealed following comparative microarray analysis of transcripts derived 
from retinas of wild-type and Rho(-/-) mice.

Kennan A(1), Aherne A, Palfi A, Humphries M, McKee A, Stitt A, Simpson DA, 
Demtroder K, Orntoft T, Ayuso C, Kenna PF, Farrar GJ, Humphries P.

Author information:
(1)The Ocular Genetics Unit, Department of Genetics, Trinity College, Dublin 2, 
Ireland.

Comparative analysis of the transcriptional profiles of approximately 6000 genes 
in the retinas of wild-type mice with those carrying a targeted disruption of 
the rhodopsin gene was undertaken by microarray analysis. This revealed a series 
of transcripts, of which some were derived from genes known to map at 
retinopathy loci, levels of which were reduced or elevated in the retinas of 
Rho(-/-) mice lacking functional photoreceptors. The human homologue of one of 
these genes, encoding inosine monophosphate dehydrogenase type 1 (IMPDH1), maps 
to the region of 7q to which an adRP gene (RP10) had previously been localized. 
Mutational screening of DNA from the Spanish adRP family, originally used to 
localize the RP10 gene, revealed an Arg224Pro substitution co-segregating with 
the disease phenotype. The amino acid at position 224 of the IMPDH1 protein is 
conserved among species and the substitution is not present in healthy, 
unrelated individuals of European origin. These data provide strong evidence 
that mutations within the IMPDH1 gene cause adRP, and validate approaches to 
mutation detection involving comparative analysis of global transcription 
profiles in normal and degenerating retinal tissues. Other genes showing 
significant alterations in expression include some with anti-apoptotic functions 
and many encoding components of the extracellular matrix or cytoskeleton, a 
possible reflection of a response by Muller cells to preserve the remaining 
outer nuclear layer of the retina. We suggest that those genes identified are 
prime candidates for etiological involvement in degenerative retinal disease.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/11.5.547
PMID: 11875049 [Indexed for MEDLINE]