1. Cas Lek Cesk. 2003;142(5):276-9.

[Congenital disorder of type Ia protein glycosylation: clinical, biochemical and 
molecular characteristics in 2 siblings with cerebellar hypoplasia].

[Article in Czech]

Honzík T(1), Malonová E, Hansíková H, Rosipal R, Poupĕtová H, Martásek P, Zeman 
J.

Author information:
(1)Klinika dĕtského a dorostového lékarství a Centrum integrované genomiky 1. LF 
UK a VFN, Praha.

BACKGROUND: Congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG syndrome) represent a 
newly delineated group of inherited diseases of glycoprotein synthesis. We 
present results of biochemical and molecular analyses in two Czech patients with 
CDG Ia syndrome.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Serum concentrations of the nonglycosylated and 
hypoglycosylated transferrin were measured using turbidimetric immunoassay. In 
positive patients, the isoelectric focusing of serum transferrin and molecular 
analyses of the gene for phosphomannomutase 2 were performed. The disease 
manifested in both children in infancy with failure to thrive, inverted nipples, 
strabismus, epilepsy, muscle hypotonia, microcephaly, psychomotor retardation 
and hypoplasia of the cerebellum. The biochemical investigation revealed 
elevated liver enzymes, low concentration of factor XI and protein S. In one 
child lower concentration of the antithrombin III and protein C were found. 
Activities of arylsulfatase A and beta-glucuronidase in serum were higher and 
activity of alpha-mannosidase in leucocytes was lower in comparison with 
controls. Molecular analyses revealed that both children are compound 
heterozygotes for the mutation 422G > A and 357C > A in gene for 
phosphomanomutase 2. Both siblings are also homozygotes for polymorfism IVS5 + 
19 C-->T and heterozygygotes for polymorfism IVS5 + 22 T-->A.
CONCLUSIONS: The prognosis of children with CDG Ia is unfavourable. Enzymatic 
and/or molecular studies are necessary for genetic counselling and the prenatal 
diagnosis.

PMID: 12920791 [Indexed for MEDLINE]