1. Hum Mol Genet. 2004 Nov 1;13(21):2625-32. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddh284. Epub 2004
Sep  14.

Human laminin beta2 deficiency causes congenital nephrosis with mesangial 
sclerosis and distinct eye abnormalities.

Zenker M(1), Aigner T, Wendler O, Tralau T, Müntefering H, Fenski R, Pitz S, 
Schumacher V, Royer-Pokora B, Wühl E, Cochat P, Bouvier R, Kraus C, Mark K, 
Madlon H, Dötsch J, Rascher W, Maruniak-Chudek I, Lennert T, Neumann LM, Reis A.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human genetics, Schwabachanlage 10, 91054 Erlangen, Germany. 
mzenker@humgenet.uni-erlangen.de

Congenital nephrotic syndrome (CNS) is clinically and genetically heterogeneous, 
with mutations in WT1, NPHS1 and NPHS2 accounting for part of cases. We recently 
delineated a new autosomal recessive entity comprising CNS with diffuse 
mesangial sclerosis and distinct ocular anomalies with microcoria as the leading 
clinical feature (Pierson syndrome). On the basis of homozygosity mapping to 
markers on chromosome 3p14-p22, we identified homozygous or compound 
heterozygous mutations of LAMB2 in patients from five unrelated families. Most 
disease-associated alleles were truncating mutations. Using immunohistochemistry 
and western blotting we could demonstrate that the respective LAMB2 mutations 
lead to loss of laminin beta2 expression in kidney and other tissues studied. 
Laminin beta2 is known to be abundantly expressed in the glomerular basement 
membrane (GBM) where it is thought to play a key role in anchoring as well as 
differentiation of podocyte foot processes. Lamb2 knockout mice were reported to 
exhibit congenital nephrosis in association with anomalies of retina and 
neuromuscular junctions. By studying ocular laminin beta2 expression in 
unaffected controls, we detected the strongest expression in the intraocular 
muscles corresponding well to the characteristic hypoplasia of ciliary and 
pupillary muscles observed in patients. Moreover, we present first clinical 
evidence of severe impairment of vision and neurodevelopment due to LAMB2 
defects. Our current data suggest that human laminin beta2 deficiency is 
consistently and specifically associated with this particular oculorenal 
syndrome. In addition, components of the molecular interface between GBM and 
podocyte foot processes come in the focus as potential candidates for isolated 
and syndromic CNS.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddh284
PMID: 15367484 [Indexed for MEDLINE]