1. J Biol Chem. 1992 Apr 15;267(11):7949-55.

3,4-dichloroisocoumarin-induced activation of the degradation of beta-casein by 
the bovine pituitary multicatalytic proteinase complex.

Pereira ME(1), Nguyen T, Wagner BJ, Margolis JW, Yu B, Wilk S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, City University 
of New York, New York 10029.

The breakdown of beta-casein (caseinolytic activity) by the bovine pituitary 
multicatalytic proteinase complex (MPC) is initiated by a fourth active site 
different from the previously described chymotrypsin-like activity (cleavage of 
Cbz-Gly-Gly-Leu-p-nitroanilide, where Cbz is benzyloxycarbonyl), trypsin-like 
activity (cleavage of Cbz-D-Ala-Leu-Arg-2-naphthylamide), and peptidylglutamyl 
peptide bond-hydrolyzing (PGP) activity (cleavage of 
Cbz-Leu-Leu-Glu-2-naphthylamide) (Yu, B., Pereira, M. E., and Wilk, S. (1991) J. 
Biol. Chem. 266, 17396-17400). 3,4-Dichloroisocoumarin, a serine proteinase 
inhibitor, stimulated the caseinolytic activity of bovine pituitary or lens MPC, 
3-18-fold under conditions under which the other three catalytic activities were 
inactivated. Addition of hydroxylamine to the modified enzyme did not reverse 
the effects of the inhibitor. A form of the proteinase exhibiting only 2-4% of 
control chymotrypsin-like, trypsin-like, and PGP activities degraded beta-casein 
with no accumulation of intermediate peptides. 3,4-Dichloroisocoumarin, by 
reacting with the chymotrypsin-like, trypsin-like, and/or PGP-active sites, may 
promote a conformational change of MPC, rendering the caseinolytic active site 
accessible to the substrate. Once bound to the active site, beta-casein is 
rapidly degraded either by the caseinolytic component itself or by a cooperative 
interaction with catalytic centers that are not affected by the serine 
proteinase inhibitor. These results imply that the caseinolytic component does 
not belong to the class of serine proteinases. Other proteins tested were not 
degraded by the 3,4-dichloroisocoumarin-treated enzyme, suggesting that the 
conformation of beta-casein may be more adequate for degradation by the 
caseinolytic component.

PMID: 1560024 [Indexed for MEDLINE]