1. Curr Pharm Des. 2005;11(8):1017-30. doi: 10.2174/1381612053381693.

Estrogen and cytokines production - the possible cause of gender differences in 
neurological diseases.

Czlonkowska A(1), Ciesielska A, Gromadzka G, Kurkowska-Jastrzebska I.

Author information:
(1)Second Department of Neurology, Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology, 
Sobieskiego 9, 02-957 Warsaw, Poland. czlonkow@ipin.edu.pl

Naturally occurring sexual dimorphism has been implicated in the risk, 
progression and recovery from numerous neurological disorders. These include 
head injury, multiple sclerosis (MS), stroke, and neurodegenerative diseases 
(Parkinson's disease (PD), Alzheimer's disease (AD) or amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis (ALS). Accumulating evidence suggests that observed differences 
between men and women could result from estrogen's wide range of effects within 
the mammalian central nervous system (CNS), with it's neuroprotective effect 
being one of the most important. It seems possible that neuroprotective activity 
of estrogen could be partially a result of it's anti-inflammatory action. It has 
been well established that inflammation plays an important role in the 
etiopathogenesis and manifestation of brain pathological changes. In this 
regard, an important role has been suggested for pro-inflammatory cytokines 
produced by activated glial cells, neurons and immune cells that invade brain 
tissue. Within the CNS, cytokines stimulate inflammatory processes that may 
impair blood-brain barrier permeability as well as promote apoptosis of neurons, 
oligodendrocytes and induce myelin damage. Given that estrogen may modulate 
cytokine expression, coupled with the fact that gender differences of cytokine 
production are apparent in animal models of PD and MS, suggests an important 
connection between hormonal-cytokine link in neurodegeneration. Indeed, while MS 
patients and mice subjected to experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) 
display gender specific alterations of IFN-gamma and IL-12, variations of TNF 
and IL-6 were associated with PD. Also in case of more acute neurodegenerative 
conditions, such as stroke, the effect of IL-6 gene G-174C polymorphism was 
different in males and females. Given that our understanding of the role of 
estrogen on cytokine production and accompanying CNS pathological conditions is 
limited, the present reviews aims to present some of our recent findings in this 
area and further evaluate the evidence that may be relevant to the design of new 
hormonal anti-inflammatory treatment strategies for neurodegenerative diseases.

DOI: 10.2174/1381612053381693
PMID: 15777251 [Indexed for MEDLINE]