1. Arch Histol Cytol. 2005;68(1):57-70. doi: 10.1679/aohc.68.57.

An immunocytochemical study of calbindin-D28K in laminae I and II of the dorsal 
horn and spinal ganglia in the chicken with special reference to the relation to 
substance P-containing primary afferent neurons.

Li YN(1), Sakamoto H, Kawate T, Cheng CX, Li YC, Shimada O, Atsumi S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy, Interdisciplinary Graduate School of Medicine and 
Engineering, University of Yamanashi, Yamanashi 409-3898, Japan.

The localization of calbindin-D28K (CB) was studied immunocytochemically in 
laminae I and II of the dorsal horn and in spinal ganglia in the chicken, and 
compared with the distribution of substance P (SP) using double immunolabeling. 
At the light microscopic level, CB immunoreactivity was observed most intensely 
in the lamina II using the avidin-biotinylated peroxidase complex (ABC) and 
immunofluorescence methods. At the electron microscopic level using the ABC 
method, CB immunoreactivity was observed in the following three neuronal 
elements: 1) the scalloped central terminal with many dense-cored vesicles 
(DCVs) in the synaptic glomerulus; 2) some vesicle-containing dendrites (VCDs) 
inside or outside the synaptic glomerulus; and 3) some axon terminals outside 
the synaptic glomerulus. The CB-immunoreactive (IR) VCDs in the synaptic 
glomerulus often formed reciprocal synapses with the central terminal. Strong 
immunoreactivity was observed at the postsynaptic membrane of CB-IR elements. 
Double immunofluorescence and immunolabeling methods at the electron microscopic 
level showed that CB and SP colocalized in the scalloped central terminal with 
DCVs of the synaptic glomerulus. Almost all SP-IR neurons in the spinal ganglion 
revealed the coexistence of CB in serial sections in the chicken. In light of 
previous biochemical and physiological reports, our findings suggest that CB - 
coexisting with SP - plays an important role in the control of pain transmission 
through its strong Ca(2+)-buffering action in the chicken.

DOI: 10.1679/aohc.68.57
PMID: 15827379 [Indexed for MEDLINE]