1. Gastroenterology. 2005 May;128(5):1187-98. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2005.01.058.

Precursor lesions in patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 
1-associated duodenal gastrinomas.

Anlauf M(1), Perren A, Meyer CL, Schmid S, Saremaslani P, Kruse ML, Weihe E, 
Komminoth P, Heitz PU, Klöppel G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Univeristy of Kiel, Germany. 
manlauf@path.uni-kiel.de

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The identification of precursor lesions has a great impact on 
the understanding of tumorigenesis. Precursor lesions of endocrine tumors are 
known to occur in the setting of the MEN1 syndrome. The aim of this study was to 
test the hypothesis that MEN1-associated duodenal gastrinomas originate from 
diffuse preneoplastic gastrin cell changes. Precursor lesions may precede the 
development of duodenal gastrinomas because, in contrast to sporadic 
gastrinomas, these tumors are usually multiple.
METHODS: The distribution of endocrine cells in the nontumorous duodenal tissue 
was analyzed qualitatively and quantitatively for 25 patients operated on for a 
duodenal gastrinoma. MEN1 status was assessed clinically and by polymerase chain 
reaction-based mutational analysis.
RESULTS: Fourteen of 25 patients with gastrinoma had proliferative, hyperplastic 
lesions consisting of gastrin cells in the nontumorous duodenal mucosa, similar 
to the gastric enterochromaffin-like cell lesions observed in chronic atrophic 
gastritis. All patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome with proven MEN1 had 
such proliferative gastrin cell lesions, and all patients with Zollinger-Ellison 
syndrome without precursor lesions were MEN1 negative.
CONCLUSIONS: Duodenal gastrinomas in MEN1, but not sporadic duodenal 
gastrinomas, are associated with proliferative gastrin cell changes within the 
nontumorous mucosa. It is likely that these lesions precede the development of 
MEN1-associated duodenal gastrinomas.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2005.01.058
PMID: 15887103 [Indexed for MEDLINE]