1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2005;565:157-66; discussion 167, 371-7. doi: 
10.1007/0-387-24990-7_12.

Nature's strategy for optimizing power generation in insect flight muscle.

Maughan D(1), Vigoreaux J.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, University of Vermont, Burlington VT 
05405, USA.

Table 1 summarizes the primary mechanisms most likely responsible for modifying 
wing beat frequency (WBF) and muscle power in the Drosophila mutants discussed 
above. The different outcomes reflect different mechanisms that come into play, 
depending on the protein and site of the mutation. For example, the reduced 
muscle power and WBF of the RLC phosphorylation site mutant Mlc2(S6sA,S67A) 
reflect the reduced number of myosin heads available to form working 
cross-bridges and the concomitant reduction in muscle stiffness. The mixed 
results of the other mutants are more difficult to explain. For example, while 
the reduced muscle stiffness of the paramyosin rod mutant pm(S18A) and the 
projectin mutant bent(D)/+ may in part reflect mutation-related increases in 
compliance of the thick filaments (pm(S18A)) or connecting filaments 
(bent(D)/+), the elevated WBF is unexpected because one would expect reduced 
muscle stiffness to lower WBF rather than raise it. Other aspects of the results 
are equally baffling. In the case of pm(S18A), e.g., myofilament kinetics are 
enhanced, opposite to what one would predict from reduced myofilament stiffness 
(Wang et al. 1999), but consistent with a direct effect of the mutation on 
cross-bridge kinetics. It is tempting to speculate that the fly increases the 
resonance frequency of its flight system, perhaps even over-compensating, as a 
mechanism for bringing the optimum frequency of power output of the flight 
system in line with the optimum frequency of power output of the myofilaments in 
order to achieve flight. The fly might accomplish this by voluntarily activating 
flight control muscles that change the stiffness and shape of the thoracic box 
(Tu and Dickinson, 1996), thereby significantly changing the basal stiffness of 
the resonance system. This effective strategy would serve to tune flight system 
kinetics to that of the actomyosin motor for optimum power transmission. 
Notably, of the four thick filament mutations listed in Table 1 produce no 
significant changes in wing beat frequency, three exhibit reduced muscle power, 
so these flies must make other adjustments to maintain flight competency. These 
may be additional cases in which the effects of marked changes in cross-bridge 
kinetics (MHC IFI-EC), cross-bridge deployment (Mlc2(delta2-46), or sarcomere 
(thick filament) stiffness (pm(S-A4) and Df(3L) fln(1)/+) are ameliorated by the 
intervention of direct flight muscles. In summary, it may well be that the fly's 
general response to mutations that alter one component of the flight system is 
to alter another in order to maintain optimum transmission of power and flight 
competency. That is, nature's strategy for optimizing power generation 
throughout the flight system is probably the same as that at the level of the 
myofibril: that is, strengthen weak links, orient parts for optimum power 
production, and modify power train proteins through isoform switches or 
post-translational modifications to assure all components are in tune with one 
another.

DOI: 10.1007/0-387-24990-7_12
PMID: 16106973 [Indexed for MEDLINE]