1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005 Sep 1;33(15):e133. doi: 10.1093/nar/gni132.

Multiplex SNP typing by bioluminometric assay coupled with terminator 
incorporation (BATI).

Zhou GH(1), Gotou M, Kajiyama T, Kambara H.

Author information:
(1)Central Research Laboratory, Hitachi, Ltd 1-280 Higashi-Koigakubo, 
Kokubunji-shi, Tokyo 185-8601, Japan.

A multiplex single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) typing platform using 
'bioluminometric assay coupled with terminator [2',3'-dideoxynucleoside 
triphosphates (ddNTPs)] incorporation' (named 'BATI' for short) was developed. 
All of the reactions are carried out in a single reaction chamber containing 
target DNAs, DNA polymerase, reagents necessary for converting PPi into ATP and 
reagents for luciferase reaction. Each of the four ddNTPs is dispensed into the 
reaction chamber in turn. PPi is released by a nucleotide incorporation reaction 
and is used to produce ATP when the ddNTP dispensed is complementary to the base 
in a template. The ATP is used in a luciferase reaction to release visible 
light. Only 1 nt is incorporated into a template at a time because ddNTPs do not 
have a 3' hydroxyl group. This feature greatly simplifies a sequencing spectrum. 
The luminescence is proportional to the amount of template incorporated. Only 
one peak appears in the spectrum of a homozygote sample, and two peaks at the 
same intensity appear for a heterozygote sample. In comparison with 
pyrosequencing using dNTP, the spectrum obtained by BATI is very simple, and it 
is very easy to determine SNPs accurately from it. As only one base is extended 
at a time and the extension signals are quantitative, the observed spectrum 
pattern is uniquely determined even for a sample containing multiplex SNPs. We 
have successfully used BATI to type various samples containing plural target 
sequence areas. The measurements can be carried out with an inexpensive and 
small luminometer using a photodiode array as the detector. It takes only a few 
minutes to determine multiplex SNPs. These results indicate that this novel 
multiplexed approach can significantly decrease the cost of SNP typing and 
increase the typing throughput with an inexpensive and small luminometer.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gni132
PMCID: PMC1197137
PMID: 16141191 [Indexed for MEDLINE]