1. Hum Mol Genet. 2005 Nov 1;14(21):3169-78. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddi344. Epub 2005
Sep  14.

Pathogenetic mechanisms of hematological abnormalities of patients with MYH9 
mutations.

Pecci A(1), Canobbio I, Balduini A, Stefanini L, Cisterna B, Marseglia C, Noris 
P, Savoia A, Balduini CL, Torti M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Pavia, Italy. 
alessandro.pecci@unipv.it

Mutations of MYH9, the gene for non-muscle myosin heavy chain IIA (NMMHC-IIA), 
cause a complex clinical phenotype characterized by macrothrombocytopenia and 
granulocyte inclusion bodies, often associated with deafness, cataracts and/or 
glomerulonephritis. The pathogenetic mechanisms of these defects are either 
completely unknown or controversial. In particular, it is a matter of debate 
whether haploinsufficiency or a dominant-negative effect of mutant allele is 
responsible for hematological abnormalities. We investigated 11 patients from 
six pedigrees with different MYH9 mutations. We evaluated NMMHC-IIA levels in 
platelets and granulocytes isolated from peripheral blood and in megakaryocytes 
(Mks) cultured from circulating progenitors. NMMHC-IIA distribution in Mks and 
granulocytes was also assessed. We demonstrated that all the investigated 
patients had a 50% reduction of NMMHC-IIA expression in platelets and that a 
similar defect was present also in Mks. In subjects with R1933X and E1945X 
mutations, the whole NMMHC-IIA of platelets and Mks was wild-type. No NMMHC-IIA 
inclusions were observed at any time of Mk maturation. In granulocytes, the 
extent of NMMHC-IIA reduction in patients with respect to control cells was 
significantly greater than that measured in platelets and Mks, and we found that 
wild-type protein was sequestered within most of the NMMHC-IIA inclusions. 
Altogether these results indicate that haploinsufficiency of NMMHC-IIA in 
megakaryocytic lineage is the mechanism of macrothrombocytopenia consequent to 
MYH9 mutations, whereas in granulocytes a dominant-negative effect of mutant 
allele is involved in the formation of inclusion bodies. The finding that the 
same mutations act through different mechanisms in different cells is surprising 
and requires further investigation.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddi344
PMID: 16162639 [Indexed for MEDLINE]