1. J Biol Chem. 1992 Jul 15;267(20):14304-8.

Activation of human furin precursor processing endoprotease occurs by an 
intramolecular autoproteolytic cleavage.

Leduc R(1), Molloy SS, Thorne BA, Thomas G.

Author information:
(1)Vollum Institute, Oregon Health Sciences University, Portland 97201.

Human furin is a calcium-dependent serine endoprotease that can efficiently 
cleave many precursor proteins on the carboxyl side of the consensus cleavage 
sequence, -Arg-X-Lys/Arg-Arg-, both in vivo and in vitro. Analysis of furin 
proteins in extracts of cells infected with a vaccinia recombinant expressing 
human furin show that the enzyme is present as two prominent forms of 90 and 96 
kDa. Because the structurally related bacterial subtilisins require 
endoproteolytic removal of the NH2-terminal pro-region by an autocatalytic 
intramolecular cleavage, we speculated that the size heterogeneity in the furin 
doublet similarly may result from a proteolytic removal of an NH2-terminal 
pro-region. Here we report identification of the 90-kDa furin NH2 terminus and, 
based on the reported sequence of the furin cDNA, demonstrate that this furin 
protein is derived from a larger precursor by an endoproteolytic cleavage on the 
COOH-terminal side of a consensus furin cleavage site, -Arg-Thr-Lys-Arg107-. 
Expression of mutant furin molecules containing an altered cleavage site 
(Arg104----Ala or Arg107----Gly) resulted in the production of only the 96-kDa 
furin protein. Assays of furin-dependent cleavage of a protein substrate in 
vitro showed that proteolytic activity was associated with the 90-kDa and not 
the 96-kDa furin protein, demonstrating that removal of the NH2-terminal 
pro-region is required for furin activity. Expression of a third furin construct 
containing a mutation of the active site aspartate (Asp153----Asn) similarly 
resulted in the expression of only the 96-kDa protein, suggesting that furin 
activation occurs by an autoproteolytic cleavage. Finally, the production of 
90-kDa furin from either site-directed furin mutant could not be potentiated by 
overexpressing active furin, suggesting that the autoproteolytic activation was 
an intramolecular event.

PMID: 1629222 [Indexed for MEDLINE]