1. Genet Mol Res. 2005 Dec 30;4(4):771-82.

DNA repair gene polymorphisms and susceptibility to familial breast cancer in a 
group of patients from Campinas, Brazil.

Dufloth RM(1), Costa S, Schmitt F, Zeferino LC.

Author information:
(1)Centro de Atenção Integral à Saúde da Mulher (CAISM), Universidade Estadual 
de Campinas, Campinas, SP, Brasil.

Several studies have reported that the genes involved in DNA repair and in the 
maintenance of genome integrity play a crucial role in protecting against 
mutations that lead to cancer. Epidemiologic evidence has shown that the 
inheritance of genetic variants at one or more loci results in a reduced DNA 
repair capacity and in an increased risk of cancer. Polymorphisms have been 
identified in several DNA repair genes, such as XRCC1, XPD, XRCC3, and RAD51, 
but the influence of specific genetic variants on repair phenotype and cancer 
risk has not yet been clarified. This was a case-control study design with three 
case groups: 53 women with breast cancer and family history; 33 women with 
sporadic breast cancer; 175 women with no breast cancer but with family history. 
The control group included 120 women with no breast cancer and no family 
history. The PCR-RFLP method was used to analyze the XRCC1-Arg399Gln, 
XPD-Lys751Gln, XRCC3-Thr241Met, and RAD51-G135C polymorphisms. No statistically 
significant differences were found between the case groups and the control group 
for any of the polymorphisms analyzed, and also between the breast cancer and 
family history group and the sporadic breast cancer group. Sample sizes of women 
with breast cancer, whether familial or sporadic, were insufficient to show any 
small true differences between the groups, but we have to consider that 
currently there is no clear consensus with respect to the association of these 
polymorphisms with breast cancer risk. Considering the data available, it can be 
conjectured that if there is any risk association between these 
single-nucleotide polymorphisms and breast cancer, this risk will probably be 
minimal. The greater the risk associated with cancer, the smaller the sample 
size required to demonstrate this association, and the data of different studies 
are usually, therefore, more concordant.

PMID: 16475125 [Indexed for MEDLINE]