1. Tsitologiia. 2005;47(8):714-22.

[Inhibitory action of polycationic peptides on hormonal regulation of adenylyl 
cyclase of the ciliate Dileptus anser].

[Article in Russian]

Shpakov AO, Derkach KV, Gur'ianov IA, Uspenskaia ZI, Kuznetsova LA, Plesneva SA, 
Vlasov GP, Pertseva MN.

To analyse molecular mechanisms of regulatory action of different hormones on 
the activity of the adenylyl cyclase signaling system (ACS) of the ciliate 
Dileptus anser, we studied the influence on this process of six synthetic 
polycationic peptides and peptides, corresponding to C-terminal regions of 
mammalian G-protein 385-394 alphas- and 346-355 alphai2-subunits. As we reported 
earlier, these peptides block hormonal signal transduction in tissues of the 
higher eukaryotes. Now it has been found that both polycationic peptides, 
containing hydrophobic C to-radicals, and branched peptides decrease regulatory 
effects of peptide hormones (insulin, relaxin) and biogenic amines (serotonin, 
adrenaline) on adenylyl cyclase (AC) activity and GTP-binding. In regard to the 
following peptides 
Cys-epsilonAhx-Trp-Lys-Lys(C10)-Lys2-Lys(C10)-Lys3-Lys(C10)-Tyr-Lys-Lys(C10)-Lys-Lys-amide 
and [(Gly-Arg-Gly-Asp-Ser-Gly-Arg-Lys-Lys-Arg-Arg-Gln-Arg-Arg-Arg-Pro- 
Pro-Gly)2-Lys-EAhx-Cys]2 (epsilonAhx - E-aminocaproyl, C10 - caprinoyl group) 
their dose-dependent inhibitory action is shown. In cell culture of D. anser 
with a lower basal AC activity, both hydrophobic and branched peptides 
stimulated AC and GTP-binding without hormones. The data give evidence that 
these peptides can activate ACS of ciliates in a receptor-independent manner. No 
influence of peptides 385-394 alphas and 346-355 alphai2 on hormonal signal 
transduction in D. anser was observed, due, presumably, to some structural 
differences of G-proteins of the lower and higher eukaryotes. A conclusion was 
made about an important role of polycationic regions for functional coupling of 
hormone-activated receptor and G-proteins in the ciliate D. anser.

PMID: 16706216 [Indexed for MEDLINE]