1. J Immunol. 2006 Jul 1;177(1):519-26. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.177.1.519.

The peptidoglycan-degrading property of lysozyme is not required for 
bactericidal activity in vivo.

Nash JA(1), Ballard TN, Weaver TE, Akinbi HT.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary Biology, Department of Pediatrics, Cincinnati 
Children's Hospital Medical Center and University of Cincinnati College of 
Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

Lysozyme is an abundant, cationic antimicrobial protein that plays an important 
role in pulmonary host defense. Increased concentration of lysozyme in the 
airspaces of transgenic mice enhanced bacterial killing whereas lysozyme 
deficiency resulted in increased bacterial burden and morbidity. Lysozyme 
degrades peptidoglycan in the bacterial cell wall leading to rapid killing of 
Gram-positive organisms; however, this mechanism cannot account for the 
protective effect of lysozyme against Gram-negative bacteria. The current study 
was therefore designed to test the hypothesis that the catalytic activity 
(muramidase activity) of lysozyme is not required for bacterial killing in vivo. 
Substitution of serine for aspartic acid at position 53 (D53S) in mouse lysozyme 
M completely ablated muramidase activity. Muramidase-deficient recombinant 
lysozyme (LysM(D53S)) killed both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria in 
vitro. Targeted expression of LysM(D53S) in the respiratory epithelium of 
wild-type (LysM(+/+)/LysM(D53S)) or lysozyme M(null) mice (LysM(-/-)/LysM(D53S)) 
resulted in significantly elevated lysozyme protein in the airspaces without any 
increase in muramidase activity. Intratracheal challenge of transgenic mice with 
Gram-positive or Gram-negative bacteria resulted in a significant increase in 
bacterial burden in LysM(-/-) mice that was completely reversed by targeted 
expression of LysM(D53S). These results indicate that the muramidase activity of 
lysozyme is not required for bacterial killing in vitro or in vivo.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.177.1.519
PMID: 16785549 [Indexed for MEDLINE]