1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2006 Jul 1;34(Web Server issue):W63-9. doi: 
10.1093/nar/gkl341.

PREDITOR: a web server for predicting protein torsion angle restraints.

Berjanskii MV(1), Neal S, Wishart DS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.

Every year between 500 and 1000 peptide and protein structures are determined by 
NMR and deposited into the Protein Data Bank. However, the process of NMR 
structure determination continues to be a manually intensive and time-consuming 
task. One of the most tedious and error-prone aspects of this process involves 
the determination of torsion angle restraints including phi, psi, omega and chi 
angles. Most methods require many days of additional experiments, painstaking 
measurements or complex calculations. Here we wish to describe a web server, 
called PREDITOR, which greatly accelerates and simplifies this task. PREDITOR 
accepts sequence and/or chemical shift data as input and generates torsion angle 
predictions (with predicted errors) for phi, psi, omega and chi-1 angles. 
PREDITOR combines sequence alignment methods with advanced chemical shift 
analysis techniques to generate its torsion angle predictions. The method is 
fast (<40 s per protein) and accurate, with 88% of phi/psi predictions being 
within 30 degrees of the correct values, 84% of chi-1 predictions being correct 
and 99.97% of omega angles being correct. PREDITOR is 35 times faster and up to 
20% more accurate than any existing method. PREDITOR also provides accurate 
assessments of the torsion angle errors so that the torsion angle constraints 
can be readily fed into standard structure refinement programs, such as CNS, 
XPLOR, AMBER and CYANA. Other unique features to PREDITOR include dihedral angle 
prediction via PDB structure mapping, automated chemical shift re-referencing 
(to improve accuracy), prediction of proline cis/trans states and a simple user 
interface. The PREDITOR website is located at: 
http://wishart.biology.ualberta.ca/preditor.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkl341
PMCID: PMC1538894
PMID: 16845087 [Indexed for MEDLINE]