1. Przegl Lek. 2006;63 Suppl 3:85-6.

[Heterozygotic mutation in NPHS2 gene as a cause of familial steroid resistant 
nephrotic syndrome in two siblings--case report].

[Article in Polish]

Drozdz D(1), Pietrzyk JA, Wierzchowska-Słowiaczek E, Sancewicz-Pach K, Antignac 
C, Miezyński W.

Author information:
(1)Collegium Medicum, Uniwersytetu Jagiellońskiego w Krakowie. 
dadrozdz@cm-uj.krakow.pl

Within recent years the number of children with focal segmental 
glomerulonephritis (FSGS) has increased. A significant progress in defining of 
molecular basis of the disease has been made. Gene mutations for nephrin, 
podocin, WT1, alpha-actinin 4 cause the damage of filtration barrier of 
glomerulus and proteinuria in consequence. A girl (S.G.) became ill at the age 
of 3.5, suffering form steroid-resistant nephritic syndrome (SRNS) with 
microscopic hematuria. The renal biopsy showed FSGS accompanied by a complete 
diffuse effacement of podocyte food processes. Despite intensive and regular 
immunosuppressive therapy, remission was not achieved. In the control renal 
biopsy performed a year after cyclosporin A had been applied, 50% of globally 
sclerosed glomeruli as well as some features of post-cyclosporin damage were 
found. The girl required renal replacement therapy at the age of 10.5. Dialyzed 
at the adult dialysis centre she died at the age of 11.5. A boy S.P. was 
diagnosed with SRNS when he was 11.5 years old. The renal biopsy was performed 
after one month of treatment and showed mesangial proliferation and diffuse 
effacement of podocyte food processes. After chlorambucil treatment remission 
was not achieved, and after methylprednisolon pulse therapy only the reduction 
of proteinuria was achieved. In a control renal biopsy 10 out of 13 glomeruli 
were globally sclerosed. At the age of 17 the patient showed chronic renal 
failure with a fast progression of the disease. In September 2000 the boy 
started renal replacement therapy, an in June 2001 he received a renal 
transplant without the recurrence of FGS. In 2001 a heterozygous mutation 
(A284V) in gene NPHS2 was found in both of the siblings. Within the confines of 
the clinical project ESCAPE Trial another genetic examination was performed. In 
the boy one missense mutation on one allele (A284V) and the R229Q polymorphism 
on the other allele were found. In this family the father is bear. ing the A284V 
mutation and the mother the R229Q variant. These results prove that this disease 
is due to alterations of the podocin gene in the described family.

PMID: 16898497 [Indexed for MEDLINE]