1. PLoS Med. 2006 Sep;3(9):e358. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0030358.

In celiac disease, a subset of autoantibodies against transglutaminase binds 
toll-like receptor 4 and induces activation of monocytes.

Zanoni G(1), Navone R, Lunardi C, Tridente G, Bason C, Sivori S, Beri R, Dolcino 
M, Valletta E, Corrocher R, Puccetti A.

Author information:
(1)Section of Immunology, Department of Pathology, University of Verona, Verona, 
Italy.

BACKGROUND: Celiac disease is a small intestine inflammatory disorder with 
multiple organ involvement, sustained by an inappropriate immune response to 
dietary gluten. Anti-transglutaminase antibodies are a typical serological 
marker in patients with active disease, and may disappear during a gluten-free 
diet treatment. Involvement of infectious agents and innate immunity has been 
suggested but never proven. Molecular mimicry is one of the mechanisms that 
links infection and autoimmunity.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: In our attempt to clarify the pathogenesis of celiac 
disease, we screened a random peptide library with pooled sera of patients 
affected by active disease after a pre-screening with the sera of the same 
patients on a gluten-free diet. We identified a peptide recognized by serum 
immunoglobulins of patients with active disease, but not by those of patients on 
a gluten-free diet. This peptide shares homology with the rotavirus major 
neutralizing protein VP-7 and with the self-antigens tissue transglutaminase, 
human heat shock protein 60, desmoglein 1, and Toll-like receptor 4. We show 
that antibodies against the peptide affinity-purified from the sera of patients 
with active disease recognize the viral product and self-antigens in ELISA and 
Western blot. These antibodies were able to induce increased epithelial cell 
permeability evaluated by transepithelial flux of [(3)H] mannitol in the T84 
human intestinal epithelial cell line. Finally, the purified antibodies induced 
monocyte activation upon binding Toll-like receptor 4, evaluated both by surface 
expression of activation markers and by production of pro-inflammatory 
cytokines.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings show that in active celiac disease, a subset of 
anti-transglutaminase IgA antibodies recognize the viral protein VP-7, 
suggesting a possible involvement of rotavirus infection in the pathogenesis of 
the disease, through a mechanism of molecular mimicry. Moreover, such antibodies 
recognize self-antigens and are functionally active, able to increase intestinal 
permeability and induce monocyte activation. We therefore provide evidence for 
the involvement of innate immunity in the pathogenesis of celiac disease through 
a previously unknown mechanism of engagement of Toll-like receptor 4.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0030358
PMCID: PMC1569884
PMID: 16984219 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.