1. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2007 Feb;6(2):272-82. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M600309-MCP200.
Epub  2006 Nov 1.

Rapid evolution exposes the boundaries of domain structure and function in 
natively unfolded FG nucleoporins.

Denning DP(1), Rexach MF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular, Cell, and Developmental Biology, University of 
California, Santa Cruz, California 95064, USA.

Nucleoporins with phenylalanine-glycine repeats (FG Nups) function at the 
nuclear pore complex (NPC) to facilitate nucleocytoplasmic transport. In 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae, each FG Nup contains a large natively unfolded domain 
that is punctuated by FG repeats. These FG repeats are surrounded by hydrophilic 
amino acids (AAs) common to disordered protein domains. Here we show that the FG 
domain of Nups from human, fly, worm, and other yeast species is also enriched 
in these disorder-associated AAs, indicating that structural disorder is a 
conserved feature of FG Nups and likely serves an important role in NPC 
function. Despite the conservation of AA composition, FG Nup sequences from 
different species show extensive divergence. A comparison of the AA substitution 
rates of proteins with syntenic orthologs in four Saccharomyces species revealed 
that FG Nups have evolved at twice the rate of average yeast proteins with most 
substitutions occurring in sequences between FG repeats. The rapid evolution of 
FG Nups is poorly explained by parameters known to influence AA substitution 
rate, such as protein expression level, interactivity, and essentiality; instead 
their rapid evolution may reflect an intrinsic permissiveness of natively 
unfolded structures to AA substitutions. The overall lack of AA sequence 
conservation in FG Nups is sharply contrasted by discrete stretches of conserved 
sequences. These conserved sequences highlight known karyopherin and nucleoporin 
binding sites as well as other uncharacterized sites that may have important 
structural and functional properties.

DOI: 10.1074/mcp.M600309-MCP200
PMID: 17079785 [Indexed for MEDLINE]