1. J Biol Chem. 1991 Dec 5;266(34):23033-40.

Involvement of the distal histidine in the low affinity exhibited by Hb Chico 
(Lys beta 66----Thr) and its isolated beta chains.

Bonaventura C(1), Cashon R, Bonaventura J, Perutz M, Fermi G, Shih DT.

Author information:
(1)Marine Biomedical Center, Duke University Marine Laboratory, Beaufort, North 
Carolina 28516.

Hemoglobin (Hb) Chico (Lys beta 66----Thr at E10) has a diminished oxygen 
affinity (Shih, D. T.-b., Jones, R. T., Shih, M. F.-C., Jones, M. B., Koler, R. 
D., and Howard, J. (1987) Hemoglobin 11, 453-464). Our studies show that its P50 
is about twice that of Hb A and that its cooperativity, anion, and Bohr effects 
between pH 7 and 8 are normal. The Bohr effect above pH 8 is somewhat reduced, 
indicating a small but previously undocumented involvement of the ionic bond 
formed by Lys beta 66 in the alkaline Bohr effect. Since the oxygen affinity of 
the alpha-hemes is likely to be normal, that of the beta-hemes in the tetramer 
is likely to be reduced by the equivalent of 1.2 kcal/mol beta-heme in binding 
energy. Remarkably, both initial and final stages of oxygen binding to Hb Chico 
are of lowered affinity relative to Hb A under all conditions examined. The 
isolated beta chains also show diminished oxygen affinity. In T-state Hb A, 
Lys(E10 beta) forms a salt bridge with one of the heme propionates, but 
comparison with other hemoglobin variants shows that rupture of this bridge 
cannot be the cause of the low oxygen affinity. X-ray analysis of the deoxy 
structure has now shown that Thr beta 66 either donates a hydrogen bond to or 
accepts one from His beta 63 via a bridging water molecule. This introduces 
additional steric hindrance to ligand binding to the T-state that results in 
slower rates of ligand binding. We measured the O2/CO partition coefficient and 
the kinetics of oxygen dissociation and carbon monoxide binding and found that 
lowered O2 and CO affinity is also exhibited by the R-state tetramers and the 
isolated beta chains of Hb Chico.

PMID: 1744099 [Indexed for MEDLINE]