1. BMC Dev Biol. 2007 May 16;7:48. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-7-48.

Novel subdomains of the mouse olfactory bulb defined by molecular heterogeneity 
in the nascent external plexiform and glomerular layers.

Williams EO(1), Xiao Y, Sickles HM, Shafer P, Yona G, Yang JY, Lin DM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA. 
eow1@cornell.edu <eow1@cornell.edu>

BACKGROUND: In the mouse olfactory system, the role of the olfactory bulb in 
guiding olfactory sensory neuron (OSN) axons to their targets is poorly 
understood. What cell types within the bulb are necessary for targeting is 
unknown. What genes are important for this process is also unknown. Although 
projection neurons are not required, other cell-types within the external 
plexiform and glomerular layers also form synapses with OSNs. We hypothesized 
that these cells are important for targeting, and express spatially 
differentially expressed guidance cues that act to guide OSN axons within the 
bulb.
RESULTS: We used laser microdissection and microarray analysis to find genes 
that are differentially expressed along the dorsal-ventral, medial-lateral, and 
anterior-posterior axes of the bulb. The expression patterns of these genes 
divide the bulb into previously unrecognized subdomains. Interestingly, some 
genes are expressed in both the medial and lateral bulb, showing for the first 
time the existence of symmetric expression along this axis. We use a 
regeneration paradigm to show that several of these genes are altered in 
expression in response to deafferentation, consistent with the interpretation 
that they are expressed in cells that interact with OSNs.
CONCLUSION: We demonstrate that the nascent external plexiform and glomerular 
layers of the bulb can be divided into multiple domains based on the expression 
of these genes, several of which are known to function in axon guidance, 
synaptogenesis, and angiogenesis. These genes represent candidate guidance cues 
that may act to guide OSN axons within the bulb during targeting.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-213X-7-48
PMCID: PMC1885806
PMID: 17506891 [Indexed for MEDLINE]