1. BMC Genomics. 2007 May 21;8:124. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-8-124.

Comparative sequence analysis of leucine-rich repeats (LRRs) within vertebrate 
toll-like receptors.

Matsushima N(1), Tanaka T, Enkhbayar P, Mikami T, Taga M, Yamada K, Kuroki Y.

Author information:
(1)School of Health Sciences, Sapporo Medical University, Hokkaido, Japan. 
matusima@sapmed.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Toll-like receptors (TLRs) play a central role in innate immunity. 
TLRs are membrane glycoproteins and contain leucine rich repeat (LRR) motif in 
the ectodomain. TLRs recognize and respond to molecules such as 
lipopolysaccharide, peptidoglycan, flagellin, and RNA from bacteria or viruses. 
The LRR domains in TLRs have been inferred to be responsible for molecular 
recognition. All LRRs include the highly conserved segment, LxxLxLxxNxL, in 
which "L" is Leu, Ile, Val, or Phe and "N" is Asn, Thr, Ser, or Cys and "x" is 
any amino acid. There are seven classes of LRRs including "typical" ("T") and 
"bacterial" ("S"). All known domain structures adopt an arc or horseshoe shape. 
Vertebrate TLRs form six major families. The repeat numbers of LRRs and their 
"phasing" in TLRs differ with isoforms and species; they are aligned differently 
in various databases. We identified and aligned LRRs in TLRs by a new method 
described here.
RESULTS: The new method utilizes known LRR structures to recognize and align new 
LRR motifs in TLRs and incorporates multiple sequence alignments and secondary 
structure predictions. TLRs from thirty-four vertebrate were analyzed. The 
repeat numbers of the LRRs ranges from 16 to 28. The LRRs found in TLRs 
frequently consists of LxxLxLxxNxLxxLxxxxF/LxxLxx ("T") and sometimes short 
motifs including LxxLxLxxNxLxxLPx(x)LPxx ("S"). The TLR7 family (TLR7, TLR8, and 
TLR9) contain 27 LRRs. The LRRs at the N-terminal part have a super-motif of STT 
with about 80 residues. The super-repeat is represented by STTSTTSTT or 
_TTSTTSTT. The LRRs in TLRs form one or two horseshoe domains and are mostly 
flanked by two cysteine clusters including two or four cysteine residue.
CONCLUSION: Each of the six major TLR families is characterized by their 
constituent LRR motifs, their repeat numbers, and their patterns of cysteine 
clusters. The central parts of the TLR1 and TLR7 families and of TLR4 have more 
irregular or longer LRR motifs. These central parts are inferred to play a key 
role in the structure and/or function of their TLRs. Furthermore, the 
super-repeat in the TLR7 family suggests strongly that "bacterial" and "typical" 
LRRs evolved from a common precursor.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-8-124
PMCID: PMC1899181
PMID: 17517123 [Indexed for MEDLINE]