1. J Endocrinol. 2007 Jun;193(3):445-57. doi: 10.1677/JOE-07-0027.

Functional characterization of human 
1-acylglycerol-3-phosphate-O-acyltransferase isoform 9: cloning, tissue 
distribution, gene structure, and enzymatic activity.

Agarwal AK(1), Sukumaran S, Bartz R, Barnes RI, Garg A.

Author information:
(1)Division of Nutrition and Metabolic Diseases, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Center for Human Nutrition, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, 5323 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, Texas 75390 USA. 
anil.agarwal@utsouthwestern.edu

Most cells synthesize their glycerophospholipids and triglycerides (TG) to 
maintain the cellular integrity and to provide energy for cellular functions. 
The phospholipids are synthesized de novo in cells through an evolutionary 
conserved process involving serial acylations of glycerol-3-phosphate. Several 
isoforms of the enzyme 1-acylglycerol-3-phosphate-O-acyltransferase (AGPAT) 
acylate lysophosphatidic acid at the sn-2 position to produce phosphatidic acid. 
We cloned a cDNA predicted to be an AGPAT isoform and designated it AGPAT9. The 
human AGPAT9 gene spans across 14 exons and encodes for a polypeptide of 534 
amino acids. AGPAT9 is highly expressed in the lung and spleen, followed by 
leukocyte, omental adipose tissue, and placenta. In the Chinese Hamster Ovary 
(CHO), cell lysates overexpressing AGPAT9, we observed AGPAT activity but not 
the lysophosphatidylcholine acyltransferase activity. When AGPAT9 is coexpressed 
with AGPAT1 in CHO cells, both the isoforms localize to the endoplasmic 
reticulum (ER) and occupy the same ER domain as AGPAT1. Despite substitution of 
asparagine with proline in the NHX(4)D motif and arginine with cysteine in the 
EGTR motif, AGPAT9 retains AGPAT activity suggesting that residues asparagine 
and arginine in the NHX(4)D and EGTR motifs respectively are not essential for 
the enzymatic activity. Based on the X-ray crystallographic structure of a 
related acyltransferase, squash gpat, a model is proposed in which a hydrophobic 
pocket in AGPAT9 accommodates fatty acyl chains of both substrates in an 
orientation, whereas the HX(4)D motif participates in catalysis. Based on the 
activity and expression pattern of AGPAT9 in the lung and spleen, this novel 
isoform could be implicated in the biosynthesis of phospholipids and TG in these 
tissues.

DOI: 10.1677/JOE-07-0027
PMID: 17535882 [Indexed for MEDLINE]