1. Mol Psychiatry. 2007 Aug;12(8):707-47. doi: 10.1038/sj.mp.4002009. Epub 2007
Jun  5.

Pharmacogenetics and pharmacogenomics of schizophrenia: a review of last decade 
of research.

Arranz MJ(1), de Leon J.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Neuropharmocology, Division of Psychological Medicine, Institute of 
Psychiatry - King's College, London, UK. m.arrranz@iop.kcl.ac.uk

The last decade of research into the pharmacogenetics of antipsychotics has seen 
the development of genetic tests to determine the patients' metabolic status and 
the first attempts at personalization of antipsychotic treatment. The most 
significant results are the association between drug metabolic polymorphisms, 
mainly in cytochrome P450 genes, with variations in drug metabolic rates and 
side effects. Patients with genetically determined CYP2D6 poor metabolizer (PMs) 
status may require lower doses of antipsychotic. Alternatively, CYP2D6 
ultrarapid matabolizers (UMs) will need increased drug dosage to obtain 
therapeutic response. Additionally, polymorphisms in dopamine and serotonin 
receptor genes are repeatedly found associated with response phenotypes, 
probably reflecting the strong affinities that most antipsychotics display for 
these receptors. In particular, there is important evidence suggesting 
association between dopamine 2 receptor (D2) polymorphisms (Taq I and -141-C 
Ins/Del) and a dopamine 3 receptor (D3) polymorphism (Ser9Gly) with 
antipsychotic response and drug-induced tardive dyskinesia. Additionally, there 
is accumulating evidence indicating the influence of a 5-HT2C polymorphism 
(-759-T/C) in antipsychotic-induced weight gain. Application of this knowledge 
to clinical practice is slowly gathering pace, with pretreatment determination 
of individual's drug metabolic rates, via CYP genotyping, leading the field. 
Genetic determination of patients' metabolic status is expected to bring 
clinical benefits by helping to adjust therapeutic doses and reduce adverse 
reactions. Genetic tests for the pretreatment prediction of antipsychotic 
response, although still in its infancy, have obvious implications for the 
selection and improvement of antipsychotic treatment. These developments can be 
considered as successes, but the objectives of bringing pharmacogenetic and 
pharmacogenomic research in psychiatric clinical practice are far from being 
realized. Further development of genetic tests is required before the concept of 
tailored treatment can be applied to psychopharmatherapy. This review aims to 
summarize the key findings from the last decade of research in the field. 
Current knowledge on genetic prediction of drug metabolic status, general 
response and drug-induced side effects will be reviewed and future 
pharmacogenomic and epigenetic research will be discussed.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.mp.4002009
PMID: 17549063 [Indexed for MEDLINE]