1. BMC Evol Biol. 2007 Jun 28;7:99. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-7-99.

A genetically explicit model of speciation by sensory drive within a continuous 
population in aquatic environments.

Kawata M(1), Shoji A, Kawamura S, Seehausen O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Graduate School of Sciences, 
Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan. kawata@mail.tains.tohoku.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: The sensory drive hypothesis predicts that divergent sensory 
adaptation in different habitats may lead to premating isolation upon secondary 
contact of populations. Speciation by sensory drive has traditionally been 
treated as a special case of speciation as a byproduct of adaptation to 
divergent environments in geographically isolated populations. However, if 
habitats are heterogeneous, local adaptation in the sensory systems may cause 
the emergence of reproductively isolated species from a single unstructured 
population. In polychromatic fishes, visual sensitivity might become adapted to 
local ambient light regimes and the sensitivity might influence female 
preferences for male nuptial color. In this paper, we investigate the 
possibility of speciation by sensory drive as a byproduct of divergent visual 
adaptation within a single initially unstructured population. We use models 
based on explicit genetic mechanisms for color vision and nuptial coloration.
RESULTS: We show that in simulations in which the adaptive evolution of visual 
pigments and color perception are explicitly modeled, sensory drive can promote 
speciation along a short selection gradient within a continuous habitat and 
population. We assumed that color perception evolves to adapt to the modal light 
environment that individuals experience and that females prefer to mate with 
males whose nuptial color they are most sensitive to. In our simulations color 
perception depends on the absorption spectra of an individual's visual pigments. 
Speciation occurred most frequently when the steepness of the environmental 
light gradient was intermediate and dispersal distance of offspring was 
relatively small. In addition, our results predict that mutations that cause 
large shifts in the wavelength of peak absorption promote speciation, whereas we 
did not observe speciation when peak absorption evolved by stepwise mutations 
with small effect.
CONCLUSION: The results suggest that speciation can occur where environmental 
gradients create divergent selection on sensory modalities that are used in mate 
choice. Evidence for such gradients exists from several animal groups, and from 
freshwater and marine fishes in particular. The probability of speciation in a 
continuous population under such conditions may then critically depend on the 
genetic architecture of perceptual adaptation and female mate choice.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2148-7-99
PMCID: PMC1941727
PMID: 17598893 [Indexed for MEDLINE]