1. BMC Genomics. 2007 Oct 9;8:361. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-8-361.

Fasting induces a biphasic adaptive metabolic response in murine small 
intestine.

Sokolović M(1), Wehkamp D, Sokolović A, Vermeulen J, Gilhuijs-Pederson LA, van 
Haaften RI, Nikolsky Y, Evelo CT, van Kampen AH, Hakvoort TB, Lamers WH.

Author information:
(1)AMC Liver Centre, Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 
m.sokolovic@amc.uva.nl

BACKGROUND: The gut is a major energy consumer, but a comprehensive overview of 
the adaptive response to fasting is lacking. Gene-expression profiling, pathway 
analysis, and immunohistochemistry were therefore carried out on mouse small 
intestine after 0, 12, 24, and 72 hours of fasting.
RESULTS: Intestinal weight declined to 50% of control, but this loss of tissue 
mass was distributed proportionally among the gut's structural components, so 
that the microarrays' tissue base remained unaffected. Unsupervised hierarchical 
clustering of the microarrays revealed that the successive time points separated 
into distinct branches. Pathway analysis depicted a pronounced, but transient 
early response that peaked at 12 hours, and a late response that became 
progressively more pronounced with continued fasting. Early changes in gene 
expression were compatible with a cellular deficiency in glutamine, and 
metabolic adaptations directed at glutamine conservation, inhibition of pyruvate 
oxidation, stimulation of glutamate catabolism via aspartate and 
phosphoenolpyruvate to lactate, and enhanced fatty-acid oxidation and 
ketone-body synthesis. In addition, the expression of key genes involved in cell 
cycling and apoptosis was suppressed. At 24 hours of fasting, many of the early 
adaptive changes abated. Major changes upon continued fasting implied the 
production of glucose rather than lactate from carbohydrate backbones, a 
downregulation of fatty-acid oxidation and a very strong downregulation of the 
electron-transport chain. Cell cycling and apoptosis remained suppressed.
CONCLUSION: The changes in gene expression indicate that the small intestine 
rapidly looses mass during fasting to generate lactate or glucose and ketone 
bodies. Meanwhile, intestinal architecture is maintained by downregulation of 
cell turnover.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-8-361
PMCID: PMC2148066
PMID: 17925015 [Indexed for MEDLINE]