1. BMC Bioinformatics. 2007 Nov 9;8:438. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-8-438.

Glycosylation site prediction using ensembles of Support Vector Machine 
classifiers.

Caragea C(1), Sinapov J, Silvescu A, Dobbs D, Honavar V.

Author information:
(1)Artificial Intelligence Research Laboratory, Computer Science Department, 
Iowa State University, USA. cornelia@cs.iastate.edu

BACKGROUND: Glycosylation is one of the most complex post-translational 
modifications (PTMs) of proteins in eukaryotic cells. Glycosylation plays an 
important role in biological processes ranging from protein folding and 
subcellular localization, to ligand recognition and cell-cell interactions. 
Experimental identification of glycosylation sites is expensive and laborious. 
Hence, there is significant interest in the development of computational methods 
for reliable prediction of glycosylation sites from amino acid sequences.
RESULTS: We explore machine learning methods for training classifiers to predict 
the amino acid residues that are likely to be glycosylated using information 
derived from the target amino acid residue and its sequence neighbors. We 
compare the performance of Support Vector Machine classifiers and ensembles of 
Support Vector Machine classifiers trained on a dataset of experimentally 
determined N-linked, O-linked, and C-linked glycosylation sites extracted from 
O-GlycBase version 6.00, a database of 242 proteins from several different 
species. The results of our experiments show that the ensembles of Support 
Vector Machine classifiers outperform single Support Vector Machine classifiers 
on the problem of predicting glycosylation sites in terms of a range of standard 
measures for comparing the performance of classifiers. The resulting methods 
have been implemented in EnsembleGly, a web server for glycosylation site 
prediction.
CONCLUSION: Ensembles of Support Vector Machine classifiers offer an accurate 
and reliable approach to automated identification of putative glycosylation 
sites in glycoprotein sequences.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-8-438
PMCID: PMC2220009
PMID: 17996106 [Indexed for MEDLINE]