1. Brain Res Rev. 2008 Aug;58(2):459-74. doi: 10.1016/j.brainresrev.2007.10.003. 
Epub 2007 Oct 22.

Structural plasticity in G-protein coupled receptors as demonstrated by the 
allosteric actions of homocysteine and computer-assisted analysis of disordered 
domains.

Agnati LF(1), Leo G, Genedani S, Andreoli N, Marcellino D, Woods A, Piron L, 
Guidolin D, Fuxe K.

Author information:
(1)Section of Physiology, Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of 
Modena, 41100 Modena, Italy. luigiagnati@tin.it

Structural plasticity of G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) is of basic 
importance for their interactions with ligands, in particular with other 
proteins such as receptors or receptor-modifying proteins that can lead to 
different functions for the same GPCR. In the present paper, structural 
plasticity of GPCRs has been investigated discussing allosteric modulatory 
actions of Homocysteine (Hcy) on D2 receptors together with data obtained by 
computer-assisted analysis of the presence of disordered domains in GPCRs. 
Previous evidence for a modulatory action of Hcy on D2 receptors has been 
further extended by means of experiments on the effects of Hcy local 
intrastriatal injection on rotational behaviour. Altogether the present data 
allow considering under a new angle the well known proposal of A2A antagonists 
as new therapeutic agents in Parkinson's disease (PD). Furthermore, they point 
out to not only the importance of drugs capable of reducing Hcy brain levels, 
but also to the potential therapeutic impact of drugs capable of regionally 
blocking (for PD) or enhancing (for some schizophrenic syndromes) Hcy allosteric 
action on D2 receptors. As far as the investigations on GPCR plastic domains, 
extracellular, intracellular and transmembrane domains of 14 GPCRs have been 
considered and propensity of each of these domains for a structured or 
unstructured conformation has been evaluated by means of ad hoc computer 
programs. It has been shown that the N- and C-terminals as well as intracellular 
loop 3 have a high propensity towards an unstructured conformation, hence they 
are potentially very plastic domains, which can undergo easily to interactions 
with other ligands, particularly with other protein domains. This aspect is 
obviously of the greatest importance not only for the function of single GPCRs, 
but also for their interactions either with other receptors (receptor-receptor 
interactions) or, more generally, for formation of clusters of membrane 
associated proteins, hence of "protein mosaics", where the GPCRs could represent 
the input unit of the supra-molecular device.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainresrev.2007.10.003
PMID: 18022243 [Indexed for MEDLINE]