1. PLoS Med. 2007 Dec;4(12):e337. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0040337.

Plasmodium vivax invasion of human erythrocytes inhibited by antibodies directed 
against the Duffy binding protein.

Grimberg BT(1), Udomsangpetch R, Xainli J, McHenry A, Panichakul T, Sattabongkot 
J, Cui L, Bockarie M, Chitnis C, Adams J, Zimmerman PA, King CL.

Author information:
(1)The Center for Global Health and Diseases, Case Western Reserve University, 
Cleveland, Ohio, United States of America.

Comment in
    PLoS Med. 2007 Dec;4(12):e350. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0040350.

BACKGROUND: Plasmodium vivax invasion requires interaction between the human 
Duffy antigen on the surface of erythrocytes and the P. vivax Duffy binding 
protein (PvDBP) expressed by the parasite. Given that Duffy-negative individuals 
are resistant and that Duffy-negative heterozygotes show reduced susceptibility 
to blood-stage infection, we hypothesized that antibodies directed against 
region two of P. vivax Duffy binding protein (PvDBPII) would inhibit P. vivax 
invasion of human erythrocytes.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: Using a recombinant region two of the P. vivax Duffy 
binding protein (rPvDBPII), polyclonal antibodies were generated from immunized 
rabbits and affinity purified from the pooled sera of 14 P. vivax-exposed Papua 
New Guineans. It was determined by ELISA and by flow cytometry, respectively, 
that both rabbit and human antibodies inhibited binding of rPvDBPII to the Duffy 
antigen N-terminal region and to Duffy-positive human erythrocytes. 
Additionally, using immunofluorescent microscopy, the antibodies were shown to 
attach to native PvDBP on the apical end of the P. vivax merozoite. In vitro 
invasion assays, using blood isolates from individuals in the Mae Sot district 
of Thailand, showed that addition of rabbit anti-PvDBPII Ab or serum (antibodies 
against, or serum containing antibodies against, region two of the Plasmodium 
vivax Duffy binding protein) (1:100) reduced the number of parasite invasions by 
up to 64%, while pooled PvDBPII antisera from P. vivax-exposed people reduced P. 
vivax invasion by up to 54%.
CONCLUSIONS: These results show, for what we believe to be the first time, that 
both rabbit and human antibodies directed against PvDBPII reduce invasion 
efficiency of wild P. vivax isolated from infected patients, and suggest that a 
PvDBP-based vaccine may reduce human blood-stage P. vivax infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0040337
PMCID: PMC2140086
PMID: 18092885 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.