1. Przegl Lek. 2007;64(6):398-400.

[Glycemic index of meals and postprandial glycemia in patients with permanent 
neonatal diabetes due to Kir6.2 gene mutations].

[Article in Polish]

Klupa T(1), Małecki M, Skupień J, Szalecki M, Jałowiec I, Surdej B, Myśliwiec M, 
Sieradzki J.

Author information:
(1)Katedra i Klinika Chorób Metabolicznych, Collegium Medicum, Uniwersytet 
Jagielloński, Kraków. tomasz_klupa@yahoo.com

Activating mutations in the KCNJ11 gene encoding the ATP-sensitive 
potassium-channel subunit of Kir6.2 result in the phenotype of permanent 
neonatal diabetes (PNDM). Patients with PNDM can be successfully transferred 
from insulin to sulphonylurea. It is not clear, however, whether the type of 
diet may play a role in the metabolic control in PNDM patients. This report 
describes two cases of patients with PNDM due to the R201H mutation coming from 
the Polish Nationwide Registry of PNDM treated with the same sulphonylurea 
(glipizide GITS). In one of them, diet was practically free (Pol1), the other 
one (Pol2) avoided high glycemic-index products. Both mutation carriers were 
submitted to a 72 h continuous glucose monitoring system (CGMS) (Medtronic, CA). 
Before the CGMS record, families were encouraged not to alter their usual 
pattern of food intake during recording periods and to use food diaries. The 
postprandial glycemia in Poll reached the maximal level of 9.5 mmo/l, 5 episodes 
of glycemia above 8.0 mmol/l lasting overall for about 6 hours followed the 
ingestion of high-glycemic-index (>70) meals. Patient Pol2 did not use 
high-glycaemic-index-products and his postprandial blood glucose did not exceed 
7.0 mmol/l. Following the CGMS record, an additional diet-oriented educational 
session with patient Poll and his parents was performed, Poll declared to avoid 
the intake of high-glycemic-index products. He remained on the same dose of 
Glipizide GITS. Results of home blood glucose monitoring performed 2 months 
later showed normoglycemia. We conclude that to achieve normoglycemia, patients 
with PNDM who are on sulphonylurea should refrain from eating high 
glycemic-index products.

PMID: 18159846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]