1. BMC Bioinformatics. 2008 Jan 31;9:76. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-9-76.

Response projected clustering for direct association with physiological and 
clinical response data.

Yi SG(1), Park T, Lee JK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Statistics, Seoul National University, Silim-dong, Kwanak-gu, 
Seoul, 151-747, Korea. skon@bibs.snu.ac.kr

BACKGROUND: Microarray gene expression data are often analyzed together with 
corresponding physiological response and clinical metadata of biological 
subjects, e.g. patients' residual tumor sizes after chemotherapy or glucose 
levels at various stages of diabetic patients. Current clustering analysis 
cannot directly incorporate such quantitative metadata into the clustering 
heatmap of gene expression. It will be quite useful if these clinical response 
data can be effectively summarized in the high-dimensional clustering display so 
that important groups of genes can be intuitively discovered with different 
degrees of relevance to target disease phenotypes.
RESULTS: We introduced a novel clustering analysis approach, response projected 
clustering (RPC), which uses a high-dimensional geometrical projection of 
response data to the gene expression space. The projected response vector, which 
becomes the origin in the projected space, is then clustered together with the 
projected gene vectors based on their different degrees of association with the 
response vector. A bootstrap-counting based RPC analysis is also performed to 
evaluate statistical tightness of identified gene clusters. Our RPC analysis was 
applied to the in vitro growth-inhibition and microarray profiling data on the 
NCI-60 cancer cell lines and the microarray gene expression study of macrophage 
differentiation in atherogenesis. These RPC applications enabled us to identify 
many known and novel gene factors and their potential pathway associations which 
are highly relevant to the drug's chemosensitivity activities and atherogenesis.
CONCLUSION: We have shown that RPC can effectively discover gene networks with 
different degrees of association with clinical metadata. Performed on each 
gene's response projected vector based on its degree of association with the 
response data, RPC effectively summarizes individual genes' association with 
metadata as well as their own expression patterns. Thus, RPC greatly enhances 
the utility of clustering analysis on investigating high-dimensional microarray 
gene expression data with quantitative metadata.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-9-76
PMCID: PMC2275250
PMID: 18237428 [Indexed for MEDLINE]