1. Clin Sci (Lond). 2008 Dec;115(11):327-34. doi: 10.1042/CS20080014.

Increased plasma urotensin-II levels are associated with diabetic retinopathy 
and carotid atherosclerosis in Type 2 diabetes.

Suguro T(1), Watanabe T, Kodate S, Xu G, Hirano T, Adachi M, Miyazaki A.

Author information:
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Showa University School of Medicine, 
Tokyo 142-8666, Japan.

Human U-II (urotensin-II), the most potent vasoconstrictor peptide identified to 
date, is associated with cardiovascular disease. A single nucleotide 
polymorphism (S89N) in the gene encoding U-II (UTS2) is associated with the 
onset of Type 2 diabetes and insulin resistance in the Japanese population. In 
the present study, we have demonstrated a relationship between plasma U-II 
levels and the progression of diabetic retinopathy and vascular complications in 
patients with Type 2 diabetes. Eye fundus, IMT (intima-media thickness) and 
plaque score in the carotid artery, BP (blood pressure), FPG (fasting plasma 
glucose), HbA(1c) (glycated haemoglobin), U-II, angiogenesis-stimulating 
factors, such as VEGF (vascular endothelial growth factor) and 
heregulin-beta(1), and lipid profiles were determined in 64 patients with Type 2 
diabetes and 24 non-diabetic controls. FPG, HbA(1c) and VEGF levels were 
significantly higher in patients with Type 2 diabetes than in non-diabetic 
controls. Diabetes duration, insufficient glycaemic and BP control, plasma U-II 
levels, IMT, plaque score and nephropathy grade increased significantly across 
the subjects as follows: non-diabetic controls, patients with Type 2 diabetes 
without retinopathy (group N), patients with Type 2 diabetes with simple 
(background) retinopathy (group A) and patients with Type 2 diabetes with 
pre-proliferative and proliferative retinopathy (group B). The prevalence of 
obesity and smoking, age, low-density lipoprotein, triacylglycerols 
(triglycerides) and heregulin-beta(1) were not significantly different among the 
four groups. In all subjects, U-II levels were significantly positively 
correlated with IMT, FPG, and systolic and diastolic BP. Multiple logistic 
regression analysis revealed that, of the above parameters, U-II levels alone 
had a significantly independent association with diabetic retinopathy. In 
conclusion, the results of the present study provide the first evidence that 
increased plasma U-II levels may be associated with the progression of diabetic 
retinopathy and carotid atherosclerosis in patients with Type 2 diabetes.

DOI: 10.1042/CS20080014
PMID: 18338983 [Indexed for MEDLINE]