1. BMC Infect Dis. 2008 Apr 18;8:51. doi: 10.1186/1471-2334-8-51.

PCR-DGGE assessment of the bacterial diversity of breast milk in women with 
lactational infectious mastitis.

Delgado S(1), Arroyo R, Martín R, Rodríguez JM.

Author information:
(1)Dpt. Nutrición, Bromatología y Tecnología de los Alimentos, Universidad 
Complutense de Madrid, 28040 Madrid, Spain. sdelgado@vet.ucm.es

BACKGROUND: Infectious mastitis is a common condition during lactation and in 
fact, represents one of the main causes leading to a precocious weaning. The 
number of studies dealing with lactational mastitis is low and, up to now, the 
etiological diagnosis is frequently made on the basis of unspecific clinical 
signs. The aim of this study was to investigate the microbial diversity of 
breast milk in 20 women with lactational mastitis employing culture-dependent 
and culture-independent (PCR-DGGE) approaches.
METHODS: Breast milk samples were cultured in different media to investigate the 
presence of bacteria and/or yeasts, and a total of 149 representative isolates 
were identified to the species level by 16S rRNA gene PCR sequencing. The 
microorganisms recovered were compared with those found by PCR-DGGE analysis. To 
identify the DGGE profiles two reference markers of different microbial species 
were constructed. Sequence analysis of unknown bands was also performed.
RESULTS: Staphylococci were the dominant bacterial group and Staphylococcus 
epidermidis was the dominant species. In a lower number of samples, other 
bacteria (mainly streptococci and a few gram-negative species) were also 
identified. Globally, PCR-DGGE results showed a good correlation with those 
obtained by culture-based methods. However, although DNA bands corresponding to 
different lactic acid bacteria were detected, such bacteria could not be 
isolated from the milk samples.
CONCLUSION: Staphylococci seem to be the main etiological agents of human 
lactational mastitis. The combined use of culture and molecular techniques 
allowed a better characterization of the bacterial diversity in milk from women 
suffering from infectious mastitis. Our results suggest that this condition 
could be the result of a disbiotic process where some of the bacterial species 
usually present in human milk outgrow (staphylococci) while others disappear 
(lactobacilli or lactococci).

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2334-8-51
PMCID: PMC2383900
PMID: 18423017 [Indexed for MEDLINE]