1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2008 May;49(5):2082-93. doi: 10.1167/iovs.05-1629.

Phenotypic variation in enhanced S-cone syndrome.

Audo I(1), Michaelides M, Robson AG, Hawlina M, Vaclavik V, Sandbach JM, Neveu 
MM, Hogg CR, Hunt DM, Moore AT, Bird AC, Webster AR, Holder GE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Electrophysiology, Moorfields Eye Hospital, 162 City Road, 
London, United Kingdom.

PURPOSE: To characterize the clinical, psychophysical, and electrophysiological 
phenotype of 19 patients with enhanced S-cone syndrome (ESCS) and relate the 
phenotype to the underlying genetic mutation.
METHODS: Patients underwent ophthalmic examination and functional testing 
including pattern ERG, full-field ERG, and long-duration and short-wavelength 
stimulation. Further tests were performed in some patients, including color 
contrast sensitivity (CCS), multifocal ERG, fundus autofluorescence imaging 
(FAI), optical coherence tomography (OCT), and fundus fluorescein angiography 
(FFA). Mutational screening of NR2E3 was undertaken in 13 patients.
RESULTS: The fundus appearance was variable, from normal to typical nummular 
pigment clumping at the level of the retinal pigment epithelium in older 
patients. Nine patients had foveal schisis, and one had peripheral schisis. 
Pattern ERG was abnormal in all patients. In all patients, ISCEV Standard 
photopic and scotopic responses had a similar waveform, the rod-specific-ERG was 
undetectable and the 30-Hz flicker ERG was markedly delayed with an amplitude 
lower than the photopic a-wave. Most ERG responses arose from 
short-wavelength-sensitive mechanisms, and a majority of patients showed 
possible OFF-related activity. Multifocal ERG showed relative preservation of 
central function, but reduced responses with increased eccentricity. Mutations 
were identified in NR2E3 in 12 of 13 patients including four novel variants.
CONCLUSIONS: The phenotype in ESCS is variable, both in fundus appearance and in 
the severity of the electrophysiological abnormalities. The ERGs are dominated 
by short-wavelength-sensitive mechanisms. The presence, in most of the patients, 
of possible OFF-related ERG activity is a finding not usually associated with 
S-cones.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.05-1629
PMID: 18436841 [Indexed for MEDLINE]