1. Biochem Pharmacol. 2008 Sep 15;76(6):697-706. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2008.05.019. 
Epub 2008 Jul 1.

Uracil in DNA: consequences for carcinogenesis and chemotherapy.

Berger SH(1), Pittman DL, Wyatt MD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical and Biomedical Sciences, South Carolina College 
of Pharmacy, University of South Carolina, 715 Sumter Street, Columbia, SC 
29208, USA. berger@sccp.sc.edu

The synthesis of thymidylate (TMP) occupies a convergence of two critical 
metabolic pathways: folate metabolism and pyrimidine biosynthesis. Thymidylate 
is formed from deoxyuridylate (dUMP) using N(5),N(10)-methylene 
tetrahydrofolate. The metabolic relationship between dUMP, TMP, and folate has 
been the subject of cancer research from prevention to chemotherapy. Thymidylate 
stress is induced by nutritional deficiency of folic acid, defects in folate 
metabolism, and by antifolate and fluoropyrimidine chemotherapeutics. Both 
classes of chemotherapeutics remain mainstay treatments against solid tumors. 
Because of the close relationship between dUMP and TMP, thymidylate stress is 
associated with increased incorporation of uracil into DNA. Genomic uracil is 
removed by uracil DNA glycosylases of base excision repair (BER). Unfortunately, 
BER is apparently problematic during thymidylate stress. Because BER requires a 
DNA resynthesis step, elevated dUTP causes reintroduction of genomic uracil. BER 
strand break intermediates are clastogenic if not repaired. Thus, BER during 
thymidylate stress appears to cause genome instability, yet might also 
contribute to the mechanism of action for antifolates and fluoropyrimidines. 
However, the precise roles of BER and its components during thymidylate stress 
remain unclear. In particular, links between BER and downstream events remain 
poorly defined, including damage signaling pathways and homologous recombination 
(HR). Evidence is growing that HR responds to persistent BER strand break 
intermediates and DNA damage signaling pathways mediate cross talk between BER 
and HR. Examination of crosstalk among BER, HR, and damage signaling may shed 
light on decades of investigation and provide insight for development of novel 
chemopreventive and chemotherapeutic approaches.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bcp.2008.05.019
PMCID: PMC2562027
PMID: 18599024 [Indexed for MEDLINE]