1. Behav Brain Funct. 2008 Jul 10;4:28. doi: 10.1186/1744-9081-4-28.

Altered behavior and digestive outcomes in adult male rats primed with minimal 
colon pain as neonates.

Wang J(1), Gu C, Al-Chaer ED.

Author information:
(1)Center for Pain Research, Departments of Pediatrics, Internal Medicine, 
Neurobiology and Developmental Sciences, University of Arkansas for Medical 
Sciences, Little Rock, AR, USA. ealchaer@uams.edu.

BACKGROUND: Neonatal colon irritation (CI; pain or inflammation) given for 2 
weeks prior to postnatal day 22 (PND22), causes long-lasting functional 
disorders in rats that can be seen 6 months after the initial insult. This study 
looked at the effect of varying the frequency and duration of neonatal CI on the 
rate of growth, digestive outcomes, exploratory activity, and colon and skin 
sensitivity in adult rats.
METHODS: Male Sprague-Dawley rats were given CI using repeated colorectal 
distension (CRD) at different time intervals and for varying durations starting 
at PND 8, 10 or 14. Control rats were handled by the investigator without any 
intracolonic insertion. Further experiments were done on adult rats. Digestive 
outcomes (food and water consumption, fecal and urinary outputs) were measured 
using metabolic cages. Exploratory behavior was measured using digital video 
tracking in an open field. Cutaneous sensitivity was assessed by measuring the 
responses to mechanical and heat stimuli applied to the shaved abdomen or hind 
paws. Visceral sensitivity was measured by recording electromyographic 
responses, under light isoflurane anesthesia, from the external oblique muscles 
in response to CRD.
RESULTS: No significant weight differences were observed between CI and control 
rats. Exploratory behavior was reduced in rats with neonatal CI compared to 
control. Digestive outputs and somatic and visceral sensitivity changed between 
different treatment groups with earlier and more frequent insults yielding a 
higher deviation from normal.
CONCLUSION: The diversity of behavioral and digestive symptoms in these rats 
parallels the diversity of symptoms in patients with functional gastrointestinal 
disorders and is consistent with global plastic changes affecting more than one 
system in the organism.

DOI: 10.1186/1744-9081-4-28
PMCID: PMC2518152
PMID: 18616817