1. BMC Med Genomics. 2008 Aug 1;1:33. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-1-33.

An approach to analyse the specific impact of rapamycin on mRNA-ribosome 
association.

Genolet R(1), Araud T, Maillard L, Jaquier-Gubler P, Curran J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Medicine, University of Geneva 
Medical School (CMU), 1 rue Michel Servet, CH-1211 Geneva, Switzerland. 
Raphael.Genolet@medecine.unige.ch

BACKGROUND: Recent work, using both cell culture model systems and tumour 
derived cell lines, suggests that the differential recruitment into polysomes of 
mRNA populations may be sufficient to initiate and maintain tumour formation. 
Consequently, a major effort is underway to use high density microarray profiles 
to establish molecular fingerprints for cells exposed to defined drug regimes. 
The aim of these pharmacogenomic approaches is to provide new information on how 
drugs can impact on the translational read-out within a defined cellular 
background.
METHODS: We describe an approach that permits the analysis of de-novo 
mRNA-ribosome association in-vivo during short drug exposures. It combines 
hypertonic shock, polysome fractionation and high-throughput analysis to provide 
a molecular phenotype of translationally responsive transcripts. Compared to 
previous translational profiling studies, the procedure offers increased 
specificity due to the elimination of the drugs secondary effects (e.g. on the 
transcriptional read-out). For this pilot "proof-of-principle" assay we selected 
the drug rapamycin because of its extensively studied impact on translation 
initiation.
RESULTS: High throughput analysis on both the light and heavy polysomal 
fractions has identified mRNAs whose re-recruitment onto free ribosomes 
responded to short exposure to the drug rapamycin. The results of the microarray 
have been confirmed using real-time RT-PCR. The selective down-regulation of TOP 
transcripts is also consistent with previous translational profiling studies 
using this drug.
CONCLUSION: The technical advance outlined in this manuscript offers the 
possibility of new insights into mRNA features that impact on translation 
initiation and provides a molecular fingerprint for transcript-ribosome 
association in any cell type and in the presence of a range of drugs of 
interest. Such molecular phenotypes defined pre-clinically may ultimately impact 
on the evaluation of a particular drug in a living cell.

DOI: 10.1186/1755-8794-1-33
PMCID: PMC2533349
PMID: 18673536