1. Biochemistry. 2008 Sep 9;47(36):9678-87. doi: 10.1021/bi800699v. Epub 2008 Aug
 15.

Cathepsin D is the main lysosomal enzyme involved in the degradation of 
alpha-synuclein and generation of its carboxy-terminally truncated species.

Sevlever D(1), Jiang P, Yen SH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, 4500 San Pablo 
Road, Jacksonville, Florida 32224, USA. sevlever.daniel@mayo.edu

Alpha-synuclein is likely to play a key role in the development of Parkinson's 
disease as well as other synucleinopathies. In animal models, overexpression of 
full-length or carboxy-terminally truncated alpha-synuclein has been shown to 
produce pathology. Although the proteosome and lysosome have been proposed to 
play a role in the degradation of alpha-synuclein, the enzyme(s) involved in 
alpha-synuclein clearance and generation of its carboxy-terminally truncated 
species have not been identified. In this study, the role of cathepsin D and 
calpain I in these processes was analyzed. In vitro experiments, using either 
recombinant or endogenous alpha-synuclein as substrates and purified cathepsin D 
or lysosomes, demonstrated that cathepsin D degraded alpha-synuclein very 
efficiently, and that limited proteolysis resulted in the generation of 
carboxy-terminally truncated species. Purified calpain I also cleaved 
alpha-synuclein, but carboxy-terminally truncated species were not the main 
cleavage products, and calpain I activity present in cellular lysates was not 
able to degrade the protein. Knockdown of cathepsin D in cells overexpressing 
wild-type alpha-synuclein increased total alpha-synuclein levels by 28% and 
lysosomal alpha-synuclein by 2-fold. In in vitro experiments, pepstatin A 
completely blocked the degradation of alpha-synuclein in purified lysosomes. 
Furthermore, lysosomes isolated from cathepsin D knockdown cells showed a marked 
reduction in alpha-synuclein degrading activity, indicating that cathepsin D is 
the main lysosomal enzyme involved in alpha-synuclein degradation. Our findings 
suggest that upregulation of cathepsin D could be an additional therapeutic 
strategy to lessen alpha-synuclein burden in synucleinopathies.

DOI: 10.1021/bi800699v
PMCID: PMC2630205
PMID: 18702517 [Indexed for MEDLINE]