1. Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes. 2008 Oct;15(5):446-52. doi: 
10.1097/MED.0b013e32830eb8ab.

Recent insights into the pathogenesis and management of thyroid-associated 
ophthalmopathy.

Gianoukakis AG(1), Smith TJ.

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, 
Torrance, California 90502, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To identify and critique the most recent experimental 
findings regarding the pathogenesis and therapy of thyroid-associated 
ophthalmopathy.
RECENT FINDINGS: Much of the recent work in this field has focused on 
identifying genetic alterations associated with the phenotypes of Graves' 
disease and thyroid-associated ophthalmopathy and investigating their functional 
consequences. Identified candidate genes include CD40, cytotoxic T-lymphocyte 
antigen-4, protein tyrosine phosphatase-22, human leukocyte antigen-major 
histocompatibility complex and those associated with the X-chromosome. Efforts 
to generate a complete rodent model of Graves' disease continue with little 
progress. These uniformly involve the immunization of animals with the 
thyrotropin receptor. Studies conducted in vitro have focused on the actions of 
cytokines in orbital fibroblasts, the potential role of the insulin-like growth 
factor-1 receptor and activating antibodies directed against it as a fibroblast 
and T cell activation pathway. Reports continue to appear examining the 
potential relationship between the thyrotropin receptor and orbital 
adipogenesis. Regarding therapy for thyroid-associated ophthalmopathy, small 
molecules and antibodies disrupting cytokine pathways and lymphocyte function 
are currently under examination and have yielded promising albeit preliminary 
results.
SUMMARY: Thyroid-associated ophthalmopathy remains a vexing medical problem, the 
pathogenesis of which remains uncertain. A number of obstacles continue to 
plague major advances, not least of which is the absence of a robust animal 
model. A few new insights seem to represent departure from traditional thinking 
about this disease and may herald important innovation.

DOI: 10.1097/MED.0b013e32830eb8ab
PMCID: PMC3712753
PMID: 18769218 [Indexed for MEDLINE]