1. Am J Ophthalmol. 2009 Jan;147(1):111-115.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.ajo.2008.07.041. 
Epub 2008 Oct 2.

Relation of response to treatment with dorzolamide in X-linked retinoschisis to 
the mechanism of functional loss in retinoschisin.

Walia S(1), Fishman GA, Molday RS, Dyka FM, Kumar NM, Ehlinger MA, Stone EM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Illinois at 
Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

PURPOSE: To determine if a positive response of macular cysts to treatment with 
dorzolamide eye drops in patients with juvenile X-linked retinoschisis (XLRS) 
can occur with mutations that result in different types of retinoschisin protein 
dysfunction.
DESIGN: Retrospective case series.
METHODS: Thirteen eyes of seven patients seen at the University of Illinois at 
Chicago with a known diagnosis of XLRS were included. Each patient had received 
or currently was receiving treatment with topical dorzolamide. One patient from 
each family was screened for a genetic mutation. Using the method of cell 
transfection and protein preparation, the mutation in each patient was analyzed 
further and was categorized into one of three groups: 1) total absence of 
retinoschisin protein secretion, 2) decreased expression of the secreted 
protein, or 3) secretion of a nonfunctional protein. The response to dorzolamide 
was observed using optical coherence tomography.
RESULTS: Significant improvement in the foveal zone thickness was observed with 
the use of dorzolamide in three of four patients with absence of protein 
secretion, in two patients with a lack of protein expression, and in one patient 
with a nonfunctional protein secretion.
CONCLUSIONS: This study showed that the response of macular cysts to dorzolamide 
in patients with XLRS may be observed independent of the mechanism responsible 
for retinoschisin protein dysfunction. Hence, treatment with dorzolamide may be 
effective in patients with different mechanisms of dysfunction in retinoschisin.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajo.2008.07.041
PMCID: PMC2668603
PMID: 18834580 [Indexed for MEDLINE]