1. Am J Surg Pathol. 2009 Jan;33(1):58-65. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181788566.

Prevalence of germline mutations in the TTR gene in a consecutive series of 
surgical pathology specimens with ATTR amyloid.

Eriksson M(1), Büttner J, Todorov T, Yumlu S, Schönland S, Hegenbart U, Kristen 
AV, Dengler T, Lohse P, Helmke B, Schmidt H, Röcken C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Medical Clinic of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and 
Endocrinology, Charité University Hospital, Berlin, Germany.

Transthyretin-derived amyloidosis (ATTR) amyloidosis is the third most prevalent 
amyloid type in surgical pathology and may occur as a hereditary disease with 
germline mutations in the TTR gene or as senile systemic amyloidosis (SSA) 
without mutations. Distinction between hereditary ATTR amyloidosis and SSA is of 
central importance, as the former necessitates genetic counseling and can be 
treated by liver transplantation. However, little is known about the prevalence 
of hereditary ATTR amyloidosis in surgical pathology specimens. We have examined 
the distribution of hereditary ATTR amyloidosis and SSA in a consecutive series 
of surgical pathology specimens with histologically and immunohistochemically 
confirmed ATTR amyloid. Thirty-three consecutive patients were retrieved from 
the Amyloid Registry of the Charité University Hospital. Genomic DNA was 
extracted from formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded tissue or patient blood and 
examined by DNA sequencing. ATTR amyloid was found in the gastrointestinal 
tract, endomyocardium, peripheral nerve, carpal tunnel ligament, synovia, 
breast, and testicle. Amyloid fibrils were present as interstitial and vascular 
deposits, as evidenced by Congo red staining. TTR gene mutations were detected 
in 12 of 30 patients, with p.Val30Met being the most prevalent (5 patients). 
Furthermore, 2 novel mutations (p.Asp39Val and p.Glu54Asp) were found. In 
patients carrying a mutation, ATTR amyloid was found in the gastrointestinal 
tract, myocardium, nerve, and testicles. To conclude, the hereditary form of 
ATTR amyloid seems to be more common in elderly patients than previously 
thought. It is, therefore, important to genetically test every patient when 
diagnosing ATTR amyloidosis.

DOI: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181788566
PMID: 18830126 [Indexed for MEDLINE]