1. BMC Med. 2009 Apr 7;7:14. doi: 10.1186/1741-7015-7-14.

Different atrophy-hypertrophy transcription pathways in muscles affected by 
severe and mild spinal muscular atrophy.

Millino C(1), Fanin M, Vettori A, Laveder P, Mostacciuolo ML, Angelini C, 
Lanfranchi G.

Author information:
(1)CRIBI Biotechnology Centre, University of Padova, Padova, Italy. 
caterina@cribi.unipd.it

BACKGROUND: Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a neurodegenerative disorder 
associated with mutations of the survival motor neuron gene SMN and is 
characterized by muscle weakness and atrophy caused by degeneration of spinal 
motor neurons. SMN has a role in neurons but its deficiency may have a direct 
effect on muscle tissue.
METHODS: We applied microarray and quantitative real-time PCR to study at 
transcriptional level the effects of a defective SMN gene in skeletal muscles 
affected by the two forms of SMA: the most severe type I and the mild type III.
RESULTS: The two forms of SMA generated distinct expression signatures: the SMA 
III muscle transcriptome is close to that found under normal conditions, whereas 
in SMA I there is strong alteration of gene expression. Genes implicated in 
signal transduction were up-regulated in SMA III whereas those of energy 
metabolism and muscle contraction were consistently down-regulated in SMA I. The 
expression pattern of gene networks involved in atrophy signaling was completed 
by qRT-PCR, showing that specific pathways are involved, namely IGF/PI3K/Akt, 
TNF-alpha/p38 MAPK and Ras/ERK pathways.
CONCLUSION: Our study suggests a different picture of atrophy pathways in each 
of the two forms of SMA. In particular, p38 may be the regulator of protein 
synthesis in SMA I. The SMA III profile appears as the result of the concurrent 
presence of atrophic and hypertrophic fibers. This more favorable condition 
might be due to the over-expression of MTOR that, given its role in the 
activation of protein synthesis, could lead to compensatory hypertrophy in SMA 
III muscle fibers.

DOI: 10.1186/1741-7015-7-14
PMCID: PMC2676312
PMID: 19351384 [Indexed for MEDLINE]