1. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2009 Oct;24(10):3089-96. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfp229.
Epub  2009 May 20.

TRPC6 mutational analysis in a large cohort of patients with focal segmental 
glomerulosclerosis.

Santín S(1), Ars E, Rossetti S, Salido E, Silva I, García-Maset R, Giménez I, 
Ruíz P, Mendizábal S, Luciano Nieto J, Peña A, Camacho JA, Fraga G, Cobo MA, 
Bernis C, Ortiz A, de Pablos AL, Sánchez-Moreno A, Pintos G, Mirapeix E, 
Fernández-Llama P, Ballarín J, Torra R; FSGS Study Group; Zamora I, López-Hellin 
J, Madrid A, Ventura C, Vilalta R, Espinosa L, García C, Melgosa M, Navarro M, 
Giménez A, Cots JV, Alexandra S, Caramelo C, Egido J, San José MD, de la Cerda 
F, Sala P, Raspall F, Vila A, Daza AM, Vázquez M, Ecija JL, Espinosa M, Justa 
ML, Poveda R, Aparicio C, Rosell J, Muley R, Montenegro J, González D, Hidalgo 
E, de Frutos DB, Trillo E, Gracia S, de los Ríos FJ.

Author information:
(1)Fundació Puigvert, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, REDinREN, Instituto de 
Investigación Carlos III, Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in the TRPC6 gene have been reported in six families with 
adult-onset (17-57 years) autosomal dominant focal segmental glomerulosclerosis 
(FSGS). Electrophysiology studies confirmed augmented calcium influx only in 
three of these six TRPC6 mutations. To date, the role of TRPC6 in childhood and 
adulthood non-familial forms is unknown.
METHODS: TRPC6 mutation analysis was performed by direct sequencing in 130 
Spanish patients from 115 unrelated families with FSGS. An in silico scoring 
matrix was developed to evaluate the pathogenicity of amino acid substitutions, 
by using the bio-physical and bio-chemical differences between wild-type and 
mutant amino acid, the evolutionary conservation of the amino acid residue in 
orthologues, homologues and defined domains, with the addition of contextual 
information.
RESULTS: Three new missense substitutions were identified in two clinically 
non-familial cases and in one familial case. The analysis by means of this 
scoring system allowed us to classify these variants as likely pathogenic 
mutations. One of them was detected in a female patient with unusual clinical 
features: mesangial proliferative FSGS in childhood (7 years) and partial 
response to immunosupressive therapy (CsA + MMF). Asymptomatic carriers of this 
likely mutation were found within her family.
CONCLUSIONS: We describe for the first time TRPC6 mutations in children and 
adults with non-familial FSGS. It seems that TRPC6 is a gene with a very 
variable penetrance that may contribute to glomerular diseases in a multi-hit 
setting.

DOI: 10.1093/ndt/gfp229
PMID: 19458060 [Indexed for MEDLINE]