1. Mol Vis. 2009 Jun 4;15:1127-38.

An alphaA-crystallin gene mutation, Arg12Cys, causing inherited 
cataract-microcornea exhibits an altered heat-shock response.

Zhang LY(1), Yam GH, Tam PO, Lai RY, Lam DS, Pang CP, Fan DS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, The Chinese University of 
Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.

PURPOSE: To investigate the clinical features and molecular basis of inherited 
cataract-microcornea caused by an alphaA-crystallin gene (CRYAA) mutation in a 
Chinese family.
METHODS: A three-generation Chinese family with members having autosomal 
dominant cataract and microcornea was recruited. Genomic DNA from peripheral 
blood or buccal swab samples of five affected and five unaffected members were 
obtained. Based on 15 genes known to cause autosomal dominant cataract, single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) or microsatellite markers were selected and 
genotyped for two-point linkage analysis. Direct sequencing was performed to 
identify the disease-causing mutation. The expression construct coding for 
recombinant COOH-terminal myc-His-tagged wild type or R12C alphaA-crystallin 
protein (CRYAA) was expressed in COS-7 cells. Detergent solubility and 
subcellular distribution of wild type and R12C CRYAA were examined by western 
blotting and immunofluorescence, respectively. Heat-shock response was monitored 
by quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) of heat-shock proteins 70 and 
90alpha (HSP70 and HSP90alpha).
RESULTS: The five affected family members showed variable lens opacities and 
microcornea. Clinical features of cataract were asymmetric in two eyes of some 
affected subjects. A heterozygous missense substitution, c.34C>T, in CRYAA, 
which is responsible for the R12C amino acid change, segregated with autosomal 
dominant cataract (ADCC) in this family. This substitution was absent in 103 
unrelated controls. When expressed in COS-7 cells, the R12C mutant CRYAA 
resembled the wild type protein in its solubility when extracted with 0.5% 
Triton X-100 and with its cytoplasmic localization. However, mutant cells 
exhibited an altered heat-shock response, evidenced by the delayed expression of 
HSP70, when compared to cells expressing wild type CRYAA.
CONCLUSIONS: The R12C mutation in CRYAA was responsible for a variable type of 
inherited cataract associated with microcornea in this Chinese family. The 
altered heat-shock response of mutant cells suggested a change of chaperoning 
capacity and networking, which could be associated with the pathogenesis of 
hereditary cataract-microcornea syndrome.

PMCID: PMC2690964
PMID: 19503744 [Indexed for MEDLINE]