1. J Neurosci. 2009 Jun 10;29(23):7540-8. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2018-08.2009.

Feeling the beat: premotor and striatal interactions in musicians and 
nonmusicians during beat perception.

Grahn JA(1), Rowe JB.

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Council Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge CB27EF, 
United Kingdom. jessica.grahn@mrc-cbu.cam.ac.uk

Little is known about the underlying neurobiology of rhythm and beat perception, 
despite its universal cultural importance. Here we used functional magnetic 
resonance imaging to study rhythm perception in musicians and nonmusicians. 
Three conditions varied in the degree to which external reinforcement versus 
internal generation of the beat was required. The "volume" condition strongly 
externally marked the beat with volume changes, the "duration" condition marked 
the beat with weaker accents arising from duration changes, and the "unaccented" 
condition required the beat to be entirely internally generated. In all 
conditions, beat rhythms compared with nonbeat control rhythms revealed putamen 
activity. The presence of a beat was also associated with greater connectivity 
between the putamen and the supplementary motor area (SMA), the premotor cortex 
(PMC), and auditory cortex. In contrast, the type of accent within the beat 
conditions modulated the coupling between premotor and auditory cortex, with 
greater modulation for musicians than nonmusicians. Importantly, the response of 
the putamen to beat conditions was not attributable to differences in temporal 
complexity between the three rhythm conditions. We propose that a 
cortico-subcortical network including the putamen, SMA, and PMC is engaged for 
the analysis of temporal sequences and prediction or generation of putative 
beats, especially under conditions that may require internal generation of the 
beat. The importance of this system for auditory-motor interaction and 
development of precisely timed movement is suggested here by its facilitation in 
musicians.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2018-08.2009
PMCID: PMC2702750
PMID: 19515922 [Indexed for MEDLINE]