1. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2010 Mar 5;153B(2):409-417. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.b.30993.

APOE mRNA and protein expression in postmortem brain are modulated by an 
extended haplotype structure.

Bekris LM(1)(2), Galloway NM(1), Montine TJ(3), Schellenberg GD(4), Yu CE(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Geriatric Research, Education and Clinical Center, Veterans Affairs Puget 
Sound Health Care System, Seattle, Washington.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington.
(3)Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington.
(4)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

Currently the epsilon4 allele of the apolipoprotein E gene (APOE) is the 
strongest genetic risk factor for late onset Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, 
inheritance of the APOE epsilon4 allele is not necessary or sufficient for the 
development of AD. Genetic evidence suggests that multiple loci in a 70 kb 
region surrounding APOE are associated with AD risk. Even though these loci 
could represent surrogate markers in linkage disequilibrium with APOE epsilon4 
allele, they could also contribute biological effects independent of the APOE 
epsilon4 allele. Our previous study identified multiple SNPs upstream from APOE 
that are associated with cerebrospinal fluid apoE levels, suggesting that a 
haplotype structure proximal to APOE can influence apoE expression. In this 
study, we examined apoE expression in human post-mortem brain (PMB), and 
constructed chromosome-phase-separated haplotypes of the APOE proximal region to 
evaluate their effect on PMB apoE expression. ApoE protein expression was found 
to differ among AD brain regions and to differ between AD and control 
hippocampus. In addition, an extended APOE proximal haplotype structure, 
spanning from the TOMM40 gene to the APOE promoter, may modulate apoE expression 
in a brain region-specific manner and may influence AD disease status. In 
conclusion, this haplotype-phenotype analysis of apoE expression in PMB suggests 
that either; (1) the cis-regulation of APOE expression levels extends far 
upstream of the APOE promoter or (2) an APOE epsilon4 allele independent 
mechanism involving the TOMM40 gene plays a role in the risk of AD.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.b.30993
PMCID: PMC2829359
PMID: 19554612 [Indexed for MEDLINE]