1. Prog Brain Res. 2009;175:83-93. doi: 10.1016/S0079-6123(09)17506-4.

Developing novel immunogens for a safe and effective Alzheimer's disease 
vaccine.

Lemere CA(1).

Author information:
(1)Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. 
clemere@rics.bwh.harvard.edu

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most prevalent form of neurodegeneration; 
however, therapies to prevent or treat AD are inadequate. Amyloid-beta (Abeta) 
protein accrues in cortical senile plaques, one of the key neuropathological 
hallmarks of AD, and is elevated in brains of early onset AD patients in a small 
number of families that bear certain genetic mutations, further implicating its 
role in this devastating neurological disease. In addition, soluble Abeta 
oligomers have been shown to be detrimental to neuronal function. Therapeutic 
strategies aimed at lowering cerebral Abeta levels are currently under 
development. One strategy is to immunize AD patients with Abeta peptides so that 
they will generate antibodies that bind to Abeta protein and enhance its 
clearance. As of 1999, Abeta immunotherapy, either through active immunization 
with Abeta peptides or through passive transfer of Abeta-specific antibodies, 
has been shown to reduce cerebral Abeta levels and improve cognitive deficits in 
AD mouse models and lower plaque load in nonhuman primates. However, a Phase II 
clinical trial of active immunization using full-length human Abeta1-42 peptide 
and a strong Th1-biased adjuvant, QS-21, ended prematurely in 2002 because of 
the onset of meningoencephalitis in approximately 6% of the AD patients enrolled 
in the study. It is possible that T cell recognition of the human full-length 
Abeta peptide as a self-protein may have induced an adverse autoimmune response 
in these patients. Although only approximately 20% of immunized patients 
generated anti-Abeta titers, responders showed some general slowing of cognitive 
decline. Focal cortical regions devoid of Abeta plaques were observed in brain 
tissues of several immunized patients who have since come to autopsy. In order 
to avoid a deleterious immune response, passive Abeta immunotherapy is under 
investigation by administering monthly intravenous injections of humanized Abeta 
monoclonal antibodies to AD patients. However, a safe and effective active Abeta 
vaccine would be more cost-effective and more readily available to a larger AD 
population. We have developed several novel short Abeta immunogens that target 
the Abeta N-terminus containing a strong B cell epitope while avoiding the Abeta 
mid-region and C-terminus containing T cell epitopes. These immunogens include 
dendrimeric Abeta1-15 (16 copies of Abeta1-15 on a lysine antigen tree), 
2xAbeta1-15 (a tandem repeat of two lysine-linked Abeta1-15 peptides), and 
2xAbeta1-15 with the addition of a three amino acid RGD motif (R-2xAbeta1-15). 
Intranasal immunization with our short Abeta fragment immunogens and a mucosal 
adjuvant, mutant Escherichia coli heat-labile enterotoxin LT(R192G), resulted in 
reduced cerebral Abeta levels, plaque deposition, and gliosis, as well as 
increased plasma Abeta levels and improved cognition in a transgenic mouse model 
of AD. Preclinical trials in nonhuman primates, and human clinical trials using 
similar Abeta immunogens, are now underway. Abeta immunotherapy looks promising 
but must be made safer and more effective at generating antibody titers in the 
elderly. It is hoped that these novel immunogens will enhance Abeta antibody 
generation across a broad population and avoid the adverse events seen in the 
earlier clinical trial.

DOI: 10.1016/S0079-6123(09)17506-4
PMCID: PMC2814339
PMID: 19660650 [Indexed for MEDLINE]