1. Am J Hum Genet. 2009 Aug;85(2):204-13. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.07.010. Epub 
2009 Aug 6.

Dominant renin gene mutations associated with early-onset hyperuricemia, anemia, 
and chronic kidney failure.

Zivná M(1), Hůlková H, Matignon M, Hodanová K, Vylet'al P, Kalbácová M, Baresová 
V, Sikora J, Blazková H, Zivný J, Ivánek R, Stránecký V, Sovová J, Claes K, 
Lerut E, Fryns JP, Hart PS, Hart TC, Adams JN, Pawtowski A, Clemessy M, Gasc JM, 
Gübler MC, Antignac C, Elleder M, Kapp K, Grimbert P, Bleyer AJ, Kmoch S.

Author information:
(1)Center for Applied Genomics, Charles University in Prague, First Faculty of 
Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic.

Through linkage analysis and candidate gene sequencing, we identified three 
unrelated families with the autosomal-dominant inheritance of early onset 
anemia, hypouricosuric hyperuricemia, progressive kidney failure, and mutations 
resulting either in the deletion (p.Leu16del) or the amino acid exchange 
(p.Leu16Arg) of a single leucine residue in the signal sequence of renin. Both 
mutations decrease signal sequence hydrophobicity and are predicted by 
bioinformatic analyses to damage targeting and cotranslational translocation of 
preprorenin into the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Transfection and in vitro 
studies confirmed that both mutations affect ER translocation and processing of 
nascent preprorenin, resulting either in reduced (p.Leu16del) or abolished 
(p.Leu16Arg) prorenin and renin biosynthesis and secretion. Expression of renin 
and other components of the renin-angiotensin system was decreased accordingly 
in kidney biopsy specimens from affected individuals. Cells stably expressing 
the p.Leu16del protein showed activated ER stress, unfolded protein response, 
and reduced growth rate. It is likely that expression of the mutant proteins has 
a dominant toxic effect gradually reducing the viability of renin-expressing 
cells. This alters the intrarenal renin-angiotensin system and the 
juxtaglomerular apparatus functionality and leads to nephron dropout and 
progressive kidney failure. Our findings provide insight into the functionality 
of renin-angiotensin system and stress the importance of renin analysis in 
families and individuals with early onset hyperuricemia, anemia, and progressive 
kidney failure.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.07.010
PMCID: PMC2725269
PMID: 19664745 [Indexed for MEDLINE]