1. Cancer Biol Ther. 2009 Oct;8(19):1791-7. doi: 10.4161/cbt.8.19.9762.

Molecular mechanisms of necrosis in glioblastoma: the role of glutamate 
excitotoxicity.

Noch E(1), Khalili K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Center for Neurovirology, Temple University 
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Glioblastomas continue to rank among the most lethal primary human tumors. 
Despite treatment with the most rigorous surgical interventions along with the 
most optimal chemotherapeutic and radiation regimens, the median survival is 
just 12-15 mo for patients with glioblastoma. Among the histological hallmarks 
of glioblastoma, necrosis has been demonstrated to be a powerful predictor of 
poor patient prognosis. Over the years, there have been many advances in our 
understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying glioblastoma formation, yet 
the mechanisms that lead to tumor necrosis remain unclear. One pathway that may 
lead to necrosis in glioblastoma involves the neurotransmitter, glutamate, which 
has been shown to accumulate in the peritumoral fluid as a result of decreased 
cellular uptake by glioblastoma cells. This accumulation leads to subsequent 
glutamate excitotoxicity and probable necrosis through a massive elevation of 
intracellular Ca(2+) and reduction in cellular ATP levels. We propose that a 
pathway involving tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNFalpha), astrocyte-elevated 
gene-1 (AEG-1) and nuclear factor-kappaB (NFkappaB) leads to decreased glutamate 
uptake through coordinated downregulation of the excitatory amino acid 
transporter 2 (EAAT2), the glutamate transporter responsible for the majority of 
glutamate uptake in the human brain. In addition, we suggest that AEG-1 
signaling, loss of phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN), and ionotropic 
glutamate receptor activity lead to AKT pathway activation, which results in 
nutrient overconsumption and necrosis. Together, these pathways provide a new 
perspective on glioblastoma necrosis involving the process of glutamate 
excitotoxicity. Future research should address the components of these molecular 
pathways in order to better understand the mechanism of necrosis in glioblastoma 
and to begin to develop targeted therapies that may improve patient prognosis in 
the future.

DOI: 10.4161/cbt.8.19.9762
PMCID: PMC4503249
PMID: 19770591 [Indexed for MEDLINE]