1. J Vis Exp. 2009 Oct 1;(32):1398. doi: 10.3791/1398.

A lectin HPLC method to enrich selectively-glycosylated peptides from complex 
biological samples.

Johansen E(1), Schilling B, Lerch M, Niles RK, Liu H, Li B, Allen S, Hall SC, 
Witkowska HE, Regnier FE, Gibson BW, Fisher SJ, Drake PM.

Author information:
(1)Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, University of California, 
San Francisco, CA, USA.

Glycans are an important class of post-translational modifications. Typically 
found on secreted and extracellular molecules, glycan structures signal the 
internal status of the cell. Glycans on tumor cells tend to have abundant sialic 
acid and fucose moieties. We propose that these cancer-associated glycan 
variants be exploited for biomarker development aimed at diagnosing early-stage 
disease. Accordingly, we developed a mass spectrometry-based workflow that 
incorporates chromatography on affinity matrices formed from lectins, proteins 
that bind specific glycan structures. The lectins Sambucus nigra (SNA) and 
Aleuria aurantia (AAL), which bind sialic acid and fucose, respectively, were 
covalently coupled to POROS beads (Applied Biosystems) and packed into PEEK 
columns for high pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC). Briefly, plasma was 
depleted of the fourteen most abundant proteins using a multiple affinity 
removal system (MARS-14; Agilent). Depleted plasma was trypsin-digested and 
separated into flow-through and bound fractions by SNA or AAL HPLC. The 
fractions were treated with PNGaseF to remove N-linked glycans, and analyzed by 
LC-MS/MS on a QStar Elite. Data were analyzed using Mascot software. The 
experimental design included positive controls-fucosylated and sialylated human 
lactoferrin glycopeptides-and negative controls-high mannose glycopeptides from 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae-that were used to monitor the specificity of lectin 
capture. Key features of this workflow include the reproducibility derived from 
the HPLC format, the positive identification of the captured and PNGaseF-treated 
glycopeptides from their deamidated Asn-Xxx-Ser/Thr motifs, and quality 
assessment using glycoprotein standards. Protocol optimization also included 
determining the appropriate ratio of starting material to column capacity, 
identifying the most efficient capture and elution buffers, and monitoring the 
PNGaseF-treatment to ensure full deglycosylation. Future directions include 
using this workflow to perform mass spectrometry-based discovery experiments on 
plasma from breast cancer patients and control individuals.

DOI: 10.3791/1398
PMCID: PMC2762330
PMID: 19798022 [Indexed for MEDLINE]