1. PLoS Pathog. 2010 Jan 8;6(1):e1000712. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000712.

Nutrient availability as a mechanism for selection of antibiotic tolerant 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa within the CF airway.

Hoffman LR(1), Richardson AR, Houston LS, Kulasekara HD, Martens-Habbena W, 
Klausen M, Burns JL, Stahl DA, Hassett DJ, Fang FC, Miller SI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.

Microbes are subjected to selective pressures during chronic infections of host 
tissues. Pseudomonas aeruginosa isolates with inactivating mutations in the 
transcriptional regulator LasR are frequently selected within the airways of 
people with cystic fibrosis (CF), and infection with these isolates has been 
associated with poorer lung function outcomes. The mechanisms underlying 
selection for lasR mutation are unknown but have been postulated to involve the 
abundance of specific nutrients within CF airway secretions. We characterized 
lasR mutant P. aeruginosa strains and isolates to identify conditions found in 
CF airways that select for growth of lasR mutants. Relative to wild-type P. 
aeruginosa, lasR mutants exhibited a dramatic metabolic shift, including 
decreased oxygen consumption and increased nitrate utilization, that is 
predicted to confer increased fitness within the nutrient conditions known to 
occur in CF airways. This metabolic shift exhibited by lasR mutants conferred 
resistance to two antibiotics used frequently in CF care, tobramycin and 
ciprofloxacin, even under oxygen-dependent growth conditions, yet selection for 
these mutants in vitro did not require preceding antibiotic exposure. The 
selection for loss of LasR function in vivo, and the associated adverse clinical 
impact, could be due to increased bacterial growth in the oxygen-poor and 
nitrate-rich CF airway, and from the resulting resistance to therapeutic 
antibiotics. The metabolic similarities among diverse chronic infection-adapted 
bacteria suggest a common mode of adaptation and antibiotic resistance during 
chronic infection that is primarily driven by bacterial metabolic shifts in 
response to nutrient availability within host tissues.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000712
PMCID: PMC2795201
PMID: 20072604 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.