1. Biochemistry. 2010 Apr 6;49(13):2786-95. doi: 10.1021/bi902204v.

Mechanism and specificity of DNA strand exchange catalyzed by vaccinia DNA 
topoisomerase type I.

Stahley MR(1), Stivers JT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Sciences, The Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, 725 North Wolfe Street, Baltimore, Maryland 
21205-2185, USA.

The type I DNA topoisomerase from vaccinia virus (vTopo) forms a reversible 
covalent 3'-phosphotyrosyl linkage with a single strand of duplex DNA at the 
preferred sequence 5'-(C/T)CCTTp downward arrowN(-1)N(-2)N(-3)-3'. The 
enzyme-DNA covalent adduct is recombinogenic in cells, because the nicked strand 
downstream of the cleavage site can dissociate and be replaced by another DNA 
strand, potentially resulting in genome rearrangements if the enzyme executes 
strand ligation. Topo I could play an active role in strand exchange, either by 
altering the kinetics or thermodynamics of DNA strand binding or by serving as a 
proofreading gate to prevent ligation of incoming DNA strands containing 
mismatches. To address these questions, we have measured the kinetic and 
thermodynamic parameters for strand annealing to a purified vaccinia Topo I-DNA 
(vTopo-DNA) covalent complex containing a single-strand overhang and then 
compared them with the same overhang duplex in the absence of vTopo. We found 
that vTopo accelerates the strand association rate by 2-fold but has no effect 
on the rate of strand dissociation. vTopo has a similar small effect on the 
annealing parameters of a series of DNA strands containing single mismatches. In 
contrast, single base mismatches at the -1, -2, or -3 positions decreased the 
forward rate and equilibrium constant for reversible strand ligation by 10-fold. 
These data establish that while vTopo is a bystander during the annealing step 
of strand exchange, the enzyme strongly discriminates against mismatches close 
to the cleavage site during the subsequent events leading to strand ligation. A 
mechanism emerges where vTopo oscillates between an open state where the 
downstream DNA segment does not interact with the enzyme and a closed state 
where catalytically important contacts are formed with this region. This 
oscillation between an open and closed state of the covalently bound enzyme is 
likely important for regulating the number of DNA superhelical turns that are 
removed during the lifetime of the covalent complex with supercoiled substrates.

DOI: 10.1021/bi902204v
PMCID: PMC2847668
PMID: 20187656 [Indexed for MEDLINE]