1. PLoS Pathog. 2010 Apr 8;6(4):e1000856. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000856.

Antagonism of tetherin restriction of HIV-1 release by Vpu involves binding and 
sequestration of the restriction factor in a perinuclear compartment.

Dubé M(1), Roy BB, Guiot-Guillain P, Binette J, Mercier J, Chiasson A, Cohen EA.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Human Retrovirology, Institut de recherches cliniques de 
Montréal (IRCM), Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

The Vpu accessory protein promotes HIV-1 release by counteracting 
Tetherin/BST-2, an interferon-regulated restriction factor, which retains 
virions at the cell-surface. Recent reports proposed beta-TrCP-dependent 
proteasomal and/or endo-lysosomal degradation of Tetherin as potential 
mechanisms by which Vpu could down-regulate Tetherin cell-surface expression and 
antagonize this restriction. In all of these studies, Tetherin degradation did 
not, however, entirely account for Vpu anti-Tetherin activity. Here, we show 
that Vpu can promote HIV-1 release without detectably affecting Tetherin 
steady-state levels or turnover, suggesting that Tetherin degradation may not be 
necessary and/or sufficient for Vpu anti-Tetherin activity. Even though Vpu did 
not enhance Tetherin internalization from the plasma membrane (PM), it did 
significantly slow-down the overall transport of the protein towards the 
cell-surface. Accordingly, Vpu expression caused a specific removal of 
cell-surface Tetherin and a re-localization of the residual pool of Tetherin in 
a perinuclear compartment that co-stained with the TGN marker TGN46 and Vpu 
itself. This re-localization of Tetherin was also observed with a Vpu mutant 
unable to recruit beta-TrCP, suggesting that this activity is taking place 
independently from beta-TrCP-mediated trafficking and/or degradation processes. 
We also show that Vpu co-immunoprecipitates with Tetherin and that this 
interaction involves the transmembrane domains of the two proteins. Importantly, 
this association was found to be critical for reducing cell-surface Tetherin 
expression, re-localizing the restriction factor in the TGN and promoting HIV-1 
release. Overall, our results suggest that association of Vpu to Tetherin 
affects the outward trafficking and/or recycling of the restriction factor from 
the TGN and as a result promotes its sequestration away from the PM where 
productive HIV-1 assembly takes place. This mechanism of antagonism that results 
in TGN trapping is likely to be augmented by beta-TrCP-dependent degradation, 
underlining the need for complementary and perhaps synergistic strategies to 
effectively counteract the powerful restrictive effects of human Tetherin.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000856
PMCID: PMC2851737
PMID: 20386718 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.