1. PLoS One. 2010 Apr 23;5(4):e10341. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010341.

Acetylation of WRN protein regulates its stability by inhibiting ubiquitination.

Li K(1), Wang R, Lozada E, Fan W, Orren DK, Luo J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cancer Biology and the Cancer Center, University of 
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts, United States of 
America.

BACKGROUND: WRN is a multi-functional protein involving DNA replication, 
recombination and repair. WRN acetylation has been demonstrated playing an 
important role in response to DNA damage. We previously found that WRN 
acetylation can regulate its enzymatic activities and nuclear distribution.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDING: Here, we investigated the factors involved in WRN 
acetylation and found that CBP and p300 are the only major acetyltransferases 
for WRN acetylation. We further identified 6 lysine residues in WRN that are 
subject to acetylation. Interestingly, WRN acetylation can increase its protein 
stability. SIRT1-mediated deacetylation of WRN reverses this effect. CBP 
dramatically increases the half-life of wild type WRN, while mutation of these 6 
lysine residues (WRN-6KR) abrogates this increase. We further found that WRN 
stability is regulated by the ubiquitination pathway and WRN acetylation by CBP 
significantly reduces its ubiquitination. Importantly, we found that WRN is 
strongly acetylated and stabilized in response to mitomycin C (MMC) treatment. 
H1299 cells stably expressing WRN-6KR, which mimics unacetylated WRN, display 
significantly higher MMC sensitivity compared with the cells expressing 
wild-type WRN.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: Taken together, these data demonstrate that WRN 
acetylation regulates its stability and has significant implications regarding 
the role of acetylation on WRN function in response to DNA damage.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010341
PMCID: PMC2859066
PMID: 20428248 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.