1. Genome Med. 2010 Apr 28;2(4):27. doi: 10.1186/gm148.

Genetic and epigenetic insights into fetal alcohol spectrum disorders.

Ramsay M(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Human Genetics, National Health Laboratory Service and School of 
Pathology, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, 2000, South Africa. 
Michele.ramsay@nhls.ac.za.

The magnitude of the detrimental effects following in utero alcohol exposure, 
including fetal alcohol syndrome and other fetal alcohol spectrum disorders 
(FASD), is globally underestimated. The effects include irreversible cognitive 
and behavioral disabilities as a result of abnormal brain development, pre- and 
postnatal growth retardation and facial dysmorphism. Parental alcohol exposure 
and its effect on offspring has been recognized for centuries, but only recently 
have we begun to gain molecular insight into the mechanisms involved in alcohol 
teratogenesis. Genetic attributes (susceptibility and protective alleles) of the 
mother and the fetus contribute to the risk of developing FASD and specific 
additional environmental conditions, including malnutrition, have an important 
role. The severity of FASD depends on the level of alcohol exposure, the 
developmental stage at which exposure occurs and the nature of the exposure 
(chronic or acute), and although the most vulnerable period is during the first 
trimester, damage can occur throughout gestation. Preconception alcohol exposure 
can also have a detrimental effect on the offspring. Several developmental 
pathways are affected in FASD, including nervous system development, growth and 
remodeling of tissues, as well as metabolic pathways that regulate 
glucocorticoid signaling and balanced levels of retinol, insulin and nitric 
oxide. A body of knowledge has accumulated to support the role of 
environmentally induced epigenetic remodeling during gametogenesis and after 
conception as a key mechanism for the teratogenic effects of FASD that persist 
into adulthood. Transgenerational effects are likely to contribute to the global 
burden of alcohol-related disease. FASD results in lifelong disability and 
preventative programs should include both maternal alcohol abstention and 
preconception alcohol avoidance.

DOI: 10.1186/gm148
PMCID: PMC2873805
PMID: 20423530