1. Biochem J. 2010 Aug 1;429(3):545-52. doi: 10.1042/BJ20091960.

Evidence of mitochondrial dysfunction in fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia 
syndrome.

Ross-Inta C(1), Omanska-Klusek A, Wong S, Barrow C, Garcia-Arocena D, Iwahashi 
C, Berry-Kravis E, Hagerman RJ, Hagerman PJ, Giulivi C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, University of California Davis, 95616, 
USA.

FXTAS (fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome) is a late-onset 
neurodegenerative disorder that affects individuals who are carriers of 
premutation expansions (55-200 CGG repeats) in the 5' untranslated region of the 
FMR1 (fragile X mental retardation 1) gene. The role of MD (mitochondrial 
dysfunction) in FXTAS was evaluated in fibroblasts and brain samples from 
premutation carriers with and without FXTAS symptoms, with a range of CGG 
repeats. This study resulted in several important conclusions: (i) decreased 
NAD- and FAD-linked oxygen uptake rates and uncoupling between electron 
transport and synthesis of ATP were observed in fibroblasts from premutation 
carriers; (ii) a lower expression of mitochondrial proteins preceded both in age 
and in CGG repeats the appearance of overt clinical involvement; (iii) the CGG 
repeat size required for altered mitochondrial protein expression was also 
smaller than that required to produce brain intranuclear inclusions from 
individuals with the premutation who died, suggesting that MD is an incipient 
pathological process occurring in individuals who do not display overt features 
of FXTAS; and (iv) on the basis of the CGG repeats, MD preceded the increase in 
oxidative/nitrative stress damage, indicating that the latter is a late event. 
MD in carriers of small CGG repeats, even when the allele size is not sufficient 
to produce FXTAS, may predispose them to other disorders (e.g. Parkinson's 
disease) that are likely to involve MD, and to environmental stressors, which 
may trigger the development of FXTAS symptoms. Detection of MD is of critical 
importance to the management of FXTAS, since it opens up additional treatment 
options for this disorder.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20091960
PMCID: PMC4011071
PMID: 20513237 [Indexed for MEDLINE]