1. Mol Syst Biol. 2010 Jun 22;6:381. doi: 10.1038/msb.2010.36.

Dissecting spatio-temporal protein networks driving human heart development and 
related disorders.

Lage K(1), Møllgård K, Greenway S, Wakimoto H, Gorham JM, Workman CT, Bendsen E, 
Hansen NT, Rigina O, Roque FS, Wiese C, Christoffels VM, Roberts AE, Smoot LB, 
Pu WT, Donahoe PK, Tommerup N, Brunak S, Seidman CE, Seidman JG, Larsen LA.

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Surgical Research Laboratories, MassGeneral Hospital for Children, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA. 
lage.kasper@mgh.harvard.edu

Aberrant organ development is associated with a wide spectrum of disorders, from 
schizophrenia to congenital heart disease, but systems-level insight into the 
underlying processes is very limited. Using heart morphogenesis as general model 
for dissecting the functional architecture of organ development, we combined 
detailed phenotype information from deleterious mutations in 255 genes with 
high-confidence experimental interactome data, and coupled the results to 
thorough experimental validation. Hereby, we made the first systematic analysis 
of spatio-temporal protein networks driving many stages of a developing organ 
identifying several novel signaling modules. Our results show that organ 
development relies on surprisingly few, extensively recycled, protein modules 
that integrate into complex higher-order networks. This design allows the 
formation of a complicated organ using simple building blocks, and suggests how 
mutations in the same genes can lead to diverse phenotypes. We observe a 
striking temporal correlation between organ complexity and the number of 
discrete functional modules coordinating morphogenesis. Our analysis elucidates 
the organization and composition of spatio-temporal protein networks that drive 
the formation of organs, which in the future may lay the foundation of novel 
approaches in treatments, diagnostics, and regenerative medicine.

DOI: 10.1038/msb.2010.36
PMCID: PMC2913399
PMID: 20571530 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.