1. BMC Plant Biol. 2010 Jun 25;10:129. doi: 10.1186/1471-2229-10-129.

Large scale interaction analysis predicts that the Gerbera hybrida floral E 
function is provided both by general and specialized proteins.

Ruokolainen S(1), Ng YP, Albert VA, Elomaa P, Teeri TH.

Author information:
(1)Gerbera Laboratory, Department of Applied Biology PO Box 27, 
Latokartanonkaari 7, FIN-00014 University of Helsinki, Finland.

BACKGROUND: The ornamental plant Gerbera hybrida bears complex inflorescences 
with morphologically distinct floral morphs that are specific to the sunflower 
family Asteraceae. We have previously characterized several MADS box genes that 
regulate floral development in Gerbera. To study further their behavior in 
higher order complex formation according to the quartet model, we performed 
yeast two- and three-hybrid analysis with fourteen Gerbera MADS domain proteins 
to analyze their protein-protein interaction potential.
RESULTS: The exhaustive pairwise interaction analysis showed significant 
differences in the interaction capacity of different Gerbera MADS domain 
proteins compared to other model plants. Of particular interest in these assays 
was the behavior of SEP-like proteins, known as GRCDs in Gerbera. The previously 
described GRCD1 and GRCD2 proteins, which are specific regulators involved in 
stamen and carpel development, respectively, showed very limited pairwise 
interactions, whereas the related GRCD4 and GRCD5 factors displayed hub-like 
positions in the interaction map. We propose GRCD4 and GRCD5 to provide a 
redundant and general E function in Gerbera, comparable to the SEP proteins in 
Arabidopsis. Based on the pairwise interaction data, combinations of MADS domain 
proteins were further subjected to yeast three-hybrid assays. Gerbera B function 
proteins showed active behavior in ternary complexes. All Gerbera SEP-like 
proteins with the exception of GRCD1 were excellent partners for B function 
proteins, further implicating the unique role of GRCD1 as a whorl- and 
flower-type specific C function partner.
CONCLUSIONS: Gerbera MADS domain proteins exhibit both conserved and derived 
behavior in higher order protein complex formation. This protein-protein 
interaction data can be used to classify and compare Gerbera MADS domain 
proteins to those of Arabidopsis and Petunia. Combined with our reverse genetic 
studies of Gerbera, these results reinforce the roles of different genes in the 
floral development of Gerbera. Building up the elaborate capitulum of Gerbera 
calls for modifications and added complexity in MADS domain protein behavior 
compared to the more simple flowers of, e.g., Arabidopsis.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2229-10-129
PMCID: PMC3017775
PMID: 20579338 [Indexed for MEDLINE]