1. PLoS Pathog. 2010 Jun 24;6(6):e1000958. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000958.

Protein expression redirects vesicular stomatitis virus RNA synthesis to 
cytoplasmic inclusions.

Heinrich BS(1), Cureton DK, Rahmeh AA, Whelan SP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.

Positive-strand and double-strand RNA viruses typically compartmentalize their 
replication machinery in infected cells. This is thought to shield viral RNA 
from detection by innate immune sensors and favor RNA synthesis. The picture for 
the non-segmented negative-strand (NNS) RNA viruses, however, is less clear. 
Working with vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV), a prototype of the NNS RNA 
viruses, we examined the location of the viral replication machinery and RNA 
synthesis in cells. By short-term labeling of viral RNA with 5'-bromouridine 
5'-triphosphate (BrUTP), we demonstrate that primary mRNA synthesis occurs 
throughout the host cell cytoplasm. Protein synthesis results in the formation 
of inclusions that contain the viral RNA synthesis machinery and become the 
predominant sites of mRNA synthesis in the cell. Disruption of the microtubule 
network by treatment of cells with nocodazole leads to the accumulation of viral 
mRNA in discrete structures that decorate the surface of the inclusions. By 
pulse-chase analysis of the mRNA, we find that viral transcripts synthesized at 
the inclusions are transported away from the inclusions in a 
microtubule-dependent manner. Metabolic labeling of viral proteins revealed that 
inhibiting this transport step diminished the rate of translation. Collectively 
those data suggest that microtubule-dependent transport of viral mRNAs from 
inclusions facilitates their translation. Our experiments also show that during 
a VSV infection, protein synthesis is required to redirect viral RNA synthesis 
to intracytoplasmic inclusions. As viral RNA synthesis is initially 
unrestricted, we speculate that its subsequent confinement to inclusions might 
reflect a cellular response to infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000958
PMCID: PMC2891829
PMID: 20585632 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.