1. PLoS Biol. 2010 Jun 29;8(6):e1000409. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1000409.

Following tetraploidy in maize, a short deletion mechanism removed genes 
preferentially from one of the two homologs.

Woodhouse MR(1), Schnable JC, Pedersen BS, Lyons E, Lisch D, Subramaniam S, 
Freeling M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, University of California Berkeley, 
Berkeley, California, United States of America.

Comment in
    PLoS Biol. 2010 Jun 29;8(6):e1000411. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1000411.

Previous work in Arabidopsis showed that after an ancient tetraploidy event, 
genes were preferentially removed from one of the two homologs, a process known 
as fractionation. The mechanism of fractionation is unknown. We sought to 
determine whether such preferential, or biased, fractionation exists in maize 
and, if so, whether a specific mechanism could be implicated in this process. We 
studied the process of fractionation using two recently sequenced grass species: 
sorghum and maize. The maize lineage has experienced a tetraploidy since its 
divergence from sorghum approximately 12 million years ago, and fragments of 
many knocked-out genes retain enough sequence similarity to be easily 
identifiable. Using sorghum exons as the query sequence, we studied the fate of 
both orthologous genes in maize following the maize tetraploidy. We show that 
genes are predominantly lost, not relocated, and that single-gene loss by 
deletion is the rule. Based on comparisons with orthologous sorghum and rice 
genes, we also infer that the sequences present before the deletion events were 
flanked by short direct repeats, a signature of intra-chromosomal recombination. 
Evidence of this deletion mechanism is found 2.3 times more frequently on one of 
the maize homologs, consistent with earlier observations of biased 
fractionation. The over-fractionated homolog is also a greater than 3-fold 
better target for transposon removal, but does not have an observably higher 
synonymous base substitution rate, nor could we find differentially placed 
methylation domains. We conclude that fractionation is indeed biased in maize 
and that intra-chromosomal or possibly a similar illegitimate recombination is 
the primary mechanism by which fractionation occurs. The mechanism of 
intra-chromosomal recombination explains the observed bias in both gene and 
transposon loss in the maize lineage. The existence of fractionation bias 
demonstrates that the frequency of deletion is modulated. Among the evolutionary 
benefits of this deletion/fractionation mechanism is bulk DNA removal and the 
generation of novel combinations of regulatory sequences and coding regions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1000409
PMCID: PMC2893956
PMID: 20613864 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.