1. Head Neck. 2010 Oct;32(10):1412-21. doi: 10.1002/hed.21365.

Epidermal growth factor receptor targeted therapy of squamous cell carcinoma of 
the head and neck.

Sharafinski ME(1), Ferris RL, Ferrone S, Grandis JR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 
Pittsburgh, PA.

BACKGROUND: Cumulative evidence implicates the epidermal growth factor receptor 
(EGFR) as an important therapeutic target in head and neck squamous cell 
carcinoma (HNSCC). The basis for the lack of correlation between EGFR expression 
in the HNSCC tumor and clinical responses to EGFR inhibitors is incompletely 
understood. Although a variety of mechanisms likely contribute to the 
effectiveness of EGFR blockade, this review focuses on the biologic implications 
of known EGFR variations and the role of the immune system in mediating clinical 
responses to EGFR inhibitors.
METHODS: A Medline review of articles published in the last 10 years 
(1999-present) on EGFR in HNSCC was performed in combination with preliminary 
data from our laboratories.
RESULTS: Studies published to date suggest no association between the expression 
of EGFR on HNSCC tumors and clinical responses to EGFR inhibitors. Several 
mechanisms have been proposed to mediate clinical response to EGFR inhibitors in 
HNSCC. Cumulative results from our laboratories support the role of several 
mechanisms, including cellular immune activation and mutated EGFR variants, in 
contributing to the discrepancy between level of EGFR expression and clinical 
response to EGFR inhibitors.
CONCLUSION: The efficacy of EGFR targeted therapies may be mediated, at least in 
part, by the immune system and the presence of the truncated EGFR variant, 
EGFRvIII, among other factors. Criteria to identify the subset of patients 
likely to be responsive to EGFR targeted therapies are needed.

© 2010 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/hed.21365
PMCID: PMC2946515
PMID: 20848399 [Indexed for MEDLINE]