1. PLoS Pathog. 2010 Sep 30;6(9):e1001125. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1001125.

Molecular and evolutionary bases of within-patient genotypic and phenotypic 
diversity in Escherichia coli extraintestinal infections.

Levert M(1), Zamfir O, Clermont O, Bouvet O, Lespinats S, Hipeaux MC, Branger C, 
Picard B, Saint-Ruf C, Norel F, Balliau T, Zivy M, Le Nagard H, Cruveiller S, 
Chane-Woon-Ming B, Nilsson S, Gudelj I, Phan K, Ferenci T, Tenaillon O, Denamur 
E.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U722 and Université Paris 7 Denis Diderot, Faculté de Médecine, Site 
Xavier Bichat, Paris, France.

Erratum in
    PLoS Pathog. 2011 Jun;7(6). 
doi:10.1371/annotation/700dcb3b-3475-49a1-9064-d9d070cda7be. Cruvellier, 
Stéphane[corrected to Cruveiller, Stéphane].

Although polymicrobial infections, caused by combinations of viruses, bacteria, 
fungi and parasites, are being recognised with increasing frequency, little is 
known about the occurrence of within-species diversity in bacterial infections 
and the molecular and evolutionary bases of this diversity. We used multiple 
approaches to study the genomic and phenotypic diversity among 226 Escherichia 
coli isolates from deep and closed visceral infections occurring in 19 patients. 
We observed genomic variability among isolates from the same site within 11 
patients. This diversity was of two types, as patients were infected either by 
several distinct E. coli clones (4 patients) or by members of a single clone 
that exhibit micro-heterogeneity (11 patients); both types of diversity were 
present in 4 patients. A surprisingly wide continuum of antibiotic resistance, 
outer membrane permeability, growth rate, stress resistance, red dry and rough 
morphotype characteristics and virulence properties were present within the 
isolates of single clones in 8 of the 11 patients showing genomic 
micro-heterogeneity. Many of the observed phenotypic differences within clones 
affected the trade-off between self-preservation and nutritional competence 
(SPANC). We showed in 3 patients that this phenotypic variability was associated 
with distinct levels of RpoS in co-existing isolates. Genome mutational analysis 
and global proteomic comparisons in isolates from a patient revealed a star-like 
relationship of changes amongst clonally diverging isolates. A mathematical 
model demonstrated that multiple genotypes with distinct RpoS levels can 
co-exist as a result of the SPANC trade-off. In the cases involving infection by 
a single clone, we present several lines of evidence to suggest diversification 
during the infectious process rather than an infection by multiple isolates 
exhibiting a micro-heterogeneity. Our results suggest that bacteria are subject 
to trade-offs during an infectious process and that the observed diversity 
resembled results obtained in experimental evolution studies. Whatever the 
mechanisms leading to diversity, our results have strong medical implications in 
terms of the need for more extensive isolate testing before deciding on 
antibiotic therapies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1001125
PMCID: PMC2947995
PMID: 20941353 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.