1. Nutrition. 2011 Jan;27(1):3-20. doi: 10.1016/j.nut.2010.07.021. Epub 2010 Oct 
29.

Brain fuel metabolism, aging, and Alzheimer's disease.

Cunnane S(1), Nugent S(2), Roy M(2), Courchesne-Loyer A(2), Croteau E(3), 
Tremblay S(4), Castellano A(5), Pifferi F(6), Bocti C(7), Paquet N(3), Begdouri 
H(3), Bentourkia M(3), Turcotte E(3), Allard M(8), Barberger-Gateau P(9), Fulop 
T(7), Rapoport SI(10).

Author information:
(1)Research Center on Aging, Health and Social Services Center-Sherbrooke 
University Geriatrics Institute, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC, 
Canada; Department of Medicine, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC, 
Canada; Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Université de Sherbrooke, 
Sherbrooke, QC, Canada. Electronic address: stephen.cunnane@usherbrooke.ca.
(2)Research Center on Aging, Health and Social Services Center-Sherbrooke 
University Geriatrics Institute, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC, 
Canada; Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Université de Sherbrooke, 
Sherbrooke, QC, Canada.
(3)Department of Radiobiology and Nuclear Medicine, Université de Sherbrooke, 
Sherbrooke, QC, Canada.
(4)Research Center on Aging, Health and Social Services Center-Sherbrooke 
University Geriatrics Institute, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC, 
Canada; Department of Radiobiology and Nuclear Medicine, Université de 
Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC, Canada.
(5)Research Center on Aging, Health and Social Services Center-Sherbrooke 
University Geriatrics Institute, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC, 
Canada.
(6)UMR CNRS-MNHN 7179, Brunoy, France.
(7)Research Center on Aging, Health and Social Services Center-Sherbrooke 
University Geriatrics Institute, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC, 
Canada; Department of Medicine, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC, 
Canada.
(8)UMR CNRS 5231 and Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes, France.
(9)INSERM U897, Bordeaux F-33076, France; Université Victor Segalen Bordeaux 2, 
Bordeaux F-33076, France.
(10)Brain Physiology and Metabolism Section, National Institute of Aging, 
Bethesda, MD, USA.

Lower brain glucose metabolism is present before the onset of clinically 
measurable cognitive decline in two groups of people at risk of Alzheimer's 
disease--carriers of apolipoprotein E4, and in those with a maternal family 
history of AD. Supported by emerging evidence from in vitro and animal studies, 
these reports suggest that brain hypometabolism may precede and therefore 
contribute to the neuropathologic cascade leading to cognitive decline in AD. 
The reason brain hypometabolism develops is unclear but may include defects in 
brain glucose transport, disrupted glycolysis, and/or impaired mitochondrial 
function. Methodologic issues presently preclude knowing with certainty whether 
or not aging in the absence of cognitive impairment is necessarily associated 
with lower brain glucose metabolism. Nevertheless, aging appears to increase the 
risk of deteriorating systemic control of glucose utilization, which, in turn, 
may increase the risk of declining brain glucose uptake, at least in some brain 
regions. A contributing role of deteriorating glucose availability to or 
metabolism by the brain in AD does not exclude the opposite effect, i.e., that 
neurodegenerative processes in AD further decrease brain glucose metabolism 
because of reduced synaptic functionality and hence reduced energy needs, 
thereby completing a vicious cycle. Strategies to reduce the risk of AD by 
breaking this cycle should aim to (1) improve insulin sensitivity by improving 
systemic glucose utilization, or (2) bypass deteriorating brain glucose 
metabolism using approaches that safely induce mild, sustainable ketonemia.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nut.2010.07.021
PMCID: PMC3478067
PMID: 21035308 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts.