1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2010 Nov;89(6):403-425. doi:
10.1097/MD.0b013e3181fd8ec3.

Clinical features and outcome of patients with IRAK-4 and MyD88 deficiency.

Picard C(1), von Bernuth H, Ghandil P, Chrabieh M, Levy O, Arkwright PD, 
McDonald D, Geha RS, Takada H, Krause JC, Creech CB, Ku CL, Ehl S, Maródi L, 
Al-Muhsen S, Al-Hajjar S, Al-Ghonaium A, Day-Good NK, Holland SM, Gallin JI, 
Chapel H, Speert DP, Rodriguez-Gallego C, Colino E, Garty BZ, Roifman C, Hara T, 
Yoshikawa H, Nonoyama S, Domachowske J, Issekutz AC, Tang M, Smart J, Zitnik SE, 
Hoarau C, Kumararatne DS, Thrasher AJ, Davies EG, Bethune C, Sirvent N, de 
Ricaud D, Camcioglu Y, Vasconcelos J, Guedes M, Vitor AB, Rodrigo C, Almazán F, 
Méndez M, Aróstegui JI, Alsina L, Fortuny C, Reichenbach J, Verbsky JW, Bossuyt 
X, Doffinger R, Abel L, Puel A, Casanova JL.

Author information:
(1)From Study Center of Primary Immunodeficiencies, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux 
de Paris (CP); Necker Hospital, Paris, France. Laboratory of Human Genetics of 
Infectious Diseases (CP, HvB, PG, MC, CLK, L. Abel, AP, JLC), Necker Branch, 
INSERM U980, Paris, France. Paris Descartes University (CP, HvB, PG, MC, CLK, L. 
Abel, AP, JLC), Paris, France. Department of Pediatric Pneumology and Immunology 
(HvB), Charité Hospital-Humboldt University, Berlin, Germany. Prince Naif Center 
for Immunology Research (PG, SAM, SAH, AAG, JLC), College of Medicine, King Saud 
University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. Division of Infectious Diseases (OL); and 
Division of Immunology (DM, RSG), Children's Hospital Boston (OL), Boston, 
Massachusetts. Harvard Medical School (OL, DM, RSG), Boston, Massachusetts. 
University of Manchester (PDA), Royal Manchester Children's Hospital, 
Manchester, United Kingdom. Department of Pediatrics (HT, TH), Graduate School 
of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan. Department of Pediatrics 
(JCK, CBC), Division of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, Vanderbilt University, 
Nashville, Tennessee. Centre of Chronic Immunodeficiency (SE), University of 
Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. Department of Infectious and Pediatric Immunology 
(LM), Medical and Health Science Center, University of Debrecen, Debrecen, 
Hungary. Department of Pediatrics (SAM, SAH, AAG), King Faisal Specialist 
Hospital and Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. Department of Pediatrics 
(NKDG), Division of Allergy and Immunology, University of South Florida and All 
Children's Hospital, St. Petersburg, Florida. Laboratory of Clinical Infectious 
Diseases (SMH, JIG), National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland. University of Oxford and 
Oxford Radcliffe Hospital (HC), Oxford, United Kingdom. Division of Infectious 
and Immunological Diseases (DPS), Department of Pediatrics, University of 
British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. Department of Immunology 
(CRG), Dr Negrin University Hospital of Gran Canaria, Las Palmas de Gran 
Canaria, Spain. Department of Pediatrics (EC), Unit of Infectious Diseases, 
Insular-Materno-Infantil University Hospital, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain. 
Schneider Children's Medical Center (BZG), Petah Tiqva, Israel. Division of 
Immunology and Allergy (C. Roifman), Department of Pediatrics, Hospital for Sick 
Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Department of 
Neurology (HY), Miyagi Children's Hospital, Sendai, Japan. Department of 
Pediatrics (SN), National Defense Medical College, Saitama, Japan. Pediatrics, 
Microbiology and Immunology (JD), SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, New 
York. Dalhousie University (ACI), Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada. Royal Children's 
Hospital (MT, JS), Parkville, Victoria, Australia. University Children Hospital 
Ljubljana (SEZ), Ljubljana, Slovenia. Unité transversale d'Allergologie, 
Néphrologie et Immunologie Clinique (CH), Centre hospitalier universitaire de 
Tours, Tours, France. Department of Clinical Biochemistry and Immunology (DSK, 
RD), Addenbrookes Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom. Paediatric Immunology and 
Molecular Immunology Unit (AJT), Institute of Child Health, London, United 
Kingdom. Department of Clinical Immunology (EGD), Great Ormond St Hospital, 
London, United Kingdom. Immunology Department (CB), Derriford Hospital,Plymouth, 
United Kingdom. University Hospital Archet 2 (NS), Nice, France. Lenval 
Foundation (DDR), Children's Hospital, Nice, France. Cerrahpasa Medical School 
(YC), Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey. Clinical Pathology and Pediatric 
Department (JV, MG), General Hospital of Santo António, Porto, Portugal. 
Pediatric Department (ABV), Hospital S. João, Porto, Portugal. Pediatric 
Department (C. Rodrigo, FA, MM), Germans Trias i Pujol Hospital,Barcelona 
Autonomous University, Barcelona, Spain. Immunology Department-CDB (JIA), 
Hospital Clínic-IDIBAPS, Barcelona University, Barcelona, Spain. Pediatric 
Department (L. Alsina, CF), Hospital Sant Joan de Deu, Barcelona University, 
Barcelona, Spain. Immunology Department (JR), Universitäts-Kinderspital Zürich, 
Zürich, Switzerland. Pediatrics and Microbiology and Molecular Genetics (JMV), 
Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin. Experimental Laboratory 
Medicine (XB), Department of Medical Diagnostic Sciences, Biomedical Science 
Group, Catholic University Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. St. Giles Laboratory of 
Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases (JLC), Rockefeller Branch, The Rockefeller 
University, New York, New York. Pediatric Hematology-Immunology Unit (JLC), 
Necker Hospital, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France.

Autosomal recessive interleukin-1 receptor-associated kinase (IRAK)-4 and 
myeloid differentiation factor (MyD)88 deficiencies impair Toll-like receptor 
(TLR)- and interleukin-1 receptor-mediated immunity. We documented the clinical 
features and outcome of 48 patients with IRAK-4 deficiency and 12 patients with 
MyD88 deficiency, from 37 kindreds in 15 countries.The clinical features of 
IRAK-4 and MyD88 deficiency were indistinguishable. There were no severe viral, 
parasitic, and fungal diseases, and the range of bacterial infections was 
narrow. Noninvasive bacterial infections occurred in 52 patients, with a high 
incidence of infections of the upper respiratory tract and the skin, mostly 
caused by Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Staphylococcus aureus, respectively. The 
leading threat was invasive pneumococcal disease, documented in 41 patients 
(68%) and causing 72 documented invasive infections (52.2%). P. aeruginosa and 
Staph. aureus documented invasive infections also occurred (16.7% and 16%, 
respectively, in 13 and 13 patients, respectively). Systemic signs of 
inflammation were usually weak or delayed. The first invasive infection occurred 
before the age of 2 years in 53 (88.3%) and in the neonatal period in 19 (32.7%) 
patients. Multiple or recurrent invasive infections were observed in most 
survivors (n = 36/50, 72%).Clinical outcome was poor, with 24 deaths, in 10 
cases during the first invasive episode and in 16 cases of invasive pneumococcal 
disease. However, no death and invasive infectious disease were reported in 
patients after the age of 8 years and 14 years, respectively. Antibiotic 
prophylaxis (n = 34), antipneumococcal vaccination (n = 31), and/or IgG infusion 
(n = 19), when instituted, had a beneficial impact on patients until the teenage 
years, with no seemingly detectable impact thereafter.IRAK-4 and MyD88 
deficiencies predispose patients to recurrent life-threatening bacterial 
diseases, such as invasive pneumococcal disease in particular, in infancy and 
early childhood, with weak signs of inflammation. Patients and families should 
be informed of the risk of developing life-threatening infections; empiric 
antibacterial treatment and immediate medical consultation are strongly 
recommended in cases of suspected infection or moderate fever. Prophylactic 
measures in childhood are beneficial, until spontaneous improvement occurs in 
adolescence.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0b013e3181fd8ec3
PMCID: PMC3103888
PMID: 21057262 [Indexed for MEDLINE]