1. PLoS Genet. 2010 Nov 4;6(11):e1001194. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001194.

ATM limits incorrect end utilization during non-homologous end joining of 
multiple chromosome breaks.

Bennardo N(1), Stark JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cancer Biology and Irell and Manella Graduate School of 
Biological Sciences, Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope, Duarte, 
California, United States of America.

Chromosome rearrangements can form when incorrect ends are matched during end 
joining (EJ) repair of multiple chromosomal double-strand breaks (DSBs). We 
tested whether the ATM kinase limits chromosome rearrangements via suppressing 
incorrect end utilization during EJ repair of multiple DSBs. For this, we 
developed a system for monitoring EJ of two tandem DSBs that can be repaired 
using correct ends (Proximal-EJ) or incorrect ends (Distal-EJ, which causes loss 
of the DNA between the DSBs). In this system, two DSBs are induced in a 
chromosomal reporter by the meganuclease I-SceI. These DSBs are processed into 
non-cohesive ends by the exonuclease Trex2, which leads to the formation of 
I-SceI-resistant EJ products during both Proximal-EJ and Distal-EJ. Using this 
method, we find that genetic or chemical disruption of ATM causes a substantial 
increase in Distal-EJ, but not Proximal-EJ. We also find that the increase in 
Distal-EJ caused by ATM disruption is dependent on classical non-homologous end 
joining (c-NHEJ) factors, specifically DNA-PKcs, Xrcc4, and XLF. We present 
evidence that Nbs1-deficiency also causes elevated Distal-EJ, but not 
Proximal-EJ, to a similar degree as ATM-deficiency. In addition, to evaluate the 
roles of these factors on end processing, we examined Distal-EJ repair 
junctions. We found that ATM and Xrcc4 limit the length of deletions, whereas 
Nbs1 and DNA-PKcs promote short deletions. Thus, the regulation of end 
processing appears distinct from that of end utilization. In summary, we suggest 
that ATM is important to limit incorrect end utilization during c-NHEJ.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001194
PMCID: PMC2973825
PMID: 21079684 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.