1. PLoS One. 2011 Jan 20;6(1):e16020. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016020.

Phylogeny of Mycobacterium tuberculosis Beijing strains constructed from 
polymorphisms in genes involved in DNA replication, recombination and repair.

Mestre O(1), Luo T, Dos Vultos T, Kremer K, Murray A, Namouchi A, Jackson C, 
Rauzier J, Bifani P, Warren R, Rasolofo V, Mei J, Gao Q, Gicquel B.

Author information:
(1)Unité de Génétique Mycobactérienne, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: The Beijing family is a successful group of M. tuberculosis strains, 
often associated with drug resistance and widely distributed throughout the 
world. Polymorphic genetic markers have been used to type particular M. 
tuberculosis strains. We recently identified a group of polymorphic DNA repair 
replication and recombination (3R) genes. It was shown that evolution of M. 
tuberculosis complex strains can be studied using 3R SNPs and a high-resolution 
tool for strain discrimination was developed. Here we investigated the genetic 
diversity and propose a phylogeny for Beijing strains by analyzing polymorphisms 
in 3R genes.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: A group of 3R genes was sequenced in a 
collection of Beijing strains from different geographic origins. Sequence 
analysis and comparison with the ones of non-Beijing strains identified several 
SNPs. These SNPs were used to type a larger collection of Beijing strains and 
allowed identification of 26 different sequence types for which a phylogeny was 
constructed. Phylogenetic relationships established by sequence types were in 
agreement with evolutionary pathways suggested by other genetic markers, such as 
Large Sequence Polymorphisms (LSPs). A recent Beijing genotype (Bmyc10), which 
included 60% of strains from distinct parts of the world, appeared to be 
predominant.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We found SNPs in 3R genes associated with the Beijing 
family, which enabled discrimination of different groups and the proposal of a 
phylogeny. The Beijing family can be divided into different groups characterized 
by particular genetic polymorphisms that may reflect pathogenic features. These 
SNPs are new, potential genetic markers that may contribute to better understand 
the success of the Beijing family.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016020
PMCID: PMC3024326
PMID: 21283803 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.