1. Biochemistry. 2011 Apr 5;50(13):2550-8. doi: 10.1021/bi1020106. Epub 2011 Feb 
28.

Dissociation of apolipoprotein E oligomers to monomer is required for 
high-affinity binding to phospholipid vesicles.

Garai K(1), Baban B, Frieden C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Washington University 
School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, United States.

The apolipoprotein apoE plays a key role in cholesterol and lipid metabolism. 
There are three isoforms of this protein, one of which, apoE4, is the major risk 
factor for Alzheimer's disease. At micromolar concentrations all lipid-free apoE 
isoforms exist primarily as monomers, dimers, and tetramers. However, the 
molecular weight form of apoE that binds to lipid has not been clearly defined. 
We have examined the role of self-association of apoE with respect to 
interactions with phospholipids. Measurements of the time dependence of 
turbidity clearance of small unilamellar vesicles of 
dimyristoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DMPC) upon addition of apoE show that 
higher molecular weight oligomers bind poorly if at all. The kinetic data can be 
described by a reaction model in which tetramers and dimers of apoE must first 
dissociate to monomers which then bind to the liposome surface in a fast and 
reversible manner. A slow but not readily reversible conformational conversion 
of the monomer then occurs. Prior knowledge of the rate constants for the 
association-dissociation process allows us to determine the rate constant of the 
conformational conversion. This rate constant is isoform dependent and appears 
to correlate with the stability of the apoE isoforms with the rate of 
dissociation of the apoE oligomers to monomers being the rate-limiting process 
for lipidation. Differences in the lipidation kinetics between the apoE isoforms 
arise from their differences in the self-association behavior leading to the 
conclusion that self-association behavior may influence biological functions of 
apoE in an isoform-dependent manner.

DOI: 10.1021/bi1020106
PMCID: PMC3088999
PMID: 21322570 [Indexed for MEDLINE]