1. Front Synaptic Neurosci. 2010 Dec 22;2:152. doi: 10.3389/fnsyn.2010.00152. 
eCollection 2010.

Synapsin-dependent vesicle recruitment modulated by forskolin, phorbol ester and 
ca in mouse excitatory hippocampal synapses.

Hvalby O(1), Jensen V, Kao HT, Walaas SI.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, University of Oslo Oslo, Norway.

Repeated release of transmitter from presynaptic elements depends on 
stimulus-induced Ca(2+) influx together with recruitment and priming of synaptic 
vesicles from different vesicle pools. We have compared three different 
manipulations of synaptic strength, all of which are known to increase 
short-term synaptic efficacy through presynaptic mechanisms, in the 
glutamatergic CA3-to-CA1 stratum radiatum synapse in the mouse hippocampal slice 
preparation. Synaptic responses elicited from the readily releasable vesicle 
pool during low-frequency synaptic activation (0.1 Hz) were significantly 
enhanced by both the adenylate cyclase activator forskolin, the priming 
activator β-phorbol-12,13-dibutyrate (PDBu) and 4 mM [Ca(2+)](o') whereas during 
20 Hz stimulation, the same manipulations reduced the time needed to reach the 
peak and increased the magnitude of the resulting frequency facilitation. In 
contrast, paired-pulse facilitations were unchanged in the presence of 
forskolin, decreased by 4 mM [Ca(2+)](o) and essentially abolished by PDBu. The 
subsequent delayed response enhancement (DRE) responses, elicited during 
continuous 20 Hz stimulations and mediated by recruited vesicles, were enhanced 
by forskolin, essentially unchanged by PDBu and slightly decreased by 4 mM 
[Ca(2+)](o·) Similar experiments done on slices devoid of the vesicle-associated 
synapsin I and II proteins indicated that synapsin I/II-induced enhancements of 
vesicle recruitment were restricted to Ca(2+)-induced frequency facilitations 
and forskolin-induced enhancements of the early DRE phase, whereas the proteins 
had minor effects during PDBu-treatment and represented constraints on late 
Ca(2+)-induced responses. The data indicate that in these glutamatergic 
synapses, the comparable enhancements of single synaptic responses induced by 
these biochemical mechanisms can be transformed during prolonged synaptic 
stimulation into highly distinct short-term plasticity patterns, which are 
partly dependent on synapsins I/II.

DOI: 10.3389/fnsyn.2010.00152
PMCID: PMC3059703
PMID: 21423538