1. PLoS Biol. 2011 Mar;9(3):e1001027. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001027. Epub
2011  Mar 15.

A rigidifying salt-bridge favors the activity of thermophilic enzyme at high 
temperatures at the expense of low-temperature activity.

Lam SY(1), Yeung RC, Yu TH, Sze KH, Wong KB.

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, Centre for Protein Science and Crystallography, The 
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong SAR, China.

BACKGROUND: Thermophilic enzymes are often less active than their mesophilic 
homologues at low temperatures. One hypothesis to explain this observation is 
that the extra stabilizing interactions increase the rigidity of thermophilic 
enzymes and hence reduce their activity. Here we employed a thermophilic 
acylphosphatase from Pyrococcus horikoshii and its homologous mesophilic 
acylphosphatase from human as a model to study how local rigidity of an 
active-site residue affects the enzymatic activity.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: Acylphosphatases have a unique structural feature that its 
conserved active-site arginine residue forms a salt-bridge with the C-terminal 
carboxyl group only in thermophilic acylphosphatases, but not in mesophilic 
acylphosphatases. We perturbed the local rigidity of this active-site residue by 
removing the salt-bridge in the thermophilic acylphosphatase and by introducing 
the salt-bridge in the mesophilic homologue. The mutagenesis design was 
confirmed by x-ray crystallography. Removing the salt-bridge in the thermophilic 
enzyme lowered the activation energy that decreased the activation enthalpy and 
entropy. Conversely, the introduction of the salt-bridge to the mesophilic 
homologue increased the activation energy and resulted in increases in both 
activation enthalpy and entropy. Revealed by molecular dynamics simulations, the 
unrestrained arginine residue can populate more rotamer conformations, and the 
loss of this conformational freedom upon the formation of transition state 
justified the observed reduction in activation entropy.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results support the conclusion that restricting the active-site 
flexibility entropically favors the enzymatic activity at high temperatures. 
However, the accompanying enthalpy-entropy compensation leads to a stronger 
temperature-dependency of the enzymatic activity, which explains the less active 
nature of the thermophilic enzymes at low temperatures.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001027
PMCID: PMC3057955
PMID: 21423654 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.