1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2011 May;5(5):e1156. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0001156.
Epub  2011 May 24.

Host alternation is necessary to maintain the genome stability of rift valley 
fever virus.

Moutailler S(1), Roche B, Thiberge JM, Caro V, Rougeon F, Failloux AB.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Genetics of Bunyavirus, Department of Virology, Institut Pasteur, 
Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: Most arthropod-borne viruses (arboviruses) are RNA viruses, which 
are maintained in nature by replication cycles that alternate between arthropod 
and vertebrate hosts. Arboviruses appear to experience lower rates of evolution 
than RNA viruses that replicate in a single host. This genetic stability is 
assumed to result from a fitness trade-off imposed by host alternation, which 
constrains arbovirus genome evolution. To test this hypothesis, we used Rift 
Valley fever virus (RVFV), an arbovirus that can be transmitted either directly 
(between vertebrates during the manipulation of infected tissues, and between 
mosquitoes by vertical transmission) or indirectly (from one vertebrate to 
another by mosquito-borne transmission).
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: RVFV was serially passaged in BHK21 (hamster) or 
Aag2 (Aedes aegypti) cells, or in alternation between the two cell types. After 
30 passages, these single host-passaged viruses lost their virulence and induced 
protective effects against a challenge with a virulent virus. Large deletions in 
the NSs gene that encodes the virulence factor were detectable from the 15(th) 
serial passage onwards in BHK21 cells and from the 10(th) passage in Aag2 cells. 
The phosphoprotein NSs is not essential to viral replication allowing clones 
carrying deletions in NSs to predominate as they replicate slightly more 
rapidly. No genetic changes were found in viruses that were passaged alternately 
between arthropod and vertebrate cells. Furthermore, alternating passaged 
viruses presenting complete NSs gene remained virulent after 30 passages.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our results strongly support the view that alternating 
replication is necessary to maintain the virulence factor carried by the NSs 
phosphoprotein.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0001156
PMCID: PMC3101185
PMID: 21629727 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.