1. PLoS One. 2011;6(5):e19425. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019425. Epub 2011 May
16.

Rational design of protein stability: effect of (2S,4R)-4-fluoroproline on the 
stability and folding pathway of ubiquitin.

Crespo MD(1), Rubini M.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biophysics, ETH-Hönggerberg, Zürich, 
Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Many strategies have been employed to increase the conformational 
stability of proteins. The use of 4-substituted proline analogs capable to 
induce pre-organization in target proteins is an attractive tool to deliver an 
additional conformational stability without perturbing the overall protein 
structure. Both, peptides and proteins containing 4-fluorinated proline 
derivatives can be stabilized by forcing the pyrrolidine ring in its favored 
puckering conformation. The fluorinated pyrrolidine rings of proline can 
preferably stabilize either a C(γ)-exo or a C(γ)-endo ring pucker in dependence 
of proline chirality (4R/4S) in a complex protein structure. To examine whether 
this rational strategy can be generally used for protein stabilization, we have 
chosen human ubiquitin as a model protein which contains three proline residues 
displaying C(γ)-exo puckering.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: While (2S,4R)-4-fluoroproline ((4R)-FPro) 
containing ubiquitinin can be expressed in related auxotrophic Escherichia coli 
strain, all attempts to incorporate (2S,4S)-4-fluoroproline ((4S)-FPro) failed. 
Our results indicate that (4R)-FPro is favoring the C(γ)-exo conformation 
present in the wild type structure and stabilizes the protein structure due to a 
pre-organization effect. This was confirmed by thermal and guanidinium 
chloride-induced denaturation profile analyses, where we observed an increase in 
stability of -4.71 kJ·mol(-1) in the case of (4R)-FPro containing ubiquitin 
((4R)-FPro-ub) compared to wild type ubiquitin (wt-ub). Expectedly, activity 
assays revealed that (4R)-FPro-ub retained the full biological activity compared 
to wt-ub.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The results fully confirm the general applicability of 
incorporating fluoroproline derivatives for improving protein stability. In 
general, a rational design strategy that enforces the natural occurring proline 
puckering conformation can be used to stabilize the desired target protein.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019425
PMCID: PMC3095602
PMID: 21625626 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.