1. BMC Proc. 2011 Jun 3;5 Suppl 4(Suppl 4):S18. doi: 10.1186/1753-6561-5-S4-S18.

Across-line SNP association study for (innate) immune and behavioral traits in 
laying hens.

van der Poel JJ(1), Biscarini F, Rodenburg BT, van Arendonk JA, Parmentier HK, 
Jungerius AP, Bovenhuis H.

Author information:
(1)Animal Breeding and Genomics Centre, Wageningen University, PO Box 338, 6700 
AH Wageningen, The Netherlands. jan.vanderpoel@wur.nl.

BACKGROUND: An association study between single nucleotide polymorphism markers 
(SNP) and (innate and adaptive) immune parameters but also feather condition 
score on the back, rump and belly of laying hens was performed. The immune 
parameters measured in blood samples were natural and acquired antibody titers 
and complement activity. Feather condition score as a measure of feather damage 
was determined, this parameter is closely related to feather pecking behavior in 
hens housed in groups.The aim of the study was to detect associations between 
genetic markers and immune parameters and feather condition score across nine 
lines of laying hens, focusing on the feather peckers as well as on the victims 
of feather pecking.
METHODS: A novel approach based on across-line analysis and testing of the 
SNP-by-line interaction was performed.
RESULTS: In total 59 significant associations between SNP and immune traits were 
detected. Previously identified QTL were confirmed and new associations of genes 
regulating immune function identified. The IL17A gene (chromosome 3) influences 
natural and acquired antibody titers and activation of classical and alternative 
complement pathways. The major histocompatibility complex on chromosome 16 
showed significant association with natural and acquired antibody titers and 
classical complement activity. The IL12B and IRF1 genes on chromosome 13 were 
associated with natural antibody titers.The direct effect of the genotype of an 
individual on its feather condition and the associative effect of the genotype 
of the cage mates on the individual's feather condition were analyzed. The 
direct genetic effect can be described as the susceptibility to be pecked at, 
and the associative genetic effect as the propensity to perform feather pecking. 
Eleven significant associations were detected for the direct effect, and 81 for 
the associative effect. The serotonin receptor 2C (HTR2C) on chromosome 4 was 
highlighted in both analyses.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results confirmed previously identified QTL and identified new 
associations of genes regulating immune function. The results for feather 
condition score supports existing evidence of involvement of the serotonergic 
system in feather pecking in laying hens. Immune regulatory genes were found to 
be associated to feather condition score, revealing relationships between the 
immune system and behavior.

DOI: 10.1186/1753-6561-5-S4-S18
PMCID: PMC3108212
PMID: 21645297