1. Am J Kidney Dis. 2011 Aug;58(2):186-95. doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2011.01.025. Epub 
2011 Jun 12.

Genetic diagnosis in consanguineous families with kidney disease by homozygosity 
mapping coupled with whole-exome sequencing.

Al-Romaih KI(1), Genovese G, Al-Mojalli H, Al-Othman S, Al-Manea H, Al-Suleiman 
M, Al-Jondubi M, Atallah N, Al-Rodayyan M, Weins A, Pollak MR, Adra CN.

Author information:
(1)Stem Cell Therapy Program, King Faisal Specialist Hospital & Research Centre, 
Riyadh, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

BACKGROUND: Accurate diagnosis of the primary cause of an individual's kidney 
disease can be essential for proper management. Some kidney diseases have 
overlapping histopathologic features despite being caused by defects in 
different genes. In this report, we describe 2 consanguineous Saudi Arabian 
families in which individuals presented with kidney failure and mixed clinical 
and histologic features initially believed to be consistent with focal segmental 
glomerulosclerosis.
STUDY DESIGN: Case series.
SETTING & PARTICIPANTS: We studied members of 2 apparently unrelated families 
from Saudi Arabia with kidney disease.
MEASUREMENTS: Whole-genome single-nucleotide polymorphism analysis followed by 
targeted isolation and sequencing of exons using genomic DNA samples from 
affected members of these families, followed by additional focused genotyping 
and sequence analysis.
RESULTS: The 2 apparently unrelated families shared a region of homozygosity on 
chromosome 2q13. Exome sequence from affected individuals lacked sequence reads 
from the NPHP1 gene, which is located within this homozygous region. Additional 
polymerase chain reaction-based genotyping confirmed that affected individuals 
had NPHP1 deletions, rather than defects in a known focal segmental 
glomerulosclerosis-associated gene.
LIMITATIONS: The methods used here may not result in a clear genetic diagnosis 
in many cases of apparent familial kidney disease.
CONCLUSIONS: This analysis shows the power of new high-throughput genotyping and 
sequencing technologies to aid in the rapid genetic diagnosis of individuals 
with an inherited form of kidney disease. We believe it is likely that such 
tools may become useful clinical genetic tools and alter the manner in which 
diagnoses are made in nephrology.

Copyright © 2011 National Kidney Foundation, Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2011.01.025
PMCID: PMC3291334
PMID: 21658830 [Indexed for MEDLINE]