1. West J Emerg Med. 2011 Feb;12(1):11-6.

Genetics of warfarin sensitivity in an emergency department population with 
thromboembolic.

Johnson SW(1), Henderson S.

Author information:
(1)Keck School of Medicine of the University of Southern California, Los 
Angeles, CA.

BACKGROUND: Emergency department (ED) patients with venous thromboembolism (VTE) 
are eventually treated with a standard dose of warfarin despite the fact that a 
number of patients are known to be sensitive to warfarin and may experience 
supra-therapeutic INRs and adverse bleeding events. Pharmacogenetics is an 
emerging field of medical practice that seeks to improve drug safety and 
efficacy in an individual patient by tailoring treatment to the patient's known 
genetic makeup.
OBJECTIVE: To identify patients with risk for warfarin sensitivity among an ED 
population with VTE and to assess if the warfarin sensitivity mutations were of 
significant enough prevalence to be of clinical significance in customizing 
treatment of VTE. We sought in a pilot study to identify if testing for common 
CYP2C9 and VKORC1 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in patients who were 
likely to begin warfarin treatment was feasible in an ED setting.
METHODS: A prospective study that identified and enrolled patients presenting to 
our ED with high clinical suspicion of VTE. Those with high clinical suspicion 
of VTE were defined as those who had a Doppler ultrasound or computed tomography 
pulmonary angiography (CTPA) ordered by the primary emergency physician. Blood 
was taken and processed to ascertain the following SNPs: CYP2C9*2, CYP2C9*3, and 
VKORC1 3673.
RESULTS: Of the 194 patients enrolled, 132 (68.0%) had at least one known 
warfarin sensitivity mutation and 114 (58.8%) had the most clinically 
significant VKORC1 3673 mutation.
CONCLUSION: A majority of our patients had at least one mutation associated with 
the atypical metabolism of warfarin. Over half of our population had the most 
clinically significant VKORC1 3673 mutation. They would likely benefit from 
individualized warfarin dosing if ever needing anticoagulation. Our initial 
pilot study shows that allele frequencies of target warfarin sensitivity SNPs in 
our patient population are frequent enough to make initiation of personalized 
warfarin dosing feasible.

PMCID: PMC3088368
PMID: 21691466