1. Biochem J. 2012 Feb 1;441(3):803-12. doi: 10.1042/BJ20111474.

The multifunctional poly(A)-binding protein (PABP) 1 is subject to extensive 
dynamic post-translational modification, which molecular modelling suggests 
plays an important role in co-ordinating its activities.

Brook M(1), McCracken L, Reddington JP, Lu ZL, Morrice NA, Gray NK.

Author information:
(1)MRC Centre for Reproductive Health/MRC Human Reproductive Sciences Unit, 
Queen's Medical Research Institute, University of Edinburgh, 47 Little France 
Crescent, Edinburgh EH16 4TJ, Scotland, UK. matt.brook@ed.ac.uk

PABP1 [poly(A)-binding protein 1] is a central regulator of mRNA translation and 
stability and is required for miRNA (microRNA)-mediated regulation and 
nonsense-mediated decay. Numerous protein, as well as RNA, interactions underlie 
its multi-functional nature; however, it is unclear how its different activities 
are co-ordinated, since many partners interact via overlapping binding sites. In 
the present study, we show that human PABP1 is subject to elaborate 
post-translational modification, identifying 14 modifications located throughout 
the functional domains, all but one of which are conserved in mouse. 
Intriguingly, PABP1 contains glutamate and aspartate methylations, modifications 
of unknown function in eukaryotes, as well as lysine and arginine methylations, 
and lysine acetylations. The latter dramatically alter the pI of PABP1, an 
effect also observed during the cell cycle, suggesting that different biological 
processes/stimuli can regulate its modification status, although PABP1 also 
probably exists in differentially modified subpopulations within cells. Two 
lysine residues were differentially acetylated or methylated, revealing that 
PABP1 may be the first example of a cytoplasmic protein utilizing a 
'methylation/acetylation switch'. Modelling using available structures 
implicates these modifications in regulating interactions with individual PAM2 
(PABP-interacting motif 2)-containing proteins, suggesting a direct link between 
PABP1 modification status and the formation of distinct mRNP (messenger 
ribonucleoprotein) complexes that regulate mRNA fate in the cytoplasm.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20111474
PMCID: PMC3298439
PMID: 22004688 [Indexed for MEDLINE]