1. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e27552. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0027552. Epub 2011 Nov
8.

Innate host response in primary human hepatocytes with hepatitis C virus 
infection.

Yang D(1), Liu N, Zuo C, Lei S, Wu X, Zhou F, Liu C, Zhu H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, College of Biology of Hunan University, 
Changsha, China.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: The interaction between hepatitis C virus (HCV) and innate 
antiviral defense systems in primary human hepatocytes is not well understood. 
The objective of this study is to examine how primary human hepatocytes response 
to HCV infection.
METHODS: An infectious HCV isolate JFH1 was used to infect isolated primary 
human hepatocytes. HCV RNA or NS5A protein in the cells was detected by 
real-time PCR or immunofluorescence staining respectively. Apoptosis was 
examined with flow cytometry. Mechanisms of HCV-induced IFN-β expression and 
apoptosis were determined.
RESULTS: Primary human hepatocytes were susceptible to JFH1 virus and released 
infectious virus. IFN-α inhibited viral RNA replication in the cells. IFN-β and 
interferon-stimulated genes were induced in the cells during acute infection. 
HCV infection induced apoptosis of primary human hepatocytes through the 
TRAIL-mediated pathway. Silencing RIG-I expression in primary human hepatocytes 
inhibited IFN-β and TRAIL expression and blocked apoptosis of the cells, which 
facilitated viral RNA replication in the cells. Moreover, HCV NS34A protein 
inhibited viral induced IFN-β expression in primary human hepatocytes.
CONCLUSION: Innate host response is intact in HCV-infected primary human 
hepatocytes. RIG-I plays a key role in the induction of IFN and TRAIL by viruses 
and apoptosis of primary human hepatocytes via activation of the TRAIL-mediated 
pathway. HCV NS34A protein appears to be capable of disrupting the innate 
antiviral host responses in primary human hepatocytes. Our study provides a 
novel mechanism by which primary human hepatocytes respond to natural HCV 
infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0027552
PMCID: PMC3210809
PMID: 22087337 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.