1. PLoS One. 2011;6(12):e28117. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0028117. Epub 2011 Dec
2.

Both hMutSα and hMutSß DNA mismatch repair complexes participate in 
5-fluorouracil cytotoxicity.

Tajima A(1), Iwaizumi M, Tseng-Rogenski S, Cabrera BL, Carethers JM.

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, University of 
California San Diego, La Jolla, California, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Patients with advanced microsatellite unstable colorectal cancers do 
not show a survival benefit from 5-fluorouracil (5-FU)-based chemotherapy. We 
and others have shown that the DNA mismatch repair (MMR) complex hMutSα binds 
5-FU incorporated into DNA. Although hMutSß is known to interact with 
interstrand crosslinks (ICLs) induced by drugs such as cisplatin and psoralen, 
it has not been demonstrated to interact with 5-FU incorporated into DNA. Our 
aim was to examine if hMutSß plays a role in 5-FU recognition.
METHODS: We compared the normalized growth of 5-FU treated cells containing 
either or both mismatch repair complexes using MTT and clonogenic assays. We 
utilized oligonucleotides containing 5-FU and purified baculovirus-synthesized 
hMutSα and hMutSß in electromobility shift assays (EMSA) and further analyzed 
binding using surface plasmon resonance.
RESULTS: MTT and clonogenic assays after 5-FU treatment demonstrated the most 
cytotoxicity in cells with both hMutSα and hMutSß, intermediate cytotoxicity in 
cells with hMutSα alone, and the least cytotoxicity in cells with hMutSß alone, 
hMutSß binds 5-FU-modified DNA, but its relative binding is less than the 
binding of 5-FU-modified DNA by hMutSα.
CONCLUSION: Cytotoxicity induced by 5-FU is dependent on intact DNA MMR, with 
relative cell death correlating directly with hMutSα and/or hMutSß 5-FU binding 
ability (hMutSα>hMutSß). The MMR complexes provide a hierarchical 
chemosensitivity for 5-FU cell death, and may have implications for treatment of 
patients with certain MMR-deficient tumors.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0028117
PMCID: PMC3229514
PMID: 22164234 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.