1. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 2012;8:13-25. doi: 10.2147/NDT.S16085. Epub 2011 Dec
 23.

A new treatment for focal dystonias: incobotulinumtoxinA (Xeomin®), a botulinum 
neurotoxin type A free from complexing proteins.

Jimenez-Shahed J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.

Dystonia is a movement disorder of uncertain pathogenesis that is characterized 
by involuntary and inappropriate muscle contractions which cause sustained 
abnormal postures and movements of multiple or single (focal) body regions. The 
most common focal dystonias are cervical dystonia (CD) and blepharospasm (BSP). 
The first-line recommended treatment for CD and BSP is injection with botulinum 
toxin (BoNT), of which two serotypes are available: BoNT type A (BoNT/A) and 
BoNT type B (BoNT/B). Conventional BoNT formulations include inactive complexing 
proteins, which may increase the risk for antigenicity, possibly leading to 
treatment failure. IncobotulinumtoxinA (Xeomin(®); Merz Pharmaceuticals GmbH, 
Frankfurt, Germany) is a BoNT/A agent that has been recently Food and Drug 
Administration-approved for the treatment of adults with CD and adults with BSP 
previously treated with onabotulinumtoxinA (Botox(®); Allergen, Inc, Irvine, CA) 
- a conventional BoNT/A. IncobotulinumtoxinA is the only BoNT product that is 
free of complexing proteins. The necessity of complexing proteins for the 
effectiveness of botulinum toxin treatment has been challenged by preclinical 
and clinical studies with incobotulinumtoxinA. These studies have also suggested 
that incobotulinumtoxinA is associated with a lower risk for stimulating 
antibody formation than onabotulinumtoxinA. In phase 3 noninferiority trials, 
incobotulinumtoxinA demonstrated significant improvements in CD and BSP symptoms 
in both primary and secondary measures, compared with baseline, and met criteria 
for noninferiority versus onabotulinumtoxinA. In placebo-controlled trials, 
incobotulinumtoxinA also significantly improved the symptoms of CD and BSP, with 
robust outcomes in both primary and secondary measures. The use of 
incobotulinumtoxinA has been well tolerated in all trials, with an adverse event 
profile similar to that of onabotulinumtoxinA. Based on these data, 
incobotulinumtoxinA is a safe and effective BoNT/A for the treatment of CD and 
BSP, and may pose a lower risk for immunogenicity leading to treatment failure 
compared with other available BoNT agents. This paper reviews the treatment of 
focal dystonias with BoNTs, in particular, incobotulinumtoxinA. Controlled 
trials from the existing incobotulinumtoxinA literature are summarized.

DOI: 10.2147/NDT.S16085
PMCID: PMC3261649
PMID: 22275842