1. Int J Nanomedicine. 2012;7:307-24. doi: 10.2147/IJN.S25657. Epub 2012 Jan 18.

Mithramycin encapsulated in polymeric micelles by microfluidic technology as 
novel therapeutic protocol for beta-thalassemia.

Capretto L(1), Mazzitelli S, Brognara E, Lampronti I, Carugo D, Hill M, Zhang X, 
Gambari R, Nastruzzi C.

Author information:
(1)Engineering Sciences, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK.

This report shows that the DNA-binding drug, mithramycin, can be efficiently 
encapsulated in polymeric micelles (PM-MTH), based on Pluronic(®) block 
copolymers, by a new microfluidic approach. The effect of different production 
parameters has been investigated for their effect on PM-MTH characteristics. The 
compared analysis of PM-MTH produced by microfluidic and conventional bulk 
mixing procedures revealed that microfluidics provides a useful platform for the 
production of PM-MTH with improved controllability, reproducibility, smaller 
size, and polydispersity. Finally, an investigation of the effects of PM-MTH, 
produced by microfluidic and conventional bulk mixing procedures, on the 
erythroid differentiation of both human erythroleukemia and human erythroid 
precursor cells is reported. It is demonstrated that PM-MTH exhibited a slightly 
lower toxicity and more pronounced differentiative activity when compared to the 
free drug. In addition, PM-MTH were able to upregulate preferentially γ-globin 
messenger ribonucleic acid production and to increase fetal hemoglobin (HbF) 
accumulation, the percentage of HbF-containing cells, and their HbF content 
without stimulating α-globin gene expression, which is responsible for the 
clinical symptoms of β-thalassemia. These results represent an important first 
step toward a potential clinical application, since an increase in HbF could 
alleviate the symptoms underlying β-thalassemia and sickle cell anemia. In 
conclusion, this report suggests that PM-MTH produced by microfluidic approach 
warrants further evaluation as a potential therapeutic protocol for 
β-thalassemia.

DOI: 10.2147/IJN.S25657
PMCID: PMC3265999
PMID: 22287841 [Indexed for MEDLINE]