1. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e32462. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032462. Epub 2012 Mar
7.

Bone marrow transplantation restores follicular maturation and steroid hormones 
production in a mouse model for primary ovarian failure.

Ghadami M(1), El-Demerdash E, Zhang D, Salama SA, Binhazim AA, Archibong AE, 
Chen X, Ballard BR, Sairam MR, Al-Hendy A.

Author information:
(1)Endocrine and Metabolism Research Institute, and Department of Medical 
Genetics, School of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran.

Recent studies suggest that bone marrow stem cells (BMSCs) are promising grafts 
to treat a variety of diseases, including reproductive dysfunction. Primary 
ovarian failure is characterized by amenorrhea and infertility in a normal 
karyotype female, with an elevated serum level of follicle-stimulating hormone 
(FSH) and a decrease level of estrogen caused by a mutation in FSH receptor 
(FSHR) gene. Currently, there is no effective treatment for this condition. The 
phenotype of FSHR (-/-) mouse, FORKO (follitropin receptor knockout), is a 
suitable model to study ovarian failure in humans. Female FORKO mice have 
elevated FSH, decreased estrogen levels, are sterile because of the absence of 
folliculogenesis, and display thin uteri and small nonfunctional ovaries. In 
this study, we determined the effects of BMSC transplantation on reproductive 
physiology in this animal model. Twenty four hours post BMSC transplantation, 
treated animals showed detectable estroidogeneic changes in daily vaginal smear. 
Significant increase in total body weight and reproductive organs was observed 
in treated animals. Hemotoxylin and eosin (H&E) evaluation of the ovaries 
demonstrated significant increase in both the maturation and the total number of 
the follicles in treated animals. The FSH dropped to 40-50% and estrogen 
increased 4-5.5 times in the serum of treated animals compared to controls. The 
FSHR mRNA was detected in the ovaries of treated animals. Our results show that 
intravenously injected BMSCs were able to reach the ovaries of FORKO mice, 
differentiate and express FHSR gene, make FSHR responsive to FSH, resume 
estrogen hormone production, and restore folliculogenesis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032462
PMCID: PMC3296713
PMID: 22412875 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.