1. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e33275. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0033275. Epub 2012 Mar
29.

Evaluation of genetic mutations associated with Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
resistance to amikacin, kanamycin and capreomycin: a systematic review.

Georghiou SB(1), Magana M, Garfein RS, Catanzaro DG, Catanzaro A, Rodwell TC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, 
California, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Rapid molecular diagnostics for detecting multidrug-resistant and 
extensively drug-resistant tuberculosis (M/XDR-TB) primarily identify mutations 
in Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) genes associated with drug resistance. Their 
accuracy, however, is dependent largely on the strength of the association 
between a specific mutation and the phenotypic resistance of the isolate with 
that mutation, which is not always 100%. While this relationship is well 
established and reliable for first-line anti-TB drugs, rifampin and isoniazid, 
it is less well-studied and understood for second-line, injectable drugs, 
amikacin (AMK), kanamycin (KAN) and capreomycin (CAP).
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We conducted a systematic review of all 
published studies evaluating Mtb mutations associated with resistance to AMK, 
KAN, CAP in order to characterize the diversity and frequency of mutations as 
well as describe the strength of the association between specific mutations and 
phenotypic resistance in global populations. Our objective was to determine the 
potential utility and reliability of these mutations as diagnostic markers for 
detecting AMK, KAN and CAP resistance. Mutation data was reviewed for 1,585 
unique clinical isolates from four continents and over 18 countries. Mutations 
in the rrs, tlyA, eis promoter and gidB genes were associated with AMK, KAN 
and/or CAP resistance.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The rrs A1401G mutation was present in the majority of 
AMK, KAN and CAP resistant Mtb strains reviewed, but was also found in 7% of CAP 
susceptible strains. The 1401 mutation alone, however, was not found with 
sufficient frequency to detect more than 70-80% of global Mtb strains resistant 
to AMK and CAP, and 60% of strains resistant to KAN. Additional mutations in the 
rrs, eis promoter, tlyA and gidB genes appear to be associated with resistance 
and could improve sensitivity and specificity of future diagnostics.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0033275
PMCID: PMC3315572
PMID: 22479378 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.