1. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e36198. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0036198. Epub 2012 May
4.

The fbpA/sapM double knock out strain of Mycobacterium tuberculosis is highly 
attenuated and immunogenic in macrophages.

Saikolappan S(1), Estrella J, Sasindran SJ, Khan A, Armitige LY, Jagannath C, 
Dhandayuthapani S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas Health Science 
Center at San Antonio, Edinburg, Texas, United States of America.

Tuberculosis (TB), caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb), is the leading 
cause of death due to bacterial infections in mankind, and BCG, an attenuated 
strain of Mycobacterium bovis, is an approved vaccine. BCG sequesters in 
immature phagosomes of antigen presenting cells (APCs), which do not fuse with 
lysosomes, leading to decreased antigen processing and reduced Th1 responses. 
However, an Mtb derived ΔfbpA attenuated mutant underwent limited phagosome 
maturation, enhanced immunogenicity and was as effective as BCG in protecting 
mice against TB. To facilitate phagosome maturation of ΔfbpA, we disrupted an 
additional gene sapM, which encodes for an acid phosphatase. Compared to the 
wild type Mtb, the ΔfbpAΔsapM (double knock out; DKO) strain was attenuated for 
growth in mouse macrophages and PMA activated human THP1 macrophages. 
Attenuation correlated with increased oxidants in macrophages in response to DKO 
infection and enhanced labeling of lysosomal markers (CD63 and rab7) on DKO 
phagosomes. An in vitro Antigen 85B peptide presentation assay was used to 
determine antigen presentation to T cells by APCs infected with DKO or other 
mycobacterial strains. This revealed that DKO infected APCs showed the strongest 
ability to present Ag85B to T cells (>2500 pgs/mL in 4 hrs) as compared to APCs 
infected with wild type Mtb or ΔfbpA or ΔsapM strain (<1000 pgs/mL in 4 hrs), 
indicating that DKO strain has enhanced immunogenicity than other strains. The 
ability of DKO to undergo lysosomal fusion and vacuolar acidification correlated 
with antigen presentation since bafilomycin, that inhibits acidification in 
APCs, reduced antigen presentation. Finally, the DKO vaccine elicited a better 
Th1 response in mice after subcutaneous vaccination than either ΔfbpA or ΔsapM. 
Since ΔfbpA has been used in mice as a candidate vaccine and the DKO 
(ΔfbpAΔsapM) mutant is more immunogenic than ΔfbpA, we propose the DKO is a 
potential anti-tuberculosis vaccine.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0036198
PMCID: PMC3344844
PMID: 22574140 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.