1. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e39483. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039483. Epub 2012 Jun
19.

Knockdown of the Drosophila fused in sarcoma (FUS) homologue causes deficient 
locomotive behavior and shortening of motoneuron terminal branches.

Sasayama H(1), Shimamura M, Tokuda T, Azuma Y, Yoshida T, Mizuno T, Nakagawa M, 
Fujikake N, Nagai Y, Yamaguchi M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medical Science, Kyoto 
Prefectural University of Medicine, Kamigyo-ku, Kyoto, Japan.

Mutations in the fused in sarcoma/translated in liposarcoma gene (FUS/TLS, FUS) 
have been identified in sporadic and familial forms of amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis (ALS). FUS is an RNA-binding protein that is normally localized in the 
nucleus, but is mislocalized to the cytoplasm in ALS, and comprises cytoplasmic 
inclusions in ALS-affected areas. However, it is still unknown whether the 
neurodegeneration that occurs in ALS is caused by the loss of FUS nuclear 
function, or by the gain of toxic function due to cytoplasmic FUS aggregation. 
Cabeza (Caz) is a Drosophila orthologue of human FUS. Here, we generated 
Drosophila models with Caz knockdown, and investigated their phenotypes. In 
wild-type Drosophila, Caz was strongly expressed in the central nervous system 
of larvae and adults. Caz did not colocalize with a presynaptic marker, 
suggesting that Caz physiologically functions in neuronal cell bodies and/or 
their axons. Fly models with neuron-specific Caz knockdown exhibited reduced 
climbing ability in adulthood and anatomical defects in presynaptic terminals of 
motoneurons in third instar larvae. Our results demonstrated that decreased 
expression of Drosophila Caz is sufficient to cause degeneration of motoneurons 
and locomotive disability in the absence of abnormal cytoplasmic Caz aggregates, 
suggesting that the pathogenic mechanism underlying FUS-related ALS should be 
ascribed more to the loss of physiological FUS functions in the nucleus than to 
the toxicity of cytoplasmic FUS aggregates. Since the Caz-knockdown Drosophila 
model we presented recapitulates key features of human ALS, it would be a 
suitable animal model for the screening of genes and chemicals that might modify 
the pathogenic processes that lead to the degeneration of motoneurons in ALS.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039483
PMCID: PMC3378546
PMID: 22724023 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.