1. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e39968. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039968. Epub 2012 Jun
26.

AF1q: a novel mediator of basal and 4-HPR-induced apoptosis in ovarian cancer 
cells.

Tiberio P(1), Cavadini E, Callari M, Daidone MG, Appierto V.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Fondazione IRCCS 
Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan, Italy. paola.tiberio@istitutotumori.mi.it

BACKGROUND: Fenretinide (4-HPR) is a synthetic retinoid that exhibits potent 
antitumor and chemopreventive activities against different malignancies, 
including ovarian tumors. We previously showed that in ovarian cancer cells, 
4-HPR induces apoptosis through a signaling cascade starting from reactive 
oxygen species (ROS) generation and involving endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress 
response, Jun N-terminal Kinase (JNK) activation, and induction of the 
proapoptotic PLAcental Bone morphogenetic protein (PLAB). Since recent studies 
have shown that the oncogene ALL1-fused from chromosome 1q (AF1q), a retinoic 
acid target gene, is implicated in apoptosis induction by several therapeutic 
agents, we investigated its possible involvement in the apoptosis induced by 
4-HPR in ovarian cancer cells.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Protein expression analysis, performed in 
ovarian cancer cells and extended to other histotypes (breast, neuroblastoma, 
and cervical), revealed that 4-HPR enhanced AF1q expression in cancer cells 
sensitive to the retinoid but not in resistant cells. Through gene silencing, 
AF1q was found functionally involved in 4-HPR-induced apoptosis in A2780, an 
ovarian cancer cell line highly sensitive to retinoid growth inhibitory and 
apoptotic effects. Inhibition of the signaling intermediates of the 4-HPR 
apoptotic cascade showed that AF1q upregulation was depended on prior generation 
of ROS, induction of ER stress response, JNK activation, and PLAB upmodulation. 
Finally, we found that direct overexpression of AF1q, in the absence of external 
stimuli, increased apoptosis in ovarian cancer cell lines.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The study expands the knowledge of the 4-HPR mechanism 
of action, which has not yet been completely elucidated, identifying AF1q as a 
novel mediator of retinoid anticancer activity. In addition, we demonstrate, for 
the first time, that AF1q plays a role in the onset of basal apoptosis in 
ovarian cancer cells, thus providing new information about the activity of this 
protein whose biologic functions are mostly unknown.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039968
PMCID: PMC3383705
PMID: 22761939 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.