1. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e40242. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040242. Epub 2012 Jul
6.

Measuring parathyroid hormone (PTH) in patients with oxidative stress--do we 
need a fourth generation parathyroid hormone assay?

Hocher B(1), Armbruster FP, Stoeva S, Reichetzeder C, Grön HJ, Lieker I, 
Khadzhynov D, Slowinski T, Roth HJ.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Nutritional Science, University of Potsdam, Potsdam-Rehbrücke, 
Germany. hocher@uni-potsdam.de

Oxidation of PTH at methionine residues results in loss of biological activity. 
PTH may be oxidized in patients with renal disease. The aim of this study was to 
develop an assay considering oxidation of PTH. Oxidized hPTH was analyzed by 
high resolution nano-liquid chromatography coupled to ESI-FTT tandem mass 
spectrometry (nanoLC-ESI-FT-MS/MS) directly and after proteolytic cleavage. The 
oxidized hPTH(1-84) sample shows TIC-peaks at 18-20 min and several mass peaks 
due to mass shifts caused by oxidations. No significant signal for oxidized 
hPTH(1-84) species after removal of oxidized PTH molecules by a specific column 
with monoclonal antibodies (MAB) raised against the oxidized hPTH was 
detectable. By using this column in samples from 18 patients on dialysis we 
could demonstrate that measured PTH concentrations were substantially lower when 
considering oxidized forms of PTH. The relationship between PTH concentrations 
determined directly and those concentrations measured after removal of the 
oxidized PTH forms varies substantially. In some patients only 7% of 
traditionally measured PTH was free of oxidation, whereas in other patients 34% 
of the traditionally measured PTH was real intact PTH. In conclusion, a huge but 
not constant proportion of PTH molecules are oxidized in patients requiring 
dialysis. Since oxidized PTH is biologically inactive, the currently used 
methods to detect PTH in daily clinical practice may not adequately reflect 
PTH-related bone and cardiovascular abnormalities in patients on dialysis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040242
PMCID: PMC3391306
PMID: 22792251 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Dr. Hocher, Dr. Armbruster 
and Dr. Roth submitted a patent application. The title is “MEANS AND METHODS OF 
MEASURING PARATHYROID HORMONE IN PATIENTS SUFFERING FROM OXIDATIVE STRESS.” The 
application number is 12156441.3. This application does not alter the authors’ 
adherence to all the PLoS ONE policies on sharing data and materials. Dr. 
Armbruster is the CEO of Immundiagnostik AG, Bensheim, Germany. Dr. Stoeva and 
Dr. Grön are research employees of Immundiagnostik AG, Bensheim, Germany. Dr. 
Roth is a research employee of the Department of Endocrinology/Oncology, Limbach 
Laboratory, Heidelberg, Germany. This does not alter the authors’ adherence to 
all the PLoS ONE polices on sharing data and materials.