1. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e42438. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0042438. Epub 2012 Aug
8.

Molecular evolution of trehalose-6-phosphate synthase (TPS) gene family in 
Populus, Arabidopsis and rice.

Yang HL(1), Liu YJ, Wang CL, Zeng QY.

Author information:
(1)College of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Beijing Forestry University, 
Beijing, China. yhailing@yahoo.com.cn

Trehalose-6-phosphate synthase (TPS) plays important roles in trehalose 
metabolism and signaling. Plant TPS proteins contain both a TPS and a 
trehalose-6-phosphate phosphatase (TPP) domain, which are coded by a multi-gene 
family. The plant TPS gene family has been divided into class I and class II. A 
previous study showed that the Populus, Arabidopsis, and rice genomes have seven 
class I and 27 class II TPS genes. In this study, we found that all class I TPS 
genes had 16 introns within the protein-coding region, whereas class II TPS 
genes had two introns. A significant sequence difference between the two classes 
of TPS proteins was observed by pairwise sequence comparisons of the 34 TPS 
proteins. A phylogenetic analysis revealed that at least seven TPS genes were 
present in the monocot-dicot common ancestor. Segmental duplications contributed 
significantly to the expansion of this gene family. At least five and three TPS 
genes were created by segmental duplication events in the Populus and rice 
genomes, respectively. Both the TPS and TPP domains of 34 TPS genes have evolved 
under purifying selection, but the selective constraint on the TPP domain was 
more relaxed than that on the TPS domain. Among 34 TPS genes from Populus, 
Arabidopsis, and rice, four class I TPS genes (AtTPS1, OsTPS1, PtTPS1, and 
PtTPS2) were under stronger purifying selection, whereas three Arabidopsis class 
I TPS genes (AtTPS2, 3, and 4) apparently evolved under relaxed selective 
constraint. Additionally, a reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction 
analysis showed the expression divergence of the TPS gene family in Populus, 
Arabidopsis, and rice under normal growth conditions and in response to 
stressors. Our findings provide new insights into the mechanisms of gene family 
expansion and functional evolution.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0042438
PMCID: PMC3414516
PMID: 22905132 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.