1. BMC Microbiol. 2012 Sep 3;12:189. doi: 10.1186/1471-2180-12-189.

A proteomic investigation of Fusobacterium nucleatum alkaline-induced biofilms.

Chew J(1), Zilm PS, Fuss JM, Gully NJ.

Author information:
(1)Oral Microbiology Laboratory, The School of Dentistry, The University of 
Adelaide, Adelaide 5005, Australia.

BACKGROUND: The Gram negative anaerobe Fusobacterium nucleatum has been 
implicated in the aetiology of periodontal diseases. Although frequently 
isolated from healthy dental plaque, its numbers and proportion increase in 
plaque associated with disease. One of the significant physico-chemical changes 
in the diseased gingival sulcus is increased environmental pH. When grown under 
controlled conditions in our laboratory, F. nucleatum subspecies polymorphum 
formed mono-culture biofilms when cultured at pH 8.2. Biofilm formation is a 
survival strategy for bacteria, often associated with altered physiology and 
increased virulence. A proteomic approach was used to understand the phenotypic 
changes in F. nucleatum cells associated with alkaline induced biofilms. The 
proteomic based identification of significantly altered proteins was verified 
where possible using additional methods including quantitative real-time PCR 
(qRT-PCR), enzyme assay, acidic end-product analysis, intracellular polyglucose 
assay and Western blotting.
RESULTS: Of 421 proteins detected on two-dimensional electrophoresis gels, spot 
densities of 54 proteins varied significantly (p < 0.05) in F. nucleatum 
cultured at pH 8.2 compared to growth at pH 7.4. Proteins that were 
differentially produced in biofilm cells were associated with the functional 
classes; metabolic enzymes, transport, stress response and hypothetical 
proteins. Our results suggest that biofilm cells were more metabolically 
efficient than planktonic cells as changes to amino acid and glucose metabolism 
generated additional energy needed for survival in a sub-optimal environment. 
The intracellular concentration of stress response proteins including heat shock 
protein GroEL and recombinational protein RecA increased markedly in the 
alkaline environment. A significant finding was the increased abundance of an 
adhesin, Fusobacterial outer membrane protein A (FomA). This surface protein is 
known for its capacity to bind to a vast number of bacterial species and human 
epithelial cells and its increased abundance was associated with biofilm 
formation.
CONCLUSION: This investigation identified a number of proteins that were 
significantly altered by F. nucleatum in response to alkaline conditions similar 
to those reported in diseased periodontal pockets. The results provide insight 
into the adaptive mechanisms used by F. nucleatum biofilms in response to pH 
increase in the host environment.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2180-12-189
PMCID: PMC3478200
PMID: 22943491 [Indexed for MEDLINE]