1. Genome Biol Evol. 2012;4(9):994-1006. doi: 10.1093/gbe/evs074. Epub 2012 Sep
12.

The mitochondrial genome of Paraminabea aldersladei (Cnidaria: Anthozoa: 
Octocorallia) supports intramolecular recombination as the primary mechanism of 
gene rearrangement in octocoral mitochondrial genomes.

Brockman SA(1), McFadden CS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Harvey Mudd College, Claremont, California, USA.

Sequencing of the complete mitochondrial genome of the soft coral Paraminabea 
aldersladei (Alcyoniidae) revealed a unique gene order, the fifth mt gene 
arrangement now known within the cnidarian subclass Octocorallia. At 19,886 bp, 
the mt genome of P. aldersladei is the second largest known for octocorals; its 
gene content and nucleotide composition are, however, identical to most other 
octocorals, and the additional length is due to the presence of two large, 
noncoding intergenic regions. Relative to the presumed ancestral octocoral gene 
order, in P. aldersladei a block of three protein-coding genes (nad6-nad3-nad4l) 
has been translocated and inverted. Mapping the distribution of mt gene 
arrangements onto a taxonomically comprehensive phylogeny of Octocorallia 
suggests that all of the known octocoral gene orders have evolved by successive 
inversions of one or more evolutionarily conserved blocks of protein-coding 
genes. This mode of genome evolution is unique among Metazoa, and contrasts 
strongly with that observed in Hexacorallia, in which extreme gene shuffling has 
occurred among taxonomic orders. Two of the four conserved gene blocks found in 
Octocorallia are, however, also conserved in the linear mt genomes of Medusozoa 
and in one group of Demospongiae. We speculate that the rate and mechanism of 
gene rearrangement in octocorals may be influenced by the presence in their mt 
genomes of mtMutS, a putatively active DNA mismatch repair protein that may also 
play a role in mediating intramolecular recombination.

DOI: 10.1093/gbe/evs074
PMCID: PMC3468961
PMID: 22975720 [Indexed for MEDLINE]