1. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e45981. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0045981. Epub 2012 Sep
28.

Biochemical and molecular dynamic simulation analysis of a weak coiled coil 
association between kinesin-II stalks.

Doodhi H(1), Jana SC, Devan P, Mazumdar S, Ray K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, 
Mumbai, India.

DEFINITION: Kinesin-2 refers to the family of motor proteins represented by 
conserved, heterotrimeric kinesin-II and homodimeric Osm3/Kif17 class of motors.
BACKGROUND: Kinesin-II, a microtubule-based anterograde motor, is composed of 
three different conserved subunits, named KLP64D, KLP68D and DmKAP in 
Drosophila. Although previous reports indicated that coiled coil interaction 
between the middle segments of two dissimilar motor subunits established the 
heterodimer, the molecular basis of the association is still unknown.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here, we present a detailed heterodimeric 
association model of the KLP64D/68D stalk supported by extensive experimental 
analysis and molecular dynamic simulations. We find that KLP64D stalk is 
unstable, but forms a weak coiled coil heteroduplex with the KLP68D stalk when 
coexpressed in bacteria. Local instabilities, relative affinities between the 
C-terminal stalk segments, and dynamic long-range interactions along the stalks 
specify the heterodimerization. Thermal unfolding studies and independent 
simulations further suggest that interactions between the C-terminal stalk 
fragments are comparatively stable, whereas the N-terminal stalk reversibly 
unfolds at ambient temperature.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Results obtained in this study suggest that coiled 
coil interaction between the C-terminal stalks of kinesin-II motor subunits is 
held together through a few hydrophobic and charged interactions. The N-terminal 
stalk segments are flexible and could uncoil reversibly during a motor walk. 
This supports the requirement for a flexible coiled coil association between the 
motor subunits, and its role in motor function needs to be elucidated.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0045981
PMCID: PMC3461054
PMID: 23029351 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.