1. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e48756. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048756. Epub 2012 Nov
2.

Human milk sIgA molecules contain various combinations of different 
antigen-binding sites resulting in a multiple binding specificity of antibodies 
and enzymatic activities of abzymes.

Sedykh SE(1), Buneva VN, Nevinsky GA.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Chemical Biology and Fundamental Medicine, Siberian Division of 
Russian Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk, Russia.

In the classic paradigm, immunoglobulins are monospecific molecules that have 
stable structures and two or more identical antigen-binding sites. However, we 
show here for the first time that the sIgA pool of human milk contains, 
depending on the donor, only 35±5% λ-sIgAs, 48±7% κ-sIgAs, and 17±4% of chimeric 
λ-κ-sIgAs. sIgA preparations contained no traces of canonical enzymes. However, 
all sIgA fractions eluted from several specific affinity sorbents under the 
conditions destroying even strong immune complexes demonstrated high catalytic 
activities in hydrolysis of ATP, DNA, and oligosaccharides, and phosphorylation 
of proteins, lipids, and oligosaccharides. Sequential re-chromatographies of the 
sIgA fractions with high affinity to one affinity sorbents on the second, third 
and then fourth affinity sorbents bearing other immobilized antigens led to the 
distribution of Abs and all catalytic activities all over the profiles of these 
chromatographies; in all cases some fractions eluted from affinity sorbents only 
under the conditions destroying strong immune complexes. In vitro, only an 
addition of reduced glutathione and milk plasma containing no Abs to two sIgA 
fractions with different affinity for DNA-cellulose led to a transition of up to 
11-20% of Ab from one fraction to the other. Our data are indicative of the 
possibility of half-molecule exchange between different IgA and sIgA molecules. 
In addition, it cannot be excluded that during the penetration of IgAs through 
the specific milk barrier, the secretory component (S) and the join chain (J) 
can combine molecules of dimeric H(2)L(2) λ-IgAs and κ-IgAs against different 
antigens forming many different variants of H(4)L(4)SJ sIgA molecules. 
Therefore, some chimeric molecules of sIgA can contain from two to four 
HL-fragments to various antigens interacting with high affinity with different 
sorbents and catalyzing various chemical reactions. Our data essentially expand 
the ideas concerning explanation of the phenomenon of polyspecificity and 
cross-reactivity of Abs.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048756
PMCID: PMC3487837
PMID: 23133657 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.