1. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e51154. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0051154. Epub 2012 Nov 
30.

Nicotine reward and affective nicotine withdrawal signs are attenuated in 
calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase IV knockout mice.

Jackson KJ(1), Sanjakdar SS, Chen X, Damaj MI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, 
USA.

The influx of Ca(2+) through calcium-permeable nicotinic acetylcholine receptors 
(nAChRs) leads to activation of various downstream processes that may be 
relevant to nicotine-mediated behaviors. The calcium activated protein, 
calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase IV (CaMKIV) phosphorylates the 
downstream transcription factor cyclic AMP response element binding protein 
(CREB), which mediates nicotine responses; however the role of CaMKIV in 
nicotine dependence is unknown. Given the proposed role of CaMKIV in CREB 
activation, we hypothesized that CaMKIV might be a crucial molecular component 
in the development of nicotine dependence. Using male CaMKIV genetically 
modified mice, we found that nicotine reward is attenuated in CaMKIV knockout 
(-/-) mice, but cocaine reward is enhanced in these mice. CaMKIV protein levels 
were also increased in the nucleus accumbens of C57Bl/6 mice after nicotine 
reward. In a nicotine withdrawal assessment, anxiety-related behavior, but not 
somatic signs or the hyperalgesia response are attenuated in CaMKIV -/- mice. To 
complement our animal studies, we also conducted a human genetic association 
analysis and found that variants in the CaMKIV gene are associated with a 
protective effect against nicotine dependence. Taken together, our results 
support an important role for CaMKIV in nicotine reward, and suggest that CaMKIV 
has opposing roles in nicotine and cocaine reward. Further, CaMKIV mediates 
affective, but not physical nicotine withdrawal signs, and has a protective 
effect against nicotine dependence in human genetic association studies. These 
findings further indicate the importance of calcium-dependent mechanisms in 
mediating behaviors associated with drugs of abuse.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0051154
PMCID: PMC3511389
PMID: 23226481 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.