1. PLoS Pathog. 2012 Dec;8(12):e1003055. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003055. Epub 
2012 Dec 27.

The Calmodulin-like calcium binding protein EhCaBP3 of Entamoeba histolytica 
regulates phagocytosis and is involved in actin dynamics.

Aslam S(1), Bhattacharya S, Bhattacharya A.

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi, India.

Phagocytosis is required for proliferation and pathogenesis of Entamoeba 
histolytica and erythrophagocytosis is considered to be a marker of invasive 
amoebiasis. Ca²⁺ has been found to play a central role in the process of 
phagocytosis. However, the molecular mechanisms and the signalling mediated by 
Ca²⁺ still remain largely unknown. Here we show that Calmodulin-like calcium 
binding protein EhCaBP3 of E. histolytica is directly involved in disease 
pathomechanism by its capacity to participate in cytoskeleton dynamics and 
scission machinery during erythrophagocytosis. Using imaging techniques EhCaBP3 
was found in phagocytic cups and newly formed phagosomes along with actin and 
myosin IB. In vitro studies confirmed that EhCaBP3 directly binds actin, and 
affected both its polymerization and bundling activity. Moreover, it also binds 
myosin 1B in the presence of Ca²⁺. In cells where EhCaBP3 expression was down 
regulated by antisense RNA, the level of RBC uptake was reduced, myosin IB was 
found to be absent at the site of pseudopod cup closure and the time taken for 
phagocytosis increased, suggesting that EhCaBP3 along with myosin 1B mediate the 
closure of phagocytic cups. Experiments with EhCaBP3 mutant defective in 
Ca²⁺-binding showed that Ca²⁺ binding is required for phagosome formation. 
Liposome binding assay revealed that EhCaBP3 recruitment and enrichment to 
membrane is independent of any cellular protein as it binds directly to 
phosphatidylserine. Taken together, our results suggest a novel pathway 
mediating phagocytosis in E. histolytica, and an unusual mechanism of modulation 
of cytoskeleton dynamics by two calcium binding proteins, EhCaBP1 and EhCaBP3 
with mostly non-overlapping functions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003055
PMCID: PMC3531509
PMID: 23300437 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.