1. J Bone Miner Res. 2013 Jun;28(6):1501-8. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.1868.

Juvenile paget's disease in an Iranian kindred with vitamin D deficiency and 
novel homozygous TNFRSF11B mutation.

Saki F(1), Karamizadeh Z, Nasirabadi S, Mumm S, McAlister WH, Whyte MP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Namazi Hospital, Shiraz University of 
Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.

Juvenile Paget's disease (JPD) is a rare heritable osteopathy characterized 
biochemically by markedly increased serum alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity 
emanating from generalized acceleration of skeletal turnover. Affected infants 
and children typically suffer bone pain and fractures and deformities, become 
deaf, and have macrocranium. Some who survive to young adult life develop 
blindness from retinopathy engendered by vascular microcalcification. Most cases 
of JPD are caused by osteoprotegerin (OPG) deficiency due to homozygous 
loss-of-function mutations within the TNFRSF11B gene that encodes OPG. We report 
a 3-year-old Iranian girl with JPD and craniosynostosis who had vitamin D 
deficiency in infancy. She presented with fractures during the first 
year-of-life followed by bone deformities, delayed development, 
failure-to-thrive, and pneumonias. At 1 year-of-age, biochemical studies of 
serum revealed marked hyperphosphatasemia together with low-normal calcium and 
low inorganic phosphate and 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels. Several family members 
in previous generations of this consanguineous kindred may also have had JPD and 
vitamin D deficiency. Mutation analysis showed homozygosity for a unique 
missense change (c.130T>C, p.Cys44Arg) in TNFRSF11B that would compromise the 
cysteine-rich domain of OPG that binds receptor activator of NF-κB ligand 
(RANKL). Both parents were heterozygous for this mutation. The patient's serum 
OPG level was extremely low and RANKL level markedly elevated. She responded 
well to rapid oral vitamin D repletion followed by pamidronate treatment given 
intravenously. Our patient is the first Iranian reported with JPD. Her novel 
mutation in TNFRSF11B plus vitamin D deficiency in infancy was associated with 
severe JPD uniquely complicated by craniosynostosis. Pamidronate treatment with 
vitamin D sufficiency can be effective therapy for the skeletal disease caused 
by the OPG deficiency form of JPD.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

DOI: 10.1002/jbmr.1868
PMCID: PMC3663917
PMID: 23322328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures: The authors have no conflict of 
interest.