1. Nutrients. 2013 Mar 18;5(3):928-48. doi: 10.3390/nu5030928.

Lipoprotein subfractions in metabolic syndrome and obesity: clinical 
significance and therapeutic approaches.

Nikolic D(1), Katsiki N, Montalto G, Isenovic ER, Mikhailidis DP, Rizzo M.

Author information:
(1)Biomedical Department of Internal Medicine and Medical Specialties, 
University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy. draggana.nikolic@gmail.com

Small, dense low density lipoprotein (sdLDL) represents an emerging 
cardiovascular risk factor, since these particles can be associated with 
cardiovascular disease (CVD) independently of established risk factors, 
including plasma lipids. Obese subjects frequently have atherogenic 
dyslipidaemia, including elevated sdLDL levels, in addition to elevated 
triglycerides (TG), very low density lipoprotein (VLDL) and apolipoprotein-B, as 
well as decreased high density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) levels. 
Obesity-related co-morbidities, such as metabolic syndrome (MetS) are also 
characterized by dyslipidaemia. Therefore, agents that favourably modulate LDL 
subclasses may be of clinical value in these subjects. Statins are the 
lipid-lowering drug of choice. Also, anti-obesity and lipid lowering drugs other 
than statins could be useful in these patients. However, the effects of 
anti-obesity drugs on CVD risk factors remain unclear. We review the clinical 
significance of sdLDL in being overweight and obesity, as well as the efficacy 
of anti-obesity drugs on LDL subfractions in these individuals; a short comment 
on HDL subclasses is also included. Our literature search was based on PubMed 
and Scopus listings. Further research is required to fully explore both the 
significance of sdLDL and the efficacy of anti-obesity drugs on LDL subfractions 
in being overweight, obesity and MetS. Improving the lipoprotein profile in 
these patients may represent an efficient approach for reducing cardiovascular 
risk.

DOI: 10.3390/nu5030928
PMCID: PMC3705327
PMID: 23507795 [Indexed for MEDLINE]