1. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(3):e1003360. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003360. Epub 2013
Mar  14.

Deficiency in origin licensing proteins impairs cilia formation: implications 
for the aetiology of Meier-Gorlin syndrome.

Stiff T(1), Alagoz M, Alcantara D, Outwin E, Brunner HG, Bongers EM, O'Driscoll 
M, Jeggo PA.

Author information:
(1)Double Strand Break Repair Laboratory, Genome Damage and Stability Centre, 
University of Sussex, Brighton, United Kingdom.

Mutations in ORC1, ORC4, ORC6, CDT1, and CDC6, which encode proteins required 
for DNA replication origin licensing, cause Meier-Gorlin syndrome (MGS), a 
disorder conferring microcephaly, primordial dwarfism, underdeveloped ears, and 
skeletal abnormalities. Mutations in ATR, which also functions during 
replication, can cause Seckel syndrome, a clinically related disorder. These 
findings suggest that impaired DNA replication could underlie the developmental 
defects characteristic of these disorders. Here, we show that although origin 
licensing capacity is impaired in all patient cells with mutations in origin 
licensing component proteins, this does not correlate with the rate of 
progression through S phase. Thus, the replicative capacity in MGS patient cells 
does not correlate with clinical manifestation. However, ORC1-deficient cells 
from MGS patients and siRNA-mediated depletion of origin licensing proteins also 
have impaired centrosome and centriole copy number. As a novel and unexpected 
finding, we show that they also display a striking defect in the rate of 
formation of primary cilia. We demonstrate that this impacts sonic hedgehog 
signalling in ORC1-deficient primary fibroblasts. Additionally, reduced growth 
factor-dependent signaling via primary cilia affects the kinetics of cell cycle 
progression following cell cycle exit and re-entry, highlighting an unexpected 
mechanism whereby origin licensing components can influence cell cycle 
progression. Finally, using a cell-based model, we show that defects in cilia 
function impair chondroinduction. Our findings raise the possibility that a 
reduced efficiency in forming cilia could contribute to the clinical features of 
MGS, particularly the bone development abnormalities, and could provide a new 
dimension for considering developmental impacts of licensing deficiency.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003360
PMCID: PMC3597520
PMID: 23516378 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.