1. Cell Div. 2013 Apr 12;8(1):4. doi: 10.1186/1747-1028-8-4.

Rad53 homologue forkhead-associated kinase A (FhkA) and Ca2+-binding protein 4a 
(CBP4a) are nucleolar proteins that differentially redistribute during mitosis 
in Dictyostelium.

Catalano A(1), O'Day DH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Systems Biology, University of Toronto, 25 Harbord 
st,, Toronto, ON M5S 3G5, Canada. acatalano@ccny.cuny.edu.

BACKGROUND: During mitosis most nucleolar proteins redistribute to other locales 
providing an opportunity to study the relationship between nucleolar protein 
localization and function. Dictyostelium is a model organism for the study of 
several fundamental biological processes and human diseases but only two 
nucleolar proteins have been studied during mitosis: NumA1 and Snf12. Both of 
them are linked to the cell cycle. To acquire a better understanding of 
nucleolar protein localization and dynamics in Dictyostelium we studied the 
nucleolar localization of two additional proteins during mitosis: Snf12-linked 
forkhead-associated kinase A (FhkA), which is involved in the cell cycle, and 
Ca2+-binding protein 4a (CBP4a), which is a binding partner of NumA1.
METHODS: Polyclonal antibodies were produced in-house. Cells were fixed and 
probed with either anti-FhkA or anti-CBP4a in order to determine cellular 
localization during interphase and throughout the stages of mitosis. 
Colocalization with DAPI nuclear stain allowed us to determine the location of 
the nucleus and nucleolus while colocalization with anti-α-tubulin allowed us to 
determine the cell cycle stage.
RESULTS: Here we verify two novel nucleolar proteins, Rad53 homologue FhkA which 
localized around the edge of the nucleolus and CBP4a which was detected 
throughout the entire nucleolus. Treatment with the Ca2+ chelator BAPTA (5 mM) 
showed that the nucleolar localization of CBP4a is Ca2+-dependent. In response 
to actinomycin D (0.05 mg/mL) CBP4a disappeared from the nucleolus while FhkA 
protruded from the nucleus, eventually pinching off as cytoplasmic circles. FhkA 
and CBP4a redistributed differently during mitosis. FhkA redistributed 
throughout the entire cell and at the nuclear envelope region from prometaphase 
through telophase. In contrast, during prometaphase CBP4a relocated to many 
large, discrete "CBP4a islands" throughout the nucleoplasm. Two larger "CBP4a 
islands" were also detected specifically at the metaphase plate region.
CONCLUSIONS: FhkA and CBP4a represent the sixth and seventh nucleolar proteins 
that have been verified to date in Dictyostelium and the third and fourth 
studied during mitosis. The protein-specific distributions of all of these 
nucleolar proteins during interphase and mitosis provide unique insight into 
nucleolar protein dynamics in this model organism setting the stage for future 
work.

DOI: 10.1186/1747-1028-8-4
PMCID: PMC3637376
PMID: 23587254