1. Theor Biol Med Model. 2013 May 1;10:29. doi: 10.1186/1742-4682-10-29.

Determination of the optimal tubulin isotype target as a method for the 
development of individualized cancer chemotherapy.

Ravanbakhsh S(1), Gajewski M, Greiner R, Tuszynski JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 2E8, 
Canada.

BACKGROUND: As microtubules are essential for cell growth and division, its 
constituent protein β-tubulin has been a popular target for various treatments, 
including cancer chemotherapy. There are several isotypes of human β-tubulin and 
each type of cell expresses its characteristic distribution of these isotypes. 
Moreover, each tubulin-binding drug has its own distribution of binding 
affinities over the various isotypes, which further complicates identifying the 
optimal drug selection. An ideal drug would preferentially bind only the tubulin 
isotypes expressed abundantly by the cancer cells, but not those in the healthy 
cells. Unfortunately, as the distributions of the tubulin isotypes in cancer 
cells overlap with those of healthy cells, this ideal scenario is clearly not 
possible. We can, however, seek a drug that interferes significantly with the 
isotype distribution of the cancer cell, but has only minor interactions with 
those of the healthy cells.
METHODS: We describe a quantitative methodology for identifying this optimal 
tubulin isotype profile for an ideal cancer drug, given the isotype distribution 
of a specific cancer type, as well as the isotype distributions in various 
healthy tissues, and the physiological importance of each such tissue.
RESULTS: We report the optimal isotype profiles for different types of cancer 
with various routes of delivery.
CONCLUSIONS: Our algorithm, which defines the best profile for each type of 
cancer (given the drug delivery route and some specified patient 
characteristics), will help to personalize the design of pharmaceuticals for 
individual patients. This paper is an attempt to explicitly consider the effects 
of the tubulin isotype distributions in both cancer and normal cell types, for 
rational chemotherapy design aimed at optimizing the drug's efficacy with 
minimal side effects.

DOI: 10.1186/1742-4682-10-29
PMCID: PMC3651705
PMID: 23634782 [Indexed for MEDLINE]