1. J Transl Med. 2013 May 9;11:119. doi: 10.1186/1479-5876-11-119.

Use of V(D)J recombination excision circles to identify T- and B-cell defects 
and to monitor the treatment in primary and acquired immunodeficiencies.

Serana F(1), Chiarini M, Zanotti C, Sottini A, Bertoli D, Bosio A, Caimi L, 
Imberti L.

Author information:
(1)Inter-Departmental AIL Laboratory, Diagnostics Department, Spedali Civili of 
Brescia, Brescia, Italy.

T-cell receptor excision circles (TRECs) and kappa-deleting recombination 
excision circles (KRECs) are circular DNA segments generated in T and B cells 
during their maturation in the thymus and bone marrow. These circularized DNA 
elements persist in the cells, are unable to replicate, and are diluted as a 
result of cell division, thus are considered markers of new lymphocyte output. 
The quantification of TRECs and KRECs, which can be reliably performed using 
singleplex or duplex real-time quantitative PCR, provides novel information in 
the management of T- and B-cell immunity-related diseases. In primary 
immunodeficiencies, when combined with flow cytometric analysis of T- and B-cell 
subpopulations, the measure of TRECs and KRECs has contributed to an improved 
characterization of the diseases, to the identification of patients' subgroups, 
and to the monitoring of stem cell transplantation and enzyme replacement 
therapy. For the same diseases, the TREC and KREC assays, introduced in the 
newborn screening program, allow early disease identification and may lead to 
discovery of new genetic defects. TREC and KREC levels can also been used as a 
surrogate marker of lymphocyte output in acquired immunodeficiencies. The low 
number of TRECs, which has in fact been extensively documented in untreated 
HIV-infected subjects, has been shown to increase following antiretroviral 
therapy. Differently, KREC number, which is in the normal range in these 
patients, has been shown to decrease following long-lasting therapy. Whether 
changes of KREC levels have relevance in the biology and in the clinical aspects 
of primary and acquired immunodeficiencies remains to be firmly established.

DOI: 10.1186/1479-5876-11-119
PMCID: PMC3666889
PMID: 23656963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]