1. PLoS One. 2013 May 8;8(5):e63757. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0063757. Print
2013.

Anaplastic lymphoma kinase is required for neurogenesis in the developing 
central nervous system of zebrafish.

Yao S(1), Cheng M, Zhang Q, Wasik M, Kelsh R, Winkler C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and Centre for BioImaging Sciences, 
National University of Singapore, Singapore.

Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase (ALK) was initially discovered as an oncogene in 
human lymphoma and other cancers, including neuroblastoma. However, little is 
known about the physiological function of ALK. We identified the alk ortholog in 
zebrafish (Danio rerio) and found that it is highly expressed in the developing 
central nervous system (CNS). Heat-shock inducible transgenic zebrafish lines 
were generated to over-express alk during early neurogenesis. Its ectopic 
expression resulted in activation of the MEK/ERK pathway, increased cell 
proliferation, and aberrant neurogenesis leading to mis-positioning of 
differentiated neurons. Thus, overexpressed alk is capable of promoting cell 
proliferation in the nervous system, similar to the situation in ALK-related 
cancers. Next, we used Morpholino mediated gene knock-down and a pharmacological 
inhibitor to interfere with expression and function of endogenous Alk. Alk 
inhibition did not affect neuron progenitor formation but severely compromised 
neuronal differentiation and neuron survival in the CNS. These data indicate 
that tightly controlled alk expression is critical for the balance between 
neural progenitor proliferation, differentiation and survival during embryonic 
neurogenesis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0063757
PMCID: PMC3648509
PMID: 23667670 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Mangeng Cheng is currently 
an employee of Merck Research Laboratory and a former employee of Cephalon, Inc. 
This does not alter the authors' adherence to all the PLOS ONE policies on 
sharing data and materials.