1. Neuroimage. 2013 Nov 1;81:393-399. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.05.037. Epub
 2013 May 16.

The tricks of the trait: neural implementation of personality varies with 
genotype-dependent serotonin levels.

Hahn T(1), Heinzel S(2), Notebaert K(3), Dresler T(4), Reif A(5), Lesch KP(5), 
Jakob PM(6), Windmann S(7), Fallgatter AJ(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cognitive Psychology II, Johann Wolfgang Goethe University 
Frankfurt/Main, Germany. Electronic address: Hahn@psych.uni-frankfurt.de.
(2)Department of Neurodegeneration, Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain 
Research, Tübingen, Germany.
(3)Department of Cognitive Psychology II, Johann Wolfgang Goethe University 
Frankfurt/Main, Germany; Research Center of Marketing and Consumer Science, 
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Belgium.
(4)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, 
Germany; Department of Psychiatry, Psychosomatics and Psychotherapy, University 
of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany; LEAD Graduate School, University of Tübingen, 
Tübingen, Germany.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, Psychosomatics and Psychotherapy, University of 
Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany.
(6)Research Center Magnetic Resonance Bavaria, Würzburg, Germany; Department of 
Experimental Physics V, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany.
(7)Department of Cognitive Psychology II, Johann Wolfgang Goethe University 
Frankfurt/Main, Germany.
(8)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, 
Germany; Centre for Integrative Neuroscience, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, 
Germany.

Gray's Reinforcement Sensitivity Theory (RST) has developed into one of the most 
prominent personality theories of the last decades. The RST postulates a 
Behavioral Inhibition System (BIS) modulating the reaction to stimuli indicating 
aversive events. A number of psychiatric disorders including depression, anxiety 
disorders, and psychosomatic illnesses have been associated with extreme BIS 
responsiveness. In recent years, neuroimaging studies have implicated the 
amygdala-septo-hippocampal circuit as an important neural substrate of the BIS. 
However, the neurogenetic basis of the regulation of this behaviorally and 
clinically essential system remains unclear. Investigating the effects of two 
functional genetic polymorphisms (tryptophan hydroxylase-2, G-703T, and 
serotonin transporter, serotonin transporter gene-linked polymorphic region) in 
89 human participants, we find significantly different patterns of associations 
between BIS scores and amygdala-hippocampus connectivity during loss 
anticipation for genotype groups regarding both polymorphisms. Specifically, the 
correlation between amygdala-hippocampus connectivity and Gray's trait anxiety 
scores is positive in individuals homozygous for the TPH2 G-allele, while 
carriers of at least one T-allele show a negative association. Likewise, 
individuals homozygous for the 5-HTTLPR L(A) variant display a positive 
association while carriers of the S/L(G) allele show a trend towards a negative 
association. Thus, we show converging evidence of different neural 
implementation of the BIS depending on genotype-dependent levels of serotonin. 
We provide evidence suggesting that genotype-dependent serotonin levels and thus 
putative changes in the efficiency of serotonergic neurotransmission might not 
only alter brain activation levels directly, but also more fundamentally impact 
the neural implementation of personality traits. We outline the direct clinical 
implications arising from this finding and discuss the complex interplay of 
neural responses, genes and personality traits in this context.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.05.037
PMID: 23684859 [Indexed for MEDLINE]