1. Front Plant Sci. 2013 May 16;4:127. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2013.00127. eCollection 
2013.

A component of the Sec61 ER protein transporting pore is required for plant 
susceptibility to powdery mildew.

Zhang WJ(1), Hanisch S, Kwaaitaal M, Pedersen C, Thordal-Christensen H.

Author information:
(1)Section for Plant and Soil Science, Department of Plant and Environmental 
Sciences, Faculty of Science, University of Copenhagen Frederiksberg, Denmark.

Biotrophic pathogens, like the powdery mildew fungi, require living plant cells 
for their growth and reproduction. During infection, a specialized structure 
called the haustorium is formed by the fungus. The haustorium is surrounded by a 
plant cell-derived extrahaustorial membrane (EHM). Over the EHM, the fungus 
obtains nutrients from and secretes effector proteins into the plant cell. In 
the plant cell these effectors interfere with cellular processes such as 
pathogen defense and membrane trafficking. However, the mechanisms behind 
effector delivery are largely unknown. This paper provides a model for and new 
insights into a putative transfer mechanism of effectors into the plant cell. We 
show that silencing of the barley Sec61βa transcript results in decreased 
susceptibility to the powdery mildew fungus. HvSec61βa is a component of both 
the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) translocon and retrotranslocon pores, the latter 
being part of the ER-associated protein degradation machinery. We provide 
support for a model suggesting that the retrotranslocon function of HvSec61βa is 
required for successful powdery mildew fungal infection. HvSec61βa-GFP and a 
luminal ER marker were co-localized to the ER, which was found to be in close 
proximity to the EHM around the haustorial body, but not the haustorial fingers. 
This differential EHM proximity suggests that the ER, including HvSec61βa, may 
be actively recruited by the haustorium, potentially to provide efficient 
effector transfer to the cytosol. Effector transport across this EHM-ER 
interface may occur by a vesicle-mediated process, while the Sec61 
retrotranslocon pore potentially provides an escape route for these proteins to 
reach the cytosol.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2013.00127
PMCID: PMC3655284
PMID: 23720664