1. PLoS One. 2013 May 29;8(5):e65002. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0065002. Print 
2013.

A novel carboxyl-terminal heptapeptide initiates the regulated secretion of LH 
from unique sub-domains of the ER.

Jablonka-Shariff A(1), Boime I.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Developmental Biology and Obstetrics and Gynecology, 
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.

The coordinated secretion of LH and FSH are critical for reproductive functions. 
After translocation into the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), their biosynthetic 
routes diverge at a determinative step prior to sorting in the regulated (LH) 
and constitutive (FSH) secretion pathways. Recently, we identified a C-terminal 
heptapeptide sequence, present only in the LHβ subunit, as a critical signal for 
entry of the LH dimer into the regulated pathway. We showed that an LHβ mutant 
lacking the heptapeptide (LHβΔT) assembled more efficiently with the α subunit 
than wild-type LHβ subunit, and this LHΔT dimer was secreted constitutively. 
Thus, an association exists between the presence of the C-terminal heptapeptide 
and sorting of the LH heterodimer to the regulated pathway. To study how this 
delayed LHβ subunit assembly is related to the trafficking of LH, we exploited 
the single subunit transfection model in rat somatotrope-derived GH3 cells with 
the use of immunofluorescence confocal microscopy. The LHβ subunit showed a 
distinct immunofluorescent localization as compared to the FSHβ subunit and LHβ 
mutants. The wild-type LHβ subunit exhibited a perinuclear staining 
corresponding to the ER/nuclear envelope region. In contrast, the wild-type FSHβ 
subunit and the mutants LHβΔT and LHβL119A displayed no detectable perinuclear 
staining; only peripheral ER puncta were observed. Also, no perinuclear 
fluorescence was detected in cells expressing the LH heterodimer. We propose 
that the C-terminal heptapeptide is responsible for delayed heterodimer assembly 
within an ER sub-domain of the nuclear envelope, as an early partitioning event 
necessary for the entrance of LH into the regulated secretory pathway, whereas 
FSHβ does not traverse the nuclear envelope region. These data suggest that, at 
least for LH, the molecular decision to enter the regulated secretory pathway is 
a pre-Golgi event controlled by the novel C-terminal heptapeptide.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0065002
PMCID: PMC3666967
PMID: 23734233 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.