1. Mol Vis. 2013 May 29;19:1149-57. Print 2013.

Explant cultures of Rpe65-/- mouse retina: a model to investigate cone opsin 
trafficking.

Bandyopadhyay M(1), Kono M, Rohrer B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Medical University of South Carolina, 
Charleston, SC, USA.

PURPOSE: In the absence of 11-cis retinal (e.g., Rpe65⁻/⁻), the chromophore for 
all pigments, cone opsins are mislocalized in vivo. Using the systemic 
application of 11-cis retinal, appropriate protein localization can be promoted. 
Here, we asked whether explant cultures of Rpe65⁻/⁻ mouse retina are amenable to 
screening retinoids for their ability to promote opsin trafficking.
METHODS: Retina-retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) cultures were prepared from 
7-day-old Rpe65⁻/⁻ Rho⁻/⁻ or wild-type pups and cultured for 11 days. Explants 
were treated with retinoids throughout this period. Ultraviolet (UV)-opsin 
trafficking was analyzed by immunohistochemistry and quantitative image 
analysis, while its messenger RNA expression was examined by quantitative 
real-time PCR, and the interaction of retinoids with UV-opsin was probed in 
transducing-activation assays.
RESULTS: In wild-type explant cultures, UV-opsin was restricted to the outer 
segments, whereas in those derived from Rpe65⁻/⁻ Rho⁻/⁻ mice, opsin trafficking 
was impaired. In Rpe65⁻/⁻ Rho⁻/⁻ explants, administration of 11-cis retinal, 
11-cis retinol or retinoic acid (RA) reversed the opsin trafficking phenotype. 
RA analogs designed to act by binding to the retinoic acid receptor or the 
retinoid X-receptor, however, had no effect. RA was shown to interact with the 
UV-cone opsin, demonstrated by its ability to effect ligand-dependent activation 
of transducin by UV-cone opsin. All compounds tested increased cone opsin 
messenger RNA expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Cone-opsin trafficking defects were replicated in Rpe65⁻/⁻ Rho⁻/⁻ 
retina-RPE cultures, and were reversed by 11-cis retinal treatment. Comparing 
the effects of different retinoids on their ability to promote UV-opsin 
trafficking to outer segments confirmed the critical role of agents that bind in 
the retinoid binding pocket. Retinoids that act as transcription factors, 
however, were ineffective. Thus, organ cultures may be a powerful low-throughput 
screening tool to identify novel compounds to promote cone survival.

PMCID: PMC3669539
PMID: 23734084 [Indexed for MEDLINE]