1. Neuroinformatics. 2013 Jul;11(3):367-88. doi: 10.1007/s12021-013-9184-3.

The MCIC collection: a shared repository of multi-modal, multi-site brain image 
data from a clinical investigation of schizophrenia.

Gollub RL(1), Shoemaker JM, King MD, White T, Ehrlich S, Sponheim SR, Clark VP, 
Turner JA, Mueller BA, Magnotta V, O'Leary D, Ho BC, Brauns S, Manoach DS, 
Seidman L, Bustillo JR, Lauriello J, Bockholt J, Lim KO, Rosen BR, Schulz SC, 
Calhoun VD, Andreasen NC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital, Building 120, Suite 
101D, Charlestown, MA 02129-2000, USA. RGOLLUB@PARTNERS.ORG

Expertly collected, well-curated data sets consisting of comprehensive clinical 
characterization and raw structural, functional and diffusion-weighted DICOM 
images in schizophrenia patients and sex and age-matched controls are now 
accessible to the scientific community through an on-line data repository 
(coins.mrn.org). The Mental Illness and Neuroscience Discovery Institute, now 
the Mind Research Network (MRN, http://www.mrn.org/ ), comprised of 
investigators at the University of New Mexico, the University of Minnesota, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, and the University of Iowa, conducted a 
cross-sectional study to identify quantitative neuroimaging biomarkers of 
schizophrenia. Data acquisition across multiple sites permitted the integration 
and cross-validation of clinical, cognitive, morphometric, and functional 
neuroimaging results gathered from unique samples of schizophrenia patients and 
controls using a common protocol across sites. Particular effort was made to 
recruit patients early in the course of their illness, at the onset of their 
symptoms. There is a relatively even sampling of illness duration in chronic 
patients. This data repository will be useful to 1) scientists who can study 
schizophrenia by further analysis of this cohort and/or by pooling with other 
data; 2) computer scientists and software algorithm developers for testing and 
validating novel registration, segmentation, and other analysis software; and 3) 
educators in the fields of neuroimaging, medical image analysis and medical 
imaging informatics who need exemplar data sets for courses and workshops. 
Sharing provides the opportunity for independent replication of already 
published results from this data set and novel exploration. This manuscript 
describes the inclusion/exclusion criteria, imaging parameters and other 
information that will assist those wishing to use this data repository.

DOI: 10.1007/s12021-013-9184-3
PMCID: PMC3727653
PMID: 23760817 [Indexed for MEDLINE]