1. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2013;53(6):458-64. doi: 10.5692/clinicalneurol.53.458.

[A case of inclusion body myopathy with Paget's disease of bone and 
frontotemporal dementia (IBMPFD) showing clinical features of motor neuron 
disease].

[Article in Japanese]

Igari R(1), Wada M, Sato H, K Hayashi Y, Nishino I, Kato T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Hematology, Metabolism, Endocrinology and 
Diabetology, Yamagata University Faculty of Medicine.

Inclusion body myopathy with Paget's disease of bone and frontotemporal dementia 
(IBMPFD) is caused by mutations in the valosin-containing protein (VCP) gene. 
Varied clinical features caused by VCP mutations have been reported: these 
clinical phenotypes include distal myopathy, frontotemporal dementia and 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. We report a 49-year-old woman with 3-year history 
of progressive proximal limb muscle weakness. Family history was notable for her 
father with motor neuron disease and an elder brother with a myopathy involving 
tibialis anterior and quadriceps. Neurological examinations showed proximal 
muscle atrophy, especially severe atrophy of paravertebral muscles, 
right-dominant scapular winging, bilateral pyramidal signs and hyperreflexia. 
Serum CK level was normal and EMG showed chronic neurogenic changes. Muscle 
imaging (CT) showed adipose tissue replacement of paravertebral muscles and 
right serratus anterior, and marked atrophy of bilateral trapezius and vastus 
intermedius muscles. Her lumbar spine X-ray showed an osteosclerotic change in 
the vertebral body, where an increased uptake of Tc99m was also observed in bone 
scintigraphy. Although brain MRI was normal, neuropsychological examination 
showed a mild attention deficit with cognitive impairment. A muscle biopsy 
specimen revealed scattered fibers with rimmed vacuoles. These findings prompted 
us to analyze a mutation in the VCP gene. Genomic sequencing of all exons of the 
gene showed a heterozygous missense mutation in exon 5 (c.1315G>C; p.Ala439Pro).

DOI: 10.5692/clinicalneurol.53.458
PMID: 23782824 [Indexed for MEDLINE]