1. Mol Vis. 2013 Jun 17;19:1371-86. Print 2013.

RIT2, a neuron-specific small guanosine triphosphatase, is expressed in retinal 
neuronal cells and its promoter is modulated by the POU4 transcription factors.

Zhang L(1), Wahlin K, Li Y, Masuda T, Yang Z, Zack DJ, Esumi N.

Author information:
(1)The Wilmer Eye Institute, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.

PURPOSE: Ras-like without CAAX 2 (RIT2), a member of the Ras superfamily of 
small guanosine triphosphatases, is involved in regulating neuronal function. 
RIT2 is a unique member of the Ras family in that RIT2 is preferentially 
expressed in various neurons, including retinal neurons. The mechanisms that 
regulate RIT2 expression in neurons were studied.
METHODS: Reverse transcription-quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR), immunohistochemistry, 
western blotting, bioinformatic prediction, electrophoretic mobility shift assay 
(EMSA), and cell transfection methods were used.
RESULTS: With immunohistochemistry of the mouse retina, RIT2 protein was 
detected in the ganglion cell layer (GCL), inner plexiform layer, inner nuclear 
layer, and outer plexiform layer, with the strongest staining in the GCL and the 
inner plexiform layer. RT-qPCR combined with laser capture microdissection 
detected Rit2 messenger RNA in the GCL and the inner nuclear layer. Western blot 
analysis showed a large increase in the RIT2 protein in the retina during 
maturation from newborn to adult. Transient transfection identified the 1.3 kb 
upstream region of human RIT2 as capable of driving expression in neuronal cell 
lines. Based on the known expression pattern and biological activity, we 
hypothesized that POU4 family factors might modulate RIT2 expression in retinal 
ganglion cells (RGCs). Bioinformatic analyses predicted six POU4 factor-binding 
sites within the 1.3 kb human RIT2 promoter region. EMSA analyses showed binding 
of POU4 proteins to three of the six predicted sites. Cotransfection with 
expression vectors demonstrated that POU4 proteins can indeed modulate the human 
RIT2 promoter, and that ISL1, a LIM homeodomain factor, can further modulate the 
activity of the POU4 factors.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies confirm the expression of RIT2 in retinal neuronal 
cells, including RGCs, begin to reveal the mechanisms responsible for neuronal 
expression of RIT2, and suggest a role for the POU4 family factors in modulating 
RIT2 expression in RGCs.

PMCID: PMC3692409
PMID: 23805044 [Indexed for MEDLINE]