1. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2013 Aug;72(8):791-800. doi: 
10.1097/NEN.0b013e31829ecc89.

Dendritic spine density, morphology, and fibrillar actin content surrounding 
amyloid-β plaques in a mouse model of amyloid-β deposition.

Kirkwood CM(1), Ciuchta J, Ikonomovic MD, Fish KN, Abrahamson EE, Murray PS, 
Klunk WE, Sweet RA.

Author information:
(1)Translational Neuroscience Program, Department of Psychiatry, University of 
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

Dendritic spines are the site of most excitatory synapses, the loss of which 
correlates with cognitive impairment in patients with Alzheimer disease. 
Substantial evidence indicates that amyloid-β (Aβ) peptide, either insoluble 
fibrillar Aβ deposited into plaques or soluble nonfibrillar Aβ species, can 
cause spine loss but the concurrent contributions of fibrillar Aβ and 
nonfibrillar Aβ to spine loss has not been previously assessed. We used 
multiple-label immunohistochemistry to measure spine density, size, and F-actin 
content surrounding plaques in the cerebral cortex in the PSAPP mouse model of 
Aβ deposition. Our approach allowed us to measure fibrillar Aβ plaque content 
and an index of nonfibrillar Aβ species concurrently. We found that spine 
density was reduced within 6 μm of the plaque perimeter, remaining spines were 
more compact, and F-actin content per spine was increased. Measures of fibrillar 
Aβ plaque content were associated with reduced spine density near plaques, 
whereas measures of nonfibrillar Aβ species were associated with reduced spine 
density and size but not altered F-actin content. These findings suggest that 
strategies to preserve dendritic spines in AD patients may need to address both 
nonfibrillar and fibrillar forms of Aβ and that nonfibrillar Aβ may exert spine 
toxicity through pathways not mediated by depolymerization of F-actin.

DOI: 10.1097/NEN.0b013e31829ecc89
PMCID: PMC3763821
PMID: 23860033 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures: There are no actual or potential 
conflicts of interest.