1. Front Neural Circuits. 2013 Aug 8;7:131. doi: 10.3389/fncir.2013.00131. 
eCollection 2013.

Mind the fish: zebrafish as a model in cognitive social neuroscience.

Oliveira RF(1).

Author information:
(1)Unidade de Investigação em Eco-Etologia, ISPA - Instituto Universitário 
Lisboa, Portugal ; Champalimaud Neuroscience Programme, Instituto Gulbenkian de 
Ciência Oeiras, Portugal.

Understanding how the brain implements social behavior on one hand, and how 
social processes feedback on the brain to promote fine-tuning of behavioral 
output according to changes in the social environment is a major challenge in 
contemporary neuroscience. A critical step to take this challenge successfully 
is finding the appropriate level of analysis when relating social to biological 
phenomena. Given the enormous complexity of both the neural networks of the 
brain and social systems, the use of a cognitive level of analysis (in an 
information processing perspective) is proposed here as an explanatory interface 
between brain and behavior. A conceptual framework for a cognitive approach to 
comparative social neuroscience is proposed, consisting of the following steps 
to be taken across different species with varying social systems: (1) 
identification of the functional building blocks of social skills; (2) 
identification of the cognitive mechanisms underlying the previously identified 
social skills; and (3) mapping these information processing mechanisms onto the 
brain. Teleost fish are presented here as a group of choice to develop this 
approach, given the diversity of social systems present in closely related 
species that allows for planned phylogenetic comparisons, and the availability 
of neurogenetic tools that allows the visualization and manipulation of selected 
neural circuits in model species such as the zebrafish. Finally, the 
state-of-the art of zebrafish social cognition and of the tools available to map 
social cognitive abilities to neural circuits in zebrafish are reviewed.

DOI: 10.3389/fncir.2013.00131
PMCID: PMC3737460
PMID: 23964204 [Indexed for MEDLINE]