1. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 26;8(8):e72038. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072038. 
eCollection 2013.

Complete mitochondrial genome of the medicinal mushroom Ganoderma lucidum.

Li J(1), Zhang J, Chen H, Chen X, Lan J, Liu C.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medicinal Plant Development, Chinese Academy of Medical 
Sciences, Beijing, P. R. China.

Ganoderma lucidum is one of the well-known medicinal basidiomycetes worldwide. 
The mitochondrion, referred to as the second genome, is an organelle found in 
most eukaryotic cells and participates in critical cellular functions. 
Elucidating the structure and function of this genome is important to understand 
completely the genetic contents of G. lucidum. In this study, we assembled the 
mitochondrial genome of G. lucidum and analyzed the differential expressions of 
its encoded genes across three developmental stages. The mitochondrial genome is 
a typical circular DNA molecule of 60,630 bp with a GC content of 26.67%. Genome 
annotation identified genes that encode 15 conserved proteins, 27 tRNAs, small 
and large rRNAs, four homing endonucleases, and two hypothetical proteins. 
Except for genes encoding trnW and two hypothetical proteins, all genes were 
located on the positive strand. For the repeat structure analysis, eight 
forward, two inverted, and three tandem repeats were detected. A pair of 
fragments with a total length around 5.5 kb was found in both the nuclear and 
mitochondrial genomes, which suggests the possible transfer of DNA sequences 
between two genomes. RNA-Seq data for samples derived from three stages, namely, 
mycelia, primordia, and fruiting bodies, were mapped to the mitochondrial genome 
and qualified. The protein-coding genes were expressed higher in mycelia or 
primordial stages compared with those in the fruiting bodies. The rRNA 
abundances were significantly higher in all three stages. Two regions were 
transcribed but did not contain any identified protein or tRNA genes. 
Furthermore, three RNA-editing sites were detected. Genome synteny analysis 
showed that significant genome rearrangements occurred in the mitochondrial 
genomes. This study provides valuable information on the gene contents of the 
mitochondrial genome and their differential expressions at various developmental 
stages of G. lucidum. The results contribute to the understanding of the 
functions and evolution of fungal mitochondrial DNA.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072038
PMCID: PMC3753355
PMID: 23991034 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.