1. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2013 Nov;28(11):2899-907. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gft340.
Epub  2013 Sep 5.

Eculizumab in an anephric patient with atypical haemolytic uraemic syndrome and 
advanced vascular lesions.

Békássy ZD(1), Kristoffersson AC, Cronqvist M, Roumenina LT, Rybkine T, Vergoz 
L, Hue C, Fremeaux-Bacchi V, Karpman D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Clinical Sciences Lund, Lund University, Lund, 
Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Atypical haemolytic uraemic syndrome (aHUS) is associated with 
dysfunction of the alternative pathway of complement. Disease activity subsides 
as renal failure progresses but recurs upon renal transplantation, indicating 
that viable renal tissue contributes to disease activity. We present evidence of 
cerebrovascular occlusive disease indicating that vascular injury may occur in 
the absence of kidneys.
METHODS: A currently 12-year-old girl developed renal failure at the age of 20 
months. She underwent bilateral nephrectomy and renal transplantation but lost 
the transplant due to recurrences. She was on haemodialysis for 7 years. At 10 
years of age she developed a transient ischaemic attack. Imaging, genetic 
investigation and mutation characterization were performed.
RESULTS: Imaging demonstrated occlusion and stenosis of the carotid arteries. 
Two complement mutations, a novel mutation in factor B and a previously 
described mutation in factor I, and the H3-factor H haplotype, were identified. 
The factor B mutation, L433S, did not induce excessive complement activation in 
vitro. Measurement of C3 degradation products indicated ongoing complement 
activation. In spite of the patient being anephric, treatment was initiated with 
eculizumab, a humanized anti-C5 antibody that blocks terminal complement 
activation. She underwent a successful kidney transplant 9 months later and has 
not developed a recurrence or progression of vascular stenosis 1 year later.
CONCLUSIONS: The course of disease in this patient with aHUS suggests that 
complement-mediated vascular injury may occur in the total absence of renal 
tissue and overt recurrences. To our knowledge, this is the first description of 
eculizumab treatment in an anephric aHUS patient.

DOI: 10.1093/ndt/gft340
PMID: 24009284 [Indexed for MEDLINE]