1. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 4;8(9):e74325. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074325.
eCollection  2013.

Small molecule suppressors of Drosophila kinesin deficiency rescue motor axon 
development in a zebrafish model of spinal muscular atrophy.

Gassman A(1), Hao le T, Bhoite L, Bradford CL, Chien CB, Beattie CE, Manfredi 
JP.

Author information:
(1)Sera Prognostics, Inc., Salt Lake City, Utah, United States of America.

Proximal spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is the most common inherited motor 
neuropathy and the leading hereditary cause of infant mortality. Currently there 
is no effective treatment for the disease, reflecting a need for pharmacologic 
interventions that restore performance of dysfunctional motor neurons or 
suppress the consequences of their dysfunction. In a series of assays relevant 
to motor neuron biology, we explored the activities of a collection of 
tetrahydroindoles that were reported to alter the metabolism of amyloid 
precursor protein (APP). In Drosophila larvae the compounds suppressed aberrant 
larval locomotion due to mutations in the Khc and Klc genes, which respectively 
encode the heavy and light chains of kinesin-1. A representative compound of 
this class also suppressed the appearance of axonal swellings (alternatively 
termed axonal spheroids or neuritic beads) in the segmental nerves of the 
kinesin-deficient Drosophila larvae. Given the importance of kinesin-dependent 
transport for extension and maintenance of axons and their growth cones, three 
members of the class were tested for neurotrophic effects on isolated rat spinal 
motor neurons. Each compound stimulated neurite outgrowth. In addition, 
consistent with SMA being an axonopathy of motor neurons, the three axonotrophic 
compounds rescued motor axon development in a zebrafish model of SMA. The 
results introduce a collection of small molecules as pharmacologic suppressors 
of SMA-associated phenotypes and nominate specific members of the collection for 
development as candidate SMA therapeutics. More generally, the results reinforce 
the perception of SMA as an axonopathy and suggest novel approaches to treating 
the disease.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074325
PMCID: PMC3762770
PMID: 24023935 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have read the 
journal’s policy and have the following conflicts: JPM is an owner and Chief 
Scientific Officer of Sfida BioLogic, Inc., which owns patent rights to the 
compounds that are the subject of this report. Applications for additional 
patents relevant to these compounds have been filed. Sfida BioLogic has 
commercial interests in determining the therapeutic potential of the compounds. 
No other author has competing interests. A patent (vfz., US 7,678,823, 
“Compounds for Alzheimer’s Disease”) relevant to this report and currently 
assigned to one of the authors (JPM) has been awarded. This does not alter the 
authors’ adherence to all the PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials. 
Affiliations of authors: John Manfredi is founder of and is employed by Sfida 
Biologic; Andrew Gassman and Chad Bradford are employed by Sera Prognostics; Le 
T. Hao aud Christine Beattie are employed by the Ohio State University; Leena 
Bhoite is employed by the University of Utah. These affiliations do not alter 
the authors’ adherence to all the PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and 
materials.