1. Diabet Foot Ankle. 2013 Sep 10;4. doi: 10.3402/dfa.v4i0.21757. eCollection
2013.

An analysis of clinical activity, admission rates, length of hospital stay, and 
economic impact after a temporary loss of 50% of the non-operative podiatrists 
from a tertiary specialist foot clinic in the United Kingdom.

Gooday C(1), Murchison R, Dhatariya K.

Author information:
(1)Diabetic Foot Clinic, Elsie Bertram Diabetes Centre, Norfolk and Norwich 
University Hospitals National Health Service Foundation Trust, Norwich, Norfolk, 
UK.

INTRODUCTION: Podiatrists form an integral part of the multidisciplinary foot 
team in the treatment of diabetic foot-related complications. A set of 
unforeseen circumstances within our specialist diabetes foot service in the 
United Kingdom caused a loss of 50% of our non-operative podiatry team for 
almost 7 months during 2010. Some of this time was filled by non-specialist 
community non-operative podiatrists.
METHODS: We assessed the economic impact of this loss by examining data for the 
5 years prior to this 7-month interruption, and for the 2 years after 'normal 
service' was resumed.
RESULTS: Our data show that the loss of the non-operative podiatrists led to a 
significant rise in the numbers of admissions into hospital, and hospital length 
of stay also increased. At our institution a single bed day cost is £275. During 
the time that the numbers of specialist non-operative podiatry staff were 
depleted, and for up to 6 months after they returned to normal activities, the 
extra costs increased by just less than £90,000. The number of people admitted 
directly from specialist vascular and orthopaedic clinics is likely to have 
increased due to the lack of capacity to manage them in the diabetic foot 
clinic. Our data were unable to assess these individuals and did not look at the 
costs saved from avoiding surgery. Thus the actual costs incurred are likely to 
be higher.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that specialist non-operative podiatrists involved 
in the treatment of the diabetic foot may prevent unwarranted hospital admission 
and increased hospitalisation rates by providing skilled assessment and care in 
the outpatient clinical settings.

DOI: 10.3402/dfa.v4i0.21757
PMCID: PMC3772317
PMID: 24040488