1. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 4;8(10):e76828. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076828. 
eCollection 2013.

Temporal characteristics of gustatory responses in rat parabrachial neurons vary 
by stimulus and chemosensitive neuron type.

Geran L(1), Travers S.

Author information:
(1)Division of Oral Biology, College of Dentistry, the Ohio State University, 
Columbus, Ohio, United States of America.

It has been demonstrated that temporal features of spike trains can increase the 
amount of information available for gustatory processing. However, the nature of 
these temporal characteristics and their relationship to different taste 
qualities and neuron types are not well-defined. The present study analyzed the 
time course of taste responses from parabrachial (PBN) neurons elicited by 
multiple applications of "sweet" (sucrose), "salty" (NaCl), "sour" (citric 
acid), and "bitter" (quinine and cycloheximide) stimuli in an acute preparation. 
Time course varied significantly by taste stimulus and best-stimulus 
classification. Across neurons, the ensemble code for the three electrolytes was 
similar initially but quinine diverged from NaCl and acid during the second 500 
ms of stimulation and all four qualities became distinct just after 1s. This 
temporal evolution was reflected in significantly broader tuning during the 
initial response. Metric space analyses of quality discrimination by individual 
neurons showed that increases in information (H) afforded by temporal factors 
was usually explained by differences in rate envelope, which had a greater 
impact during the initial 2s (22.5% increase in H) compared to the later 
response (9.5%). Moreover, timing had a differential impact according to cell 
type, with between-quality discrimination in neurons activated maximally by NaCl 
or citric acid most affected. Timing was also found to dramatically improve 
within-quality discrimination (80% increase in H) in neurons that responded 
optimally to bitter stimuli (B-best). Spikes from B-best neurons were also more 
likely to occur in bursts. These findings suggest that among PBN taste neurons, 
time-dependent increases in mutual information can arise from stimulus- and 
neuron-specific differences in response envelope during the initial dynamic 
period. A stable rate code predominates in later epochs.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076828
PMCID: PMC3790754
PMID: 24124597 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.