1. Biol Psychiatry. 2014 Jan 1;75(1):18-24. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2013.09.006. 
Epub 2013 Oct 15.

Gene × environment interaction studies have not properly controlled for 
potential confounders: the problem and the (simple) solution.

Keller MC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, and the Institute for Behavioral 
Genetics, University of Colorado at Boulder, Colorado. Electronic address: 
matthew.c.keller@gmail.com.

Candidate gene × environment (G × E) interaction research tests the hypothesis 
that the effects of some environmental variable (e.g., childhood maltreatment) 
on some outcome measure (e.g., depression) depend on a particular genetic 
polymorphism. Because this research is inherently nonexperimental, investigators 
have been rightly concerned that detected interactions could be driven by 
confounders (e.g., ethnicity, gender, age, socioeconomic status) rather than by 
the specified genetic or environmental variables per se. In an attempt to 
eliminate such alternative explanations for detected G × E interactions, 
investigators routinely enter the potential confounders as covariates in general 
linear models. However, this practice does not control for the effects these 
variables might have on the G × E interaction. Rather, to properly control for 
confounders, researchers need to enter the covariate × environment and the 
covariate × gene interaction terms in the same model that tests the G × E term. 
In this manuscript, I demonstrate this point analytically and show that the 
practice of improperly controlling for covariates is the norm in the G × E 
interaction literature to date. Thus, many alternative explanations for G × E 
findings that investigators had thought were eliminated have not been.

© 2013 Society of Biological Psychiatry Published by Society of Biological 
Psychiatry All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2013.09.006
PMCID: PMC3859520
PMID: 24135711 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Financial Disclosures. The author reports no 
biomedical financial interests or potential conflicts of interest.