1. PLoS Genet. 2013 Nov;9(11):e1003878. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003878. Epub 
2013 Nov 7.

Removal of misincorporated ribonucleotides from prokaryotic genomes: an 
unexpected role for nucleotide excision repair.

Vaisman A(1), McDonald JP, Huston D, Kuban W, Liu L, Van Houten B, Woodgate R.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Genomic Integrity, National Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of 
America.

Stringent steric exclusion mechanisms limit the misincorporation of 
ribonucleotides by high-fidelity DNA polymerases into genomic DNA. In contrast, 
low-fidelity Escherichia coli DNA polymerase V (pol V) has relatively poor sugar 
discrimination and frequently misincorporates ribonucleotides. Substitution of a 
steric gate tyrosine residue with alanine (umuC_Y11A) reduces sugar selectivity 
further and allows pol V to readily misincorporate ribonucleotides as easily as 
deoxynucleotides, whilst leaving its poor base-substitution fidelity essentially 
unchanged. However, the mutability of cells expressing the steric gate pol V 
mutant is very low due to efficient repair mechanisms that are triggered by the 
misincorporated rNMPs. Comparison of the mutation frequency between strains 
expressing wild-type and mutant pol V therefore allows us to identify pathways 
specifically directed at ribonucleotide excision repair (RER). We previously 
demonstrated that rNMPs incorporated by umuC_Y11A are efficiently removed from 
DNA in a repair pathway initiated by RNase HII. Using the same approach, we show 
here that mismatch repair and base excision repair play minimal back-up roles in 
RER in vivo. In contrast, in the absence of functional RNase HII, 
umuC_Y11A-dependent mutagenesis increases significantly in ΔuvrA, uvrB5 and 
ΔuvrC strains, suggesting that rNMPs misincorporated into DNA are actively 
repaired by nucleotide excision repair (NER) in vivo. Participation of NER in 
RER was confirmed by reconstituting ribonucleotide-dependent NER in vitro. We 
show that UvrABC nuclease-catalyzed incisions are readily made on DNA templates 
containing one, two, or five rNMPs and that the reactions are stimulated by the 
presence of mispaired bases. Similar to NER of DNA lesions, excision of rNMPs 
proceeds through dual incisions made at the 8(th) phosphodiester bond 5' and 
4(th)-5(th) phosphodiester bonds 3' of the ribonucleotide. Ribonucleotides 
misinserted into DNA can therefore be added to the broad list of 
helix-distorting modifications that are substrates for NER.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003878
PMCID: PMC3820734
PMID: 24244177 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.