1. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 4;8(12):e82067. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0082067. 
eCollection 2013.

Deletions in cox2 mRNA result in loss of splicing and RNA editing and gain of 
novel RNA editing sites.

Grüttner S(1), Hopf C, Kumar A, Kempken F.

Author information:
(1)Abteilung für Botanische Genetik und Molekularbiologie, Botanisches Institut 
und Botanischer Garten, Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel, Kiel, Germany.

As previously demonstrated, the maize cox2 RNA is fully edited in cauliflower 
mitochondria. Use of constructs with a deleted cox2 intron, however, led to a 
loss of RNA editing at almost all editing sites, with only a few sites still 
partially edited. Likewise, one deletion in exon 1 and three in exon 2 abolish 
RNA editing at all cox2 sites analyzed. Furthermore, intron splicing is 
abolished using these deletions. Mutation of a cytosine residue, which is 
normally edited and localized directly adjacent to the intron, to thymidine did 
not result in restoration of splicing, indicating that the loss of splicing was 
not due to loss of RNA editing. One deletion in exon 2 did not lead to loss of 
splicing. Instead, most editing sites were found to be edited, only three were 
not edited. Unexpectedly, we observed additional RNA editing events at new 
sites. Thus it appears that deletions in the cox2 RNA sequence can have a strong 
effect on RNA processing, leading to loss of splicing, loss of editing at all 
sites, or even to a gain of new editing sites. As these effects are not limited 
to the vicinity of the respective deletions, but appear to be widespread or even 
affect all editing sites, they may not be explained by the loss of PPR binding 
sites. Instead, it appears that several parts of the cox2 transcript are 
required for proper RNA processing. This indicates the roles of the RNA sequence 
and structural elements in the recognition of the editing sites.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0082067
PMCID: PMC3852756
PMID: 24324745 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.