1. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2014 Apr;112(4):309-16. doi: 
10.1016/j.anai.2013.09.017. Epub 2013 Oct 10.

Stress triggers coronary mast cells leading to cardiac events.

Alevizos M(1), Karagkouni A(2), Panagiotidou S(3), Vasiadi M(3), Theoharides 
TC(4).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Immunopharmacology and Drug Discovery Laboratory, Department of 
Integrative Physiology and Pathobiology, Tufts University School of Medicine, 
Tufts Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts; Present address: Department of 
Internal Medicine, Jacoby Medical Center, New York, New York.
(2)Molecular Immunopharmacology and Drug Discovery Laboratory, Department of 
Integrative Physiology and Pathobiology, Tufts University School of Medicine, 
Tufts Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts; Present address: Department of 
Psychiatry, Westchester Hospital, Mt Kisco, New York.
(3)Molecular Immunopharmacology and Drug Discovery Laboratory, Department of 
Integrative Physiology and Pathobiology, Tufts University School of Medicine, 
Tufts Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts.
(4)Molecular Immunopharmacology and Drug Discovery Laboratory, Department of 
Integrative Physiology and Pathobiology, Tufts University School of Medicine, 
Tufts Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts; Department of Internal Medicine, 
Tufts University School of Medicine, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, 
Massachusetts; Department of Biochemistry, Tufts University School of Medicine, 
Tufts Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts; Department of Psychiatry, Tufts 
University School of Medicine, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts. 
Electronic address: theoharis.theoharides@tufts.edu.

OBJECTIVE: Stress precipitates and worsens not only asthma and atopic dermatitis 
but also acute coronary syndromes (ACSs), which are associated with coronary 
inflammation. Evidence linking stress to ACS was reviewed and indicated that 
activation of coronary mast cells (MCs) by stress, through 
corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) and other neuropeptides, contributes to 
coronary inflammation and coronary artery disease.
DATA SOURCES: PubMed was searched (2005-2013) for articles using the following 
keywords: allergies, anaphylaxis, anxiety, coronary arteries, coronary artery 
disease, C-reactive protein, cytokines, chymase, histamine, hypersensitivity, 
interleukin-6 (IL-6), inflammation, mast cells, myocardial ischemia, niacin, 
platelet-activating factor, rupture, spasm, statins, stress, treatment, 
tryptase, and uroctortin.
STUDY SELECTIONS: Articles were selected based on their relevance to how stress 
affects ACS and how it activates coronary MCs, leading to coronary 
hypersensitivity, inflammation, and coronary artery disease.
RESULTS: Stress can precipitate allergies and ACS. Stress stimulates MCs through 
the activation of high-affinity surface receptors for CRH, leading to a 
CRH-dependent increase in serum IL-6. Moreover, neurotensin secreted with CRH 
from peripheral nerves augments the effect of CRH and stimulates cardiac MCs to 
release IL-6, which is elevated in ACS and is an independent risk factor for 
myocardial ischemia. MCs also secrete CRH and uroctortin, which induces IL-6 
release from cardiomyocytes. The presence of atherosclerosis increases the risk 
of cardiac MC activation owing to the stimulatory effect of lipoproteins and 
adipocytokines. Conditions such as Kounis syndrome, mastocytosis, and myalgic 
encephalopathy/chronic fatigue syndrome are particularly prone to coronary 
hypersensitivity reactions.
CONCLUSION: Inhibition of cardiac MCs may be a novel treatment approach.

Copyright © 2014 American College of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anai.2013.09.017
PMCID: PMC4288814
PMID: 24428962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]