1. Endocr Connect. 2014 Mar 14;3(1):R13-30. doi: 10.1530/EC-13-0103. Print 2014.

Therapeutic management of hypophosphatemic rickets from infancy to adulthood.

Linglart A(1), Biosse-Duplan M, Briot K, Chaussain C, Esterle L, 
Guillaume-Czitrom S, Kamenicky P, Nevoux J, Prié D, Rothenbuhler A, Wicart P, 
Harvengt P.

Author information:
(1)Service d'Endocrinologie et Diabétologie de l'Enfant Service de Pédiatrie 
générale - Consultation de rhumatologie Service d'Endocrinologie et des Maladies 
de la Reproduction Service d'ORL et chirurgie cervico-maxillo-facialeHôpital 
Bicêtre, APHP, 78 rue du Général Leclerc, 94270 Le Kremlin Bicêtre, France 
Université Paris 11Faculté de Médecine, Hôpital Bicêtre, 70 rue du Général 
Leclerc, 94270 Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France Centre de Référence des Maladies Rares 
du Métabolisme du Calcium et du PhosphoreLe Kremlin-Bicêtre, France Service 
d'Odontologie-Maladies Rares Hôpital Bretonneau 2 rue Carpeaux75018 Paris, 
France Université Paris Descartes 12 Rue de l'École de Médecine75006 Paris, 
France Service Rhumatologie B Hôpital CochinAPHP, 27, rue du Faubourg 
Saint-Jacques, 75014 Paris, France Centre de Référence des Maladies Rares des 
Maladies Auto-Inflammatoires Rares de l'EnfantLe Kremlin Bicêtre, France Service 
d'explorations fonctionnelles rénales Service de Chirurgie infantile 
orthopédiqueHôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, 149 rue de Sèvres, 75015 Paris, 
France Association de patients RVRH-XLH20 rue Merlin de Thionville, 92150 
Suresnes, France.

In children, hypophosphatemic rickets (HR) is revealed by delayed walking, 
waddling gait, leg bowing, enlarged cartilages, bone pain, craniostenosis, 
spontaneous dental abscesses, and growth failure. If undiagnosed during 
childhood, patients with hypophosphatemia present with bone and/or joint pain, 
fractures, mineralization defects such as osteomalacia, entesopathy, severe 
dental anomalies, hearing loss, and fatigue. Healing rickets is the initial 
endpoint of treatment in children. Therapy aims at counteracting consequences of 
FGF23 excess, i.e. oral phosphorus supplementation with multiple daily intakes 
to compensate for renal phosphate wasting and active vitamin D analogs 
(alfacalcidol or calcitriol) to counter the 1,25-diOH-vitamin D deficiency. 
Corrective surgeries for residual leg bowing at the end of growth are 
occasionally performed. In absence of consensus regarding indications of the 
treatment in adults, it is generally accepted that medical treatment should be 
reinitiated (or maintained) in symptomatic patients to reduce pain, which may be 
due to bone microfractures and/or osteomalacia. In addition to the conventional 
treatment, optimal care of symptomatic patients requires pharmacological and 
non-pharmacological management of pain and joint stiffness, through appropriated 
rehabilitation. Much attention should be given to the dental and periodontal 
manifestations of HR. Besides vitamin D analogs and phosphate supplements that 
improve tooth mineralization, rigorous oral hygiene, active endodontic treatment 
of root abscesses and preventive protection of teeth surfaces are recommended. 
Current outcomes of this therapy are still not optimal, and therapies targeting 
the pathophysiology of the disease, i.e. FGF23 excess, are desirable. In this 
review, medical, dental, surgical, and contributions of various expertises to 
the treatment of HR are described, with an effort to highlight the importance of 
coordinated care.

DOI: 10.1530/EC-13-0103
PMCID: PMC3959730
PMID: 24550322