1. PLoS Pathog. 2014 Feb 27;10(2):e1003938. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003938. 
eCollection 2014 Feb.

Metabolic reprogramming during purine stress in the protozoan pathogen 
Leishmania donovani.

Martin JL(1), Yates PA(1), Soysa R(1), Alfaro JF(2), Yang F(2), Burnum-Johnson 
KE(2), Petyuk VA(2), Weitz KK(2), Camp DG 2nd(2), Smith RD(2), Wilmarth PA(3), 
David LL(3), Ramasamy G(4), Myler PJ(5), Carter NS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Oregon Health & Science 
University, Portland, Oregon, United States of America.
(2)Division of Biological Sciences, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, 
Richland, Washington, United States of America.
(3)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Oregon Health & Science 
University, Portland, Oregon, United States of America ; Proteomics Shared 
Resource Core, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, Oregon, United 
States of America.
(4)Seattle Biomedical Research Institute, Seattle, Washington, United States of 
America.
(5)Seattle Biomedical Research Institute, Seattle, Washington, United States of 
America ; Department of Global Health and Department of Biomedical Informatics & 
Medical Education, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, United States 
of America.

The ability of Leishmania to survive in their insect or mammalian host is 
dependent upon an ability to sense and adapt to changes in the microenvironment. 
However, little is known about the molecular mechanisms underlying the parasite 
response to environmental changes, such as nutrient availability. To elucidate 
nutrient stress response pathways in Leishmania donovani, we have used purine 
starvation as the paradigm. The salvage of purines from the host milieu is 
obligatory for parasite replication; nevertheless, purine-starved parasites can 
persist in culture without supplementary purine for over three months, 
indicating that the response to purine starvation is robust and engenders 
parasite survival under conditions of extreme scarcity. To understand metabolic 
reprogramming during purine starvation we have employed global approaches. Whole 
proteome comparisons between purine-starved and purine-replete parasites over a 
6-48 h span have revealed a temporal and coordinated response to purine 
starvation. Purine transporters and enzymes involved in acquisition at the cell 
surface are upregulated within a few hours of purine removal from the media, 
while other key purine salvage components are upregulated later in the 
time-course and more modestly. After 48 h, the proteome of purine-starved 
parasites is extensively remodeled and adaptations to purine stress appear 
tailored to deal with both purine deprivation and general stress. To probe the 
molecular mechanisms affecting proteome remodeling in response to purine 
starvation, comparative RNA-seq analyses, qRT-PCR, and luciferase reporter 
assays were performed on purine-starved versus purine-replete parasites. While 
the regulation of a minority of proteins tracked with changes at the mRNA level, 
for many regulated proteins it appears that proteome remodeling during purine 
stress occurs primarily via translational and/or post-translational mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003938
PMCID: PMC3937319
PMID: 24586154 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.