1. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 6;9(6):e90637. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0090637.
eCollection  2014.

The bitter barricading of prostaglandin biosynthesis pathway: understanding the 
molecular mechanism of selective cyclooxygenase-2 inhibition by amarogentin, a 
secoiridoid glycoside from Swertia chirayita.

Shukla S(1), Bafna K(2), Sundar D(2), Thorat SS(3).

Author information:
(1)Bioresource Database and Bioinformatics Division, Regional Center of 
Institute of Bioresources and Sustainable Development, Tadong, Gangtok, Sikkim, 
India.
(2)Department of Biochemical Engineering and Biotechnology, Indian Institute of 
Technology Delhi, Hauz Khas, New Delhi, India.
(3)Bioresource Database and Bioinformatics Division, Regional Center of 
Institute of Bioresources and Sustainable Development, Tadong, Gangtok, Sikkim, 
India; Distributed Information Sub-Centre, Institute of Bioresources and 
Sustainable Development, Imphal, Manipur, India.

Swertia chirayita, a medicinal herb inhabiting the challenging terrains and high 
altitudes of the Himalayas, is a rich source of essential phytochemical 
isolates. Amarogentin, a bitter secoiridoid glycoside from S. chirayita, shows 
varied activity in several patho-physiological conditions, predominantly in 
leishmaniasis and carcinogenesis. Experimental analysis has revealed that 
amarogentin downregulates the cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) activity and helps to 
curtail skin carcinogenesis in mouse models; however, there exists no account on 
selective inhibition of the inducible cyclooxygenase (COX) isoform by 
amarogentin. Hence the computer-aided drug discovery methods were used to 
unravel the COX-2 inhibitory mechanism of amarogentin and to check its 
selectivity for the inducible isoform over the constitutive one. The generated 
theoretical models of both isoforms were subjected to molecular docking analysis 
with amarogentin and twenty-one other Food and Drug Authority (FDA) approved 
lead molecules. The post-docking binding energy profile of amarogentin was 
comparable to the binding energy profiles of the FDA approved selective COX-2 
inhibitors. Subsequent molecular dynamics simulation analysis delineated the 
difference in the stability of both complexes, with amarogentin-COX-2 complex 
being more stable after 40ns simulation. The total binding free energy 
calculated by MMGBSA for the amarogentin-COX-2 complex was -52.35 KCal/mol 
against a binding free energy of -8.57 KCal/mol for amarogentin-COX-1 complex, 
suggesting a possible selective inhibition of the COX-2 protein by the natural 
inhibitor. Amarogentin achieves this potential selectivity by small, yet 
significant, structural differences inherent to the binding cavities of the two 
isoforms. Hypothetically, it might block the entry of the natural substrates in 
the hydrophobic binding channel of the COX-2, inhibiting the cyclooxygenation 
step. To sum up briefly, this work highlights the mechanism of the possible 
selective COX-2 inhibition by amarogentin and endorses the possibility of 
obtaining efficient, futuristic and targeted therapeutic agents for relieving 
inflammation and malignancy from this phytochemical source.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0090637
PMCID: PMC3946170
PMID: 24603686 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.