1. Ceska Gynekol. 2014 Jan;79(1):48-52.

[Analysis of point mutations in interleukin-11 gene in the population of 
infertile patients and fertile control women].

[Article in Czech]

Lhotská P, Martínek P, Čedíková M, Lošan P, Králíčková M, Kališ V, Novotný Z.

OBJECTIVE: The interleukin-11 (IL-11) is one of the most important signaling 
factors in the process of decidua-lization and embryo-maternal cross talk during 
the embryo implantation. We investigated the prevalence of the IL-11 gene point 
variants in the population of infertile women and fertile control subjects.
DESIGN: A cohort study.
SETTING: Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine and 
University Hospital of Charles University, Pilsen.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: The population to screen consisted of 354 infertile women. 
The control population was comprised of 195 healthy fertile subjects. For the 
mutational analysis, the temperature gradient gel electrophoresis (TGGE) and 
direct sequencing had been used. The groups of fertile controls and infertile 
patients were compared for statistically significant difference using the 
Fisher´s 2 by 2 Exact test.
RESULTS: Thirteen potentially functional IL-11 gene variants, the G to A 
transversions at the position 3651 (G3651A) leading to the arginin to histidin 
exchange on the position 113 (R113H) were detected in the group of infertile 
women. No mutations were identified in the control group, which means that the 
frequency of functionally relevant mutations of the IL-11 gene in infertile 
women is significantly enhanced in comparison with controls (p = 0.01, Fisher´s 
2 by 2 Exact test).
CONCLUSION: The results prove the presence of the potentially functionally 
relevant IL-11 gene variants in the population of infertile women. The presence 
of variants does not have to lead directly to decrease fertility but may 
contribute to the dysbalance of cytokine milieu which is needed for the 
decidualization as well as subsequent embryo implantation. Even thought IL-11 
gene variants occur infrequently, their impact on molecular events during early 
phases of pregnancy should be further elucidated.

PMID: 24635366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]