1. Endocrinol Diabetes Metab Case Rep. 2013;2013:130056. doi:
10.1530/EDM-13-0056.  Epub 2013 Dec 1.

Continuous glucose monitoring in the treatment of obesity in patients with 
glycogen storage disease type Ia.

Korljan Jelaska B(1), Ostojić SB(2), Berović N(1), Kokić V(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine University Hospital Split Split Croatia.
(2)Department of Radiology General Hospital Sveti Duh Zagreb Croatia.

Glycogen storage disease (GSD) type I is characterized by impaired production of 
glucose from glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis resulting in severe 
hypoglycaemia and increased production of lactic acid, triglyceride and uric 
acid. The most common type, glycogenosis type Ia, demands a balanced, sufficient 
carbohydrate intake to preserve normal 24-h glycaemia. Insufficient intake of 
carbohydrates can cause hypoglycaemia, as the missing glucose-6-phosphatase 
enzyme cannot free the glucose stored as liver glycogen and nor is 
gluconeogenesis possible. The principle means of handling this disorder is to 
avoid starving by taking regular meals during the day and night. Such a dietary 
regimen could lead to obesity. Herein, we present the case of an adult patient 
with glycogenosis type Ia suffering from hyperuricaemia, dyslipidaemia and 
arterial hypertension. The accumulation of these cardiovascular risk factors 
could lead to the early onset of atherosclerosis, which should be postponed by 
contemporary methods of surveillance and treatment.
LEARNING POINTS: Continuous subcutaneous glucose monitoring may be of value in 
every adult patient with GSD type I to evaluate the actual prevalence of 
eventual hypoglycaemic and hyperglycaemic episodes.Good dietary management 
minimizes the metabolic abnormalities of the disease and decreases the risk of 
long-term complications.Treatment of obesity in patients with GSD reduces the 
risk of earlier atherosclerosis and cardiovascular disease.

DOI: 10.1530/EDM-13-0056
PMCID: PMC3965284
PMID: 24683476