1. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 10;9(4):e94390. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0094390. 
eCollection 2014.

Comparative analyses of lung transcriptomes in patients with alveolar capillary 
dysplasia with misalignment of pulmonary veins and in foxf1 heterozygous 
knockout mice.

Sen P(1), Dharmadhikari AV(2), Majewski T(3), Mohammad MA(1), Kalin TV(4), 
Zabielska J(5), Ren X(4), Bray M(6), Brown HM(7), Welty S(1), Thevananther S(8), 
Langston C(9), Szafranski P(10), Justice MJ(2), Kalinichenko VV(4), Gambin 
A(11), Belmont J(12), Stankiewicz P(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, United 
States of America.
(2)Department of Molecular & Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas, United States of America; Interdepartmental Program in 
Translational Biology and Molecular Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas, United States of America.
(3)Department of Pathology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, Texas, United States of America.
(4)Division of Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Research 
Foundation, Cincinnati, Ohio, United States of America.
(5)Institute of Informatics, University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.
(6)Department of Epidemiology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, 
Alabama, United States of America.
(7)Department of Molecular & Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas, United States of America; Robinson Research Institute, School of 
Pediatrics and Reproductive Health, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, United 
States of America; Interdepartmental Program in Translational Biology and 
Molecular Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, United States of 
America.
(9)Department of Pathology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, United 
States of America.
(10)Department of Molecular & Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas, United States of America.
(11)Institute of Informatics, University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland; Mossakowski 
Medical Research Center, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland.
(12)Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, United 
States of America; Department of Molecular & Human Genetics, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, Texas, United States of America.

Alveolar Capillary Dysplasia with Misalignment of Pulmonary Veins (ACDMPV) is a 
developmental disorder of the lungs, primarily affecting their vasculature. 
FOXF1 haploinsufficiency due to heterozygous genomic deletions and point 
mutations have been reported in most patients with ACDMPV. The majority of mice 
with heterozygous loss-of-function of Foxf1 exhibit neonatal lethality with 
evidence of pulmonary hemorrhage in some of them. By comparing transcriptomes of 
human ACDMPV lungs with control lungs using expression arrays, we found that 
several genes and pathways involved in lung development, angiogenesis, and in 
pulmonary hypertension development, were deregulated. Similar transcriptional 
changes were found in lungs of the postnatal day 0.5 Foxf1+/- mice when compared 
to their wildtype littermate controls; 14 genes, COL15A1, COL18A1, COL6A2, ESM1, 
FSCN1, GRINA, IGFBP3, IL1B, MALL, NOS3, RASL11B, MATN2, PRKCDBP, and SIRPA, were 
found common to both ACDMPV and Foxf1 heterozygous lungs. Our results advance 
knowledge toward understanding of the molecular mechanism of ACDMPV, lung 
development, and its vasculature pathology. These data may also be useful for 
understanding etiologies of other lung disorders, e.g. pulmonary hypertension, 
bronchopulmonary dysplasia, or cancer.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0094390
PMCID: PMC3983164
PMID: 24722050 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Tanya Kalin and Vladimir 
Kalinichenko are PLOS ONE Editorial Board members. This does not alter the 
authors' adherence to PLOS ONE Editorial policies and criteria.