1. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 14;9(4):e94677. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0094677. 
eCollection 2014.

Lack of serologic evidence to link IgA nephropathy with celiac disease or immune 
reactivity to gluten.

Moeller S(1), Canetta PA(2), Taylor AK(3), Arguelles-Grande C(1), Snyder H(2), 
Green PH(1), Kiryluk K(2), Alaedini A(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Digestive and Liver Diseases, Department of Medicine, Columbia 
University Medical Center, New York, New York, United States of America; Celiac 
Disease Center, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New York, United 
States of America.
(2)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Columbia University Medical 
Center, New York, New York, United States of America.
(3)Esoterix, Inc., Laboratory Corporation of America Holdings, Englewood, 
Colorado, United States of America.
(4)Division of Digestive and Liver Diseases, Department of Medicine, Columbia 
University Medical Center, New York, New York, United States of America; Celiac 
Disease Center, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New York, United 
States of America; Institute of Human Nutrition, Columbia University Medical 
Center, New York, New York, United States of America.

IgA nephropathy is the most common form of primary glomerulonephritis worldwide. 
Mucosal infections and food antigens, including wheat gluten, have been proposed 
as potential contributing environmental factors. Increased immune reactivity to 
gluten and/or association with celiac disease, an autoimmune disorder triggered 
by ingestion of gluten, have been reported in IgA nephropathy. However, studies 
are inconsistent about this association. We aimed to evaluate the proposed link 
between IgA nephropathy and celiac disease or immune reactivity to gluten by 
conducting a comprehensive analysis of associated serologic markers in cohorts 
of well-characterized patients and controls. Study participants included 
patients with biopsy-proven IgA nephropathy (n = 99), unaffected controls of 
similar age, gender, and race (n = 96), and patients with biopsy-proven celiac 
disease (n = 30). All serum specimens were tested for IgG and IgA antibodies to 
native gliadin and deamidated gliadin, as well as IgA antibody to 
transglutaminase 2 (TG2). Anti-TG2 antibody-positive nephropathy patients and 
unaffected controls were subsequently tested for IgA anti-endomysial antibody 
and genotyped for celiac disease-associated HLA-DQ2 and -DQ8 alleles. In 
comparison to unaffected controls, there was not a statistically significant 
increase in IgA or IgG antibody reactivity to gliadin in individuals with IgA 
nephropathy. In addition, the levels of celiac disease-specific serologic 
markers, i.e., antibodies to deamidated gliadin and TG2, did not differ between 
IgA nephropathy patients and unaffected controls. Results of the additional 
anti-endomysial antibody testing and HLA genotyping were corroborative. The data 
from this case-control study do not reveal any evidence to suggest a significant 
role for celiac disease or immune reactivity to gluten in IgA nephropathy.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0094677
PMCID: PMC3986214
PMID: 24732864 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Dr. Taylor is an employee 
of Laboratory Corporation of America, a company that provides celiac disease 
serologic and genetic testing. This does not alter the authors’ adherence to 
PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.