1. Neurobiol Aging. 2014 Sep;35(9):2180.e1-5. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2014.03.024. Epub 2014 Mar 26.

Novel α-synuclein mutation A53E associated with atypical multiple system atrophy 
and Parkinson's disease-type pathology.

Pasanen P(1), Myllykangas L(2), Siitonen M(3), Raunio A(4), Kaakkola S(5), 
Lyytinen J(5), Tienari PJ(6), Pöyhönen M(7), Paetau A(4).

Author information:
(1)Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Biomedicum Helsinki, Finland; Department of 
Medical Biochemistry and Genetics, University of Turku, Turku, Finland.
(2)Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Biomedicum Helsinki, Finland; Department of 
Pathology, University of Helsinki and HUSLAB, Helsinki, Finland. Electronic 
address: liisa.myllykangas@helsinki.fi.
(3)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Genetics, University of Turku, Turku, 
Finland.
(4)Department of Pathology, University of Helsinki and HUSLAB, Helsinki, 
Finland.
(5)Department of Neurology, University of Helsinki and University Central 
Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.
(6)Department of Neurology, University of Helsinki and University Central 
Hospital, Helsinki, Finland; Molecular Neurology, Research Programs Unit, 
Biomedicum, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(7)Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Biomedicum Helsinki, Finland; Department of 
Clinical Genetics, Helsinki University Central Hospital, University of Helsinki, 
Helsinki, Finland; Department of Medical Genetics, Haartman Institute, 
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

We describe the clinical, neuropathological, and genetic features of a Finnish 
patient with a novel α-synuclein (SNCA) mutation A53E. The patient was 
clinically diagnosed with atypical Parkinson's disease (PD) with age of onset at 
36 years. In the neuropathological analysis performed at the age of 60 years, 
highly abundant SNCA pathology was observed throughout the brain and spinal cord 
showing features of multiple system atrophy and PD. Neuronal and glial 
(including oligodendroglial) SNCA inclusions and neurites were found to be 
particularly prominent in the putamen, caudatus, amygdala, temporal and insular 
cortices, gyrus cinguli, and hippocampus CA2-3 region. These areas as well as 
the substantia nigra and locus coeruleus showed neuronal loss and gliosis. We 
also found TDP-43 positive but mostly SNCA negative perinuclear inclusions in 
the dentate fascia of the hippocampus. The A53E mutation was found in 2 other 
relatives who had parkinsonism. Our results suggest that the novel SNCA A53E 
substitution is a causative mutation resulting clinically in parkinsonism and 
pathologically in severe multiple system atrophy- and PD-type phenotype.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2014.03.024
PMID: 24746362 [Indexed for MEDLINE]