1. Cortex. 2014 Aug;57:22-37. doi: 10.1016/j.cortex.2014.02.022. Epub 2014 Mar
21.

Conceptualizing neuropsychiatric diseases with multimodal data-driven 
meta-analyses - the case of behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia.

Schroeter ML(1), Laird AR(2), Chwiesko C(3), Deuschl C(3), Schneider E(3), Bzdok 
D(4), Eickhoff SB(5), Neumann J(6).

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, 
Germany; Clinic of Cognitive Neurology, University of Leipzig, Germany; Leipzig 
Research Center for Civilization Diseases, University of Leipzig, Germany; FTLD 
Consortium, Germany. Electronic address: schroet@cbs.mpg.de.
(2)Research Imaging Institute, University of Texas Health Science Center, San 
Antonio, TX, USA.
(3)Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, 
Germany.
(4)Institute for Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-1), Research Center Jülich, 
Germany.
(5)Institute for Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-1), Research Center Jülich, 
Germany; Institute for Clinical Neuroscience and Medical Psychology, HHU 
Düsseldorf, Germany.
(6)Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, 
Germany; Leipzig University Medical Center, IFB Adiposity Diseases, Leipzig, 
Germany.

INTRODUCTION: Uniform coordinate systems in neuroimaging research have enabled 
comprehensive systematic and quantitative meta-analyses. Such approaches are 
particularly relevant for neuropsychiatric diseases, the understanding of their 
symptoms, prediction and treatment. Behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia 
(bvFTD), a common neurodegenerative syndrome, is characterized by deep 
alterations in behavior and personality. Investigating this 'nexopathy' 
elucidates the healthy social and emotional brain.
METHODS: Here, we combine three multimodal meta-analyses approaches - anatomical 
and activation likelihood estimates and behavioral domain profiles - to identify 
neural correlates of bvFTD in 417 patients and 406 control subjects and to 
extract mental functions associated with this disease by meta-analyzing 
functional activation studies in the comprehensive probabilistic functional 
brain atlas of the BrainMap database.
RESULTS: The analyses identify the frontomedian cortex, basal ganglia, anterior 
insulae and thalamus as most relevant hubs, with a regional dissociation between 
atrophy and hypometabolism. Neural networks affected by bvFTD were associated 
with emotion and reward processing, empathy and executive functions (mainly 
inhibition), suggesting these functions as core domains affected by the disease 
and finally leading to its clinical symptoms. In contrast, changes in theory of 
mind or mentalizing abilities seem to be secondary phenomena of executive 
dysfunctions.
CONCLUSIONS: The study creates a novel conceptual framework to understand 
neuropsychiatric diseases by powerful data-driven meta-analytic approaches that 
shall be extended to the whole neuropsychiatric spectrum in the future.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cortex.2014.02.022
PMCID: PMC4108513
PMID: 24763126 [Indexed for MEDLINE]