1. PLoS One. 2014 May 21;9(5):e98168. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0098168. 
eCollection 2014.

Single strain isolation method for cell culture-adapted hepatitis C virus by 
end-point dilution and infection.

Sugiyama N(1), Murayama A(1), Suzuki R(1), Watanabe N(1), Shiina M(2), Liang 
TJ(3), Wakita T(1), Kato T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Virology II, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Shin-Yurigaoka General 
Hospital, Kawasaki, Kanagawa, Japan.
(3)Liver Diseases Branch, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and 
Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United 
States of America.

The hepatitis C virus (HCV) culture system has enabled us to clarify the HCV 
life cycle and essential host factors for propagation. However, the virus 
production level of wild-type JFH-1 (JFH-1/wt) is limited, and this leads to 
difficulties in performing experiments that require higher viral concentrations. 
As the cell culture-adapted JFH-1 has been reported to have robust virus 
production, some mutations in the viral genome may play a role in the efficiency 
of virus production. In this study, we obtained cell culture-adapted virus by 
passage of full-length JFH-1 RNA-transfected Huh-7.5.1 cells. The obtained virus 
produced 3 log-fold more progeny viruses as compared with JFH-1/wt. Several 
mutations were identified as being responsible for robust virus production, but, 
on reverse-genetics analysis, the production levels of JFH-1 with these 
mutations did not reach the level of cell culture-adapted virus. By using the 
single strain isolation method by end-point dilution and infection, we isolated 
two strains with additional mutations, and found that these strains have the 
ability to produce more progeny viruses. On reverse-genetics analysis, the 
strains with these additional mutations were able to produce robust progeny 
viruses at comparable levels as cell culture-adapted JFH-1 virus. The strategy 
used in this study will be useful for identifying strains with unique 
characteristics, such as robust virus production, from a diverse population, and 
for determining the responsible mutations for these characteristics.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0098168
PMCID: PMC4029950
PMID: 24848954 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.