1. Front Neurosci. 2014 May 26;8:121. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2014.00121. eCollection 
2014.

The functional significance of newly born neurons integrated into olfactory bulb 
circuits.

Sakamoto M(1), Kageyama R(2), Imayoshi I(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University Kyoto, Japan ; Kyoto 
University Graduate School of Biostudies Kyoto, Japan.
(2)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University Kyoto, Japan ; World Premier 
International Research Initiative-Institute for Integrated Cell-Material 
Sciences, Kyoto University Kyoto, Japan ; Japan Science and Technology Agency, 
Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology Kyoto, Japan.
(3)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University Kyoto, Japan ; World Premier 
International Research Initiative-Institute for Integrated Cell-Material 
Sciences, Kyoto University Kyoto, Japan ; The Hakubi Center, Kyoto University 
Kyoto, Japan ; Japan Science and Technology Agency, Precursory Research for 
Embryonic Science and Technology Kyoto, Japan.

The olfactory bulb (OB) is the first central processing center for olfactory 
information connecting with higher areas in the brain, and this neuronal 
circuitry mediates a variety of odor-evoked behavioral responses. In the adult 
mammalian brain, continuous neurogenesis occurs in two restricted regions, the 
subventricular zone (SVZ) of the lateral ventricle and the hippocampal dentate 
gyrus. New neurons born in the SVZ migrate through the rostral migratory stream 
and are integrated into the neuronal circuits of the OB throughout life. The 
significance of this continuous supply of new neurons in the OB has been 
implicated in plasticity and memory regulation. Two decades of huge 
investigation in adult neurogenesis revealed the biological importance of 
integration of new neurons into the olfactory circuits. In this review, we 
highlight the recent findings about the physiological functions of newly 
generated neurons in rodent OB circuits and then discuss the contribution of 
neurogenesis in the brain function. Finally, we introduce cutting edge 
technologies to monitor and manipulate the activity of new neurons.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2014.00121
PMCID: PMC4033306
PMID: 24904263