1. PLoS Pathog. 2014 Jun 12;10(6):e1004191. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004191. 
eCollection 2014 Jun.

Recombination in enteroviruses is a biphasic replicative process involving the 
generation of greater-than genome length 'imprecise' intermediates.

Lowry K(1), Woodman A(1), Cook J(1), Evans DJ(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, University of Warwick, Coventry, United Kingdom.

Recombination in enteroviruses provides an evolutionary mechanism for acquiring 
extensive regions of novel sequence, is suggested to have a role in genotype 
diversity and is known to have been key to the emergence of novel 
neuropathogenic variants of poliovirus. Despite the importance of this 
evolutionary mechanism, the recombination process remains relatively poorly 
understood. We investigated heterologous recombination using a novel reverse 
genetic approach that resulted in the isolation of intermediate chimeric 
intertypic polioviruses bearing genomes with extensive duplicated sequences at 
the recombination junction. Serial passage of viruses exhibiting such imprecise 
junctions yielded progeny with increased fitness which had lost the duplicated 
sequences. Mutations or inhibitors that changed polymerase fidelity or the 
coalescence of replication complexes markedly altered the yield of recombinants 
(but did not influence non-replicative recombination) indicating both that the 
process is replicative and that it may be possible to enhance or reduce 
recombination-mediated viral evolution if required. We propose that extant 
recombinants result from a biphasic process in which an initial recombination 
event is followed by a process of resolution, deleting extraneous sequences and 
optimizing viral fitness. This process has implications for our wider 
understanding of 'evolution by duplication' in the positive-strand RNA viruses.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004191
PMCID: PMC4055744
PMID: 24945141 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.