1. Drug Des Devel Ther. 2014 Jun 17;8:799-810. doi: 10.2147/DDDT.S47441. 
eCollection 2014.

Additive effects of cilnidipine, an L-/N-type calcium channel blocker, and an 
angiotensin II receptor blocker on reducing cardiorenal damage in Otsuka 
Long-Evans Tokushima Fatty rats with type 2 diabetes mellitus.

Mori Y(1), Aritomi S(2), Niinuma K(2), Nakamura T(2), Matsuura K(3), Yokoyama 
J(3), Utsunomiya K(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Diabetes and Endocrinology, Department of Internal Medicine, The 
Jikei University School of Medicine, Minato-ku, Japan ; Department of Clinical 
Research, National Hospital Organization, Utsunomiya National Hospital, 
Utsunomiya, Japan.
(2)Research Center, Ajinomoto Pharmaceuticals Co, Ltd, Kanagawa, Japan.
(3)Division of Diabetes and Endocrinology, Department of Internal Medicine, The 
Jikei University School of Medicine, Minato-ku, Japan.

Cilnidipine (Cil), which is an L-/N-type calcium channel blocker (CCB), has been 
known to provide renal protection by decreasing the activity of the sympathetic 
nervous system (SNS) and the renin-angiotensin system. In this study, we 
compared the effects of the combination of Cil and amlodipine (Aml), which is an 
L-type CCB, with an angiotensin (Ang) II receptor blocker on diabetic 
cardiorenal damage in spontaneously type 2 diabetic rats. Seventeen-week-old 
Otsuka Long-Evans Tokushima Fatty rats were randomly assigned to receive Cil, 
Aml, valsartan (Val), Cil + Val, Aml + Val, or a vehicle (eight rats per group) 
for 22 weeks. Antihypertensive potencies were nearly equal among the CCB 
monotherapy groups and the combination therapy groups. The lowering of blood 
pressure by either treatment did not significantly affect the glycemic 
variables. However, exacerbations of renal and heart failure were significantly 
suppressed in rats administered Cil or Val, and additional suppression was 
observed in those administered Cil + Val. Although Val increased the renin-Ang 
system, Aml + Val treatment resulted in additional increases in these 
parameters, while Cil + Val did not show such effects. Furthermore, Cil 
increased the ratio of Ang-(1-7) to Ang-I, despite the fact that Val and Aml + 
Val decreased the Ang-(1-7) levels. These actions of Cil + Val might be due to 
their synergistic inhibitory effect on the activity of the SNS, and on 
aldosterone secretion through N-type calcium channel antagonism and Ang II 
receptor type 1 antagonism. Thus, Cil may inhibit the progression of cardiorenal 
disease in type 2 diabetes patients by acting as an N-type CCB and inhibiting 
the aldosterone secretion and SNS activation when these drugs were administered 
in combination with an Ang II receptor blocker.

DOI: 10.2147/DDDT.S47441
PMCID: PMC4069052
PMID: 24970998 [Indexed for MEDLINE]