1. Autophagy. 2014 Sep;10(9):1579-87. doi: 10.4161/auto.29406. Epub 2014 Jul 7.

Autophagy deficiency leads to accumulation of ubiquitinated proteins, ER stress, 
and cell death in Arabidopsis.

Munch D(1), Rodriguez E(2), Bressendorff S(1), Park OK(3), Hofius D(4), Petersen 
M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology; Copenhagen University; Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)Centre for Environmental and Marine Studies (CESAM); Biology Department; 
University Aveiro; Aveiro, Portugal.
(3)School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology; Korea University; Seoul, Korea.
(4)Department of Plant Biology and Forest Genetics; The Swedish University of 
Agricultural Sciences and Linnean Center for Plant Biology; Uppsala BioCenter; 
Uppsala, Sweden.

Autophagy is a homeostatic degradation and recycling process that is also 
involved in defense against microbial pathogens and in certain forms of cellular 
suicide. Autophagy has been proposed to negatively regulate plant 
immunity-associated cell death related to the hypersensitive response (HR), as 
older autophagy-deficient mutants are unable to contain this type of cell death 
5 to 10 d after infection. Such spreading cell death was found to require NPR1 
(nonexpressor of PR genes 1), but surprisingly did not occur in younger atg 
mutants. In contrast, we find that npr1 mutants are not impaired in rapid 
programmed cell death activation upon pathogen recognition. Furthermore, our 
molecular evidence suggests that the NPR1-dependent spreading cell death in 
older atg mutants may originate from an inability to cope with excessive 
accumulation of ubiquitinated proteins and ER stress which derive from salicylic 
acid (SA)-dependent signaling (e.g., systemic acquired resistance). We also 
demonstrate that both senescence and immunity-related cell death seen in older 
atg mutants can be recapitulated in younger atg mutants primed with ER stress. 
We therefore propose that the reduction in SA signaling caused by npr1 
loss-of-function is sufficient to alleviate the stress levels accumulated during 
aging in autophagy deficient cells which would otherwise become insurmountable 
and lead to uncontrolled cell death.

DOI: 10.4161/auto.29406
PMCID: PMC4206536
PMID: 25046116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]