1. Oncotarget. 2014 Aug 15;5(15):6425-36. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.2228.

The role of homeostatic regulation between tumor suppressor DAB2IP and oncogenic 
Skp2 in prostate cancer growth.

Tsai YS(1), Lai CL(2), Lai CH(3), Chang KH(4), Wu K(5), Tseng SF(6), Fazli L(7), 
Gleave M(7), Xiao G(8), Gandee L(9), Sharifi N(4), Moro L(10), Tzai TS(2), Hsieh 
JT(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Medical College and Hospital, National Cheng Kung 
University, Tainan, Taiwan; Department of Urology, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA.
(2)Department of Urology, Medical College and Hospital, National Cheng Kung 
University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(3)School of Medicine and Graduate Institute of Basic Medical Science, China 
Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Cancer Biology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, 
Cleveland, OH, USA.
(5)Department of Urology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Medical School of Xi'an 
Jiaotong University, Xi'an, China.
(6)Department of Bioengineering, University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, 
TX, USA.
(7)VancouverProstate Center, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British 
Columbia, Canada.
(8)Department of Clinical Sciences, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX, USA.
(9)Department of Urology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, TX, USA.
(10)Institute of Biomembranes and Bioenergetics, National Research Council 
(C.N.R.), Bari, Italy.
(11)Department of Urology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, TX, USA; Graduate Institute of Cancer Biology, China Medical University, 
Taichung, Taiwan.

Altered DAB2IP gene expression often detected in prostate cancer (PCa) is due to 
epigenetic silencing. In this study, we unveil a new mechanism leading to the 
loss of DAB2IP protein; an oncogenic S-phase kinase-associated protein-2 (Skp2) 
as E3 ubiquitin ligase plays a key regulator in DAB2IP degradation. In order to 
unveil the role of Skp2 in the turnover of DAB2IP protein, both prostate cell 
lines and prostate cancer specimens with a variety of molecular and cell 
biologic techniques were employed. We demonstrated that DAB2IP is regulated by 
Skp2-mediated proteasome degradation in the prostate cell lines. Further 
analyses identified the N-terminal DAB2IP containing the ubiquitination site. 
Immunohistochemical study exhibited an inverse correlation between DAB2IP and 
Skp2 protein expression in the prostate cancer tissue microarray. In contrast, 
DAB2IP can suppressSkp2 protein expression is mediated through Akt signaling. 
The reciprocal regulation between DAB2IP and Skp2 can impact on the growth of 
PCa cells. This reciprocal regulation between DAB2IP and Skp2 protein represents 
a unique homeostatic balance between tumor suppressor and oncoprotein in normal 
prostate epithelia, which is apparently altered in cancer cells. The outcome of 
this study has identified new potential targets for developing new therapeutic 
strategy for PCa.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.2228
PMCID: PMC4171641
PMID: 25115390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest.