1. Nucl Med Biol. 2014 Nov-Dec;41(10):777-84. doi:
10.1016/j.nucmedbio.2014.08.005.  Epub 2014 Aug 7.

Nuclear imaging: a powerful novel approach for tuberculosis.

Johnson DH(1), Via LE(2), Kim P(2), Laddy D(3), Lau CY(2), Weinstein EA(4), Jain 
S(5).

Author information:
(1)NIAID/NIH, Bethesda, MD. Electronic address: daniel.johnson@nih.gov.
(2)NIAID/NIH, Bethesda, MD.
(3)Aeras, Rockville MD.
(4)FDA/CDER, Silver Spring, MD.
(5)Center for Infection and Inflammation Imaging Research, Center for 
Tuberculosis Research and Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD.

Nearly 20 years after the World Health Organization declared tuberculosis (TB) a 
global public health emergency, TB still remains a major global threat with 8.6 
million new cases and 1.3 million deaths annually. Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
adapts to a quiescent physiological state, and is notable for complex 
interaction with the host, producing poorly-understood disease states ranging 
from latent infection to fully active disease. Of the approximately 2.5 billion 
people latently infected with M. tuberculosis, many will develop reactivation 
disease (relapse), years after the initial infection. While progress has been 
made on some fronts, the alarming spread of multidrug-resistant, extensively 
drug-resistant, and more recently totally-drug resistant strains is of grave 
concern. New tools are urgently needed for rapidly diagnosing TB, monitoring TB 
treatments and to allow unique insights into disease pathogenesis. Nuclear 
bioimaging is a powerful, noninvasive tool that can rapidly provide 
three-dimensional views of disease processes deep within the body and conduct 
noninvasive longitudinal assessments of the same patient. In this review, we 
discuss the application of nuclear bioimaging to TB, including the current state 
of the field, considerations for radioprobe development, study of TB drug 
pharmacokinetics in infected tissues, and areas of research and clinical needs 
that could be addressed by nuclear bioimaging. These technologies are an 
emerging field of research, overcome several fundamental limitations of current 
tools, and will have a broad impact on both basic research and patient care. 
Beyond diagnosis and monitoring disease, these technologies will also allow 
unique insights into understanding disease pathogenesis; and expedite 
bench-to-bedside translation of new therapeutics. Finally, since molecular 
imaging is readily available for humans, validated tracers will become valuable 
tools for clinical applications.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nucmedbio.2014.08.005
PMCID: PMC4192067
PMID: 25195017 [Indexed for MEDLINE]