1. J Hematol Oncol. 2014 Sep 9;7:56. doi: 10.1186/s13045-014-0056-6.

Mutated in colorectal cancer (MCC) is a novel oncogene in B lymphocytes.

Edwards SK, Baron J, Moore CR, Liu Y, Perlman DH, Hart RP, Xie P.

BACKGROUND: Identification of novel genetic risk factors is imperative for a 
better understanding of B lymphomagenesis and for the development of novel 
therapeutic strategies. TRAF3, a critical regulator of B cell survival, was 
recently recognized as a tumor suppressor gene in B lymphocytes. The present 
study aimed to identify novel oncogenes involved in malignant transformation of 
TRAF3-deficient B cells.
METHODS: We used microarray analysis to identify genes differentially expressed 
in TRAF3-/- mouse splenic B lymphomas. We employed lentiviral vector-mediated 
knockdown or overexpression to manipulate gene expression in human multiple 
myeloma (MM) cell lines. We analyzed cell apoptosis and proliferation using flow 
cytometry, and performed biochemical studies to investigate signaling 
mechanisms. To delineate protein-protein interactions, we applied affinity 
purification followed by mass spectrometry-based sequencing.
RESULTS: We identified mutated in colorectal cancer (MCC) as a gene strikingly 
up-regulated in TRAF3-deficient mouse B lymphomas and human MM cell lines. 
Aberrant up-regulation of MCC also occurs in a variety of primary human B cell 
malignancies, including non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) and MM. In contrast, MCC 
expression was not detected in normal or premalignant TRAF3-/- B cells even 
after treatment with B cell stimuli, suggesting that aberrant up-regulation of 
MCC is specifically associated with malignant transformation of B cells. In 
elucidating the functional roles of MCC in malignant B cells, we found that 
lentiviral shRNA vector-mediated knockdown of MCC induced apoptosis and 
inhibited proliferation in human MM cells. Experiments of knockdown and 
overexpression of MCC allowed us to identify several downstream targets of MCC 
in human MM cells, including phospho-ERK, c-Myc, p27, cyclin B1, Mcl-1, caspases 
8 and 3. Furthermore, we identified 365 proteins (including 326 novel 
MCC-interactors) in the MCC interactome, among which PARP1 and PHB2 were two 
hubs of MCC signaling pathways in human MM cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that in sharp contrast to its tumor 
suppressive role in colorectal cancer, MCC functions as an oncogene in B cells. 
Our findings suggest that MCC may serve as a diagnostic marker and therapeutic 
target in B cell malignancies, including NHL and MM.

DOI: 10.1186/s13045-014-0056-6
PMCID: PMC4172902
PMID: 25200342 [Indexed for MEDLINE]