1. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 24;9(9):e108095. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0108095. 
eCollection 2014.

High-resolution transcriptome analysis with long-read RNA sequencing.

Cho H(1), Davis J(2), Li X(3), Smith KS(3), Battle A(4), Montgomery SB(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, California, 
United States of America.
(2)Department of Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, California, United 
States of America.
(3)Department of Pathology, Stanford University, Stanford, California, United 
States of America.
(4)Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, California, 
United States of America; Department of Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, 
California, United States of America.
(5)Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, California, 
United States of America; Department of Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, 
California, United States of America; Department of Pathology, Stanford 
University, Stanford, California, United States of America.

RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) enables characterization and quantification of 
individual transcriptomes as well as detection of patterns of allelic expression 
and alternative splicing. Current RNA-seq protocols depend on high-throughput 
short-read sequencing of cDNA. However, as ongoing advances are rapidly yielding 
increasing read lengths, a technical hurdle remains in identifying the degree to 
which differences in read length influence various transcriptome analyses. In 
this study, we generated two paired-end RNA-seq datasets of differing read 
lengths (2×75 bp and 2×262 bp) for lymphoblastoid cell line GM12878 and compared 
the effect of read length on transcriptome analyses, including read-mapping 
performance, gene and transcript quantification, and detection of 
allele-specific expression (ASE) and allele-specific alternative splicing (ASAS) 
patterns. Our results indicate that, while the current long-read protocol is 
considerably more expensive than short-read sequencing, there are important 
benefits that can only be achieved with longer read length, including lower 
mapping bias and reduced ambiguity in assigning reads to genomic elements, such 
as mRNA transcript. We show that these benefits ultimately lead to improved 
detection of cis-acting regulatory and splicing variation effects within 
individuals.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0108095
PMCID: PMC4176000
PMID: 25251678 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.