1. Front Microbiol. 2014 Sep 17;5:495. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2014.00495. eCollection
 2014.

Cross-phosphorylation of bacterial serine/threonine and tyrosine protein kinases 
on key regulatory residues.

Shi L(1), Pigeonneau N(2), Ravikumar V(3), Dobrinic P(4), Macek B(3), Franjevic 
D(4), Noirot-Gros MF(2), Mijakovic I(1).

Author information:
(1)SysBio, Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Chalmers 
University of Technology Göteborg, Sweden.
(2)UMR1319 Micalis, Institut National de Recherche Agronomique Jouy-en-Josas, 
France.
(3)Proteome Center Tübingen, Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology, University 
of Tübingen Tübingen, Germany.
(4)Division of Biology, Faculty of Science, Zagreb University Zagreb, Croatia.

Bacteria possess protein serine/threonine and tyrosine kinases which resemble 
eukaryal kinases in their capacity to phosphorylate multiple substrates. We 
hypothesized that the analogy might extend further, and bacterial kinases may 
also undergo mutual phosphorylation and activation, which is currently 
considered as a hallmark of eukaryal kinase networks. In order to test this 
hypothesis, we explored the capacity of all members of four different classes of 
serine/threonine and tyrosine kinases present in the firmicute model organism 
Bacillus subtilis to phosphorylate each other in vitro and interact with each 
other in vivo. The interactomics data suggested a high degree of connectivity 
among all types of kinases, while phosphorylation assays revealed equally 
wide-spread cross-phosphorylation events. Our findings suggest that the 
Hanks-type kinases PrkC, PrkD, and YabT exhibit the highest capacity to 
phosphorylate other B. subtilis kinases, while the BY-kinase PtkA and the 
two-component-like kinases RsbW and SpoIIAB show the highest propensity to be 
phosphorylated by other kinases. Analysis of phosphorylated residues on several 
selected recipient kinases suggests that most cross-phosphorylation events 
concern key regulatory residues. Therefore, cross-phosphorylation events are 
very likely to influence the capacity of recipient kinases to phosphorylate 
substrates downstream in the signal transduction cascade. We therefore conclude 
that bacterial serine/threonine and tyrosine kinases probably engage in a 
network-type behavior previously described only in eukaryal cells.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2014.00495
PMCID: PMC4166321
PMID: 25278935