1. Front Physiol. 2014 Sep 23;5:357. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2014.00357. eCollection 
2014.

Mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR): a point of convergence in the action of 
insulin/IGF-1 and G protein-coupled receptor agonists in pancreatic cancer 
cells.

Rozengurt E(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Digestive Diseases, Department of Medicine, CURE: Digestive 
Diseases Research Center, David Geffen School of Medicine, Molecular Biology 
Institute, University of California at Los Angeles Los Angeles, CA, USA.

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), the most common form of pancreatic 
cancer, is one of the most lethal human diseases. PDAC is now the fourth leading 
cause of cancer mortality in both men and women and deaths due to PDAC are 
projected to increase dramatically. Novel targets and agents for chemoprevention 
are urgently needed and will most likely arise from a more detailed 
understanding of the signaling mechanisms that stimulate the promotion and 
progression of sub-malignant cells into pancreatic cancer cells and from the 
identification of modifiable risk factors for PDAC. Many epidemiological studies 
have linked obesity and long-standing type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) with 
increased risk and worse clinical outcomes for developing PDAC. These 
diet-related metabolic disorders are multifaceted but characterized by 
peripheral insulin resistance, compensatory overproduction of insulin and 
increased bioavailability of insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1). Mounting 
evidence indicates that the insulin/IGF-1 receptor system plays a critical role 
in PDAC development and multiple studies support the notion that crosstalk 
between the insulin receptor and heptahelical G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) 
signaling systems is an important element in the biological responses elicited 
by these signaling systems, including cell proliferation. This article 
highlights the central role of the mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) in 
mediating crosstalk between insulin/IGF-1 and GPCR signaling in pancreatic 
cancer cells and proposes strategies, including the use of metformin, to target 
this signaling system in PDAC cells.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2014.00357
PMCID: PMC4171984
PMID: 25295009