1. Hum Reprod. 2015 Jan;30(1):133-48. doi: 10.1093/humrep/deu268. Epub 2014 Oct
28.

Overlap of proteomics biomarkers between women with pre-eclampsia and PCOS: a 
systematic review and biomarker database integration.

Khan GH(1), Galazis N(2), Docheva N(2), Layfield R(3), Atiomo W(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Human Development, School of Clinical Sciences, University of 
Nottingham, Queen's Medical Centre, D Floor, East Block, Nottingham, UK 
gulafshanahafeez@hotmail.com.
(2)Division of Human Development, School of Clinical Sciences, University of 
Nottingham, Queen's Medical Centre, D Floor, East Block, Nottingham, UK.
(3)School of Life Sciences, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.

STUDY QUESTION: Do any proteomic biomarkers previously identified for 
pre-eclampsia (PE) overlap with those identified in women with polycystic ovary 
syndrome (PCOS).
SUMMARY ANSWER: Five previously identified proteomic biomarkers were found to be 
common in women with PE and PCOS when compared with controls.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: Various studies have indicated an association between 
PCOS and PE; however, the pathophysiological mechanisms supporting this 
association are not known.
STUDY DESIGN, SIZE, DURATION: A systematic review and update of our PCOS 
proteomic biomarker database was performed, along with a parallel review of PE 
biomarkers. The study included papers from 1980 to December 2013.
PARTICIPANTS/MATERIALS, SETTING, METHODS: In all the studies analysed, there 
were a total of 1423 patients and controls. The number of proteomic biomarkers 
that were catalogued for PE was 192.
MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: Five proteomic biomarkers were shown to be 
differentially expressed in women with PE and PCOS when compared with controls: 
transferrin, fibrinogen α, β and γ chain variants, kininogen-1, annexin 2 and 
peroxiredoxin 2. In PE, the biomarkers were identified in serum, plasma and 
placenta and in PCOS, the biomarkers were identified in serum, follicular fluid, 
and ovarian and omental biopsies.
LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: The techniques employed to detect proteomics 
have limited ability in identifying proteins that are of low abundance, some of 
which may have a diagnostic potential. The sample sizes and number of biomarkers 
identified from these studies do not exclude the risk of false positives, a 
limitation of all biomarker studies. The biomarkers common to PE and PCOS were 
identified from proteomic analyses of different tissues.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: This data amalgamation of the proteomic 
studies in PE and in PCOS, for the first time, discovered a panel of five 
biomarkers for PE which are common to women with PCOS, including transferrin, 
fibrinogen α, β and γ chain variants, kininogen-1, annexin 2 and peroxiredoxin 
2. If validated, these biomarkers could provide a useful framework for the 
knowledge infrastructure in this area. To accomplish this goal, a well 
co-ordinated multidisciplinary collaboration of clinicians, basic scientists and 
mathematicians is vital.
STUDY FUNDING/COMPETING INTERESTS: No financial support was obtained for this 
project. There are no conflicts of interest.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology.

DOI: 10.1093/humrep/deu268
PMCID: PMC4262466
PMID: 25351721 [Indexed for MEDLINE]