1. Genome Biol Evol. 2014 Nov 8;6(12):3182-98. doi: 10.1093/gbe/evu247.

The genome of the myxosporean Thelohanellus kitauei shows adaptations to 
nutrient acquisition within its fish host.

Yang Y(1), Xiong J(2), Zhou Z(1), Huo F(3), Miao W(4), Ran C(3), Liu Y(3), Zhang 
J(4), Feng J(4), Wang M(5), Wang M(6), Wang L(6), Yao B(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory for Feed Biotechnology of the Ministry of Agriculture, Feed 
Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, People's 
Republic of China yaobin@caas.cn zhou_zg@msn.com.
(2)Key Laboratory of Aquatic Biodiversity and Conservation, Institute of 
Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, People's Republic of China 
yaobin@caas.cn zhou_zg@msn.com.
(3)Key Laboratory for Feed Biotechnology of the Ministry of Agriculture, Feed 
Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, People's 
Republic of China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Aquatic Biodiversity and Conservation, Institute of 
Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, People's Republic of China.
(5)Tianjin Biochip Corporation, Tianjin, People's Republic of China.
(6)TEDA School of Biological Sciences and Biotechnology, Nankai University, 
Tianjin, People's Republic of China.

Members of Myxozoa, a parasitic metazoan taxon, have considerable detrimental 
effects on fish hosts and also have been associated with human food-borne 
illness. Little is known about their biology and metabolism. Analysis of the 
genome of Thelohanellus kitauei and comparative analysis with genomes of its two 
free-living cnidarian relatives revealed that T. kitauei has adapted to 
parasitism, as indicated by the streamlined metabolic repertoire and the 
tendency toward anabolism rather than catabolism. Thelohanellus kitauei mainly 
secretes proteases and protease inhibitors for nutrient digestion (parasite 
invasion), and depends on endocytosis (mainly low-density lipoprotein 
receptors-mediated type) and secondary carriers for nutrient absorption. Absence 
of both classic and complementary anaerobic pathways and gluconeogenesis, the 
lack of de novo synthesis and reduced activity in hydrolysis of fatty acids, 
amino acids, and nucleotides indicated that T. kitauei in this vertebrate 
host-parasite system has adapted to inhabit a physiological environment 
extremely rich in both oxygen and nutrients (especially glucose), which is 
consistent with its preferred parasitic site, that is, the host gut submucosa. 
Taking advantage of the genomic and transcriptomic information, 23 potential 
nutrition-related T. kitauei-specific chemotherapeutic targets were identified. 
This first genome sequence of a myxozoan will facilitate development of 
potential therapeutics for efficient control of myxozoan parasites and 
ultimately prevent myxozoan-induced fish-borne illnesses in humans.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/gbe/evu247
PMCID: PMC4986447
PMID: 25381665 [Indexed for MEDLINE]