1. BMC Plant Biol. 2014 Nov 19;14:285. doi: 10.1186/s12870-014-0285-4.

Differential transcriptome analysis reveals insight into monosymmetric corolla 
development of the crucifer Iberis amara.

Busch A, Horn S, Zachgo S.

BACKGROUND: In the co-evolution between insects and plants, the establishment of 
floral monosymmetry was an important step in angiosperm development as it 
facilitated the interaction with insect pollinators and, by that, likely 
enhanced angiosperm diversification. In Antirrhinum majus, the TCP transcription 
factor CYCLOIDEA is the molecular key regulator driving the formation of floral 
monosymmetry. Although most Brassicaceae form a polysymmetric corolla, six 
genera develop monosymmetric flowers with two petal pairs of unequal size. In 
the monosymmetric crucifer Iberis amara, formation of the different petal pairs 
coincides with a stronger expression of the CYC-homolog IaTCP1 in the small, 
adaxial petals.
RESULTS: In this study, RNA-Seq was employed to reconstruct the petal 
transcriptome of the non-model species Iberis amara. About 9 Gb of sequence data 
was generated, processed and re-assembled into 18,139 likely Iberis unigenes, 
from which 15,983 showed high sequence homology to Arabidopsis proteins. The 
transcriptome gives detailed insight into the molecular mechanisms governing 
late petal development. In addition, it was used as a scaffold to detect genes 
differentially expressed between the small, adaxial and the large, abaxial 
petals in order to understand the molecular mechanisms driving unequal petal 
growth. Far more genes are expressed in adaxial compared to abaxial petals 
implying that IaTCP1 activates more genes than it represses. Amongst all genes 
upregulated in adaxial petals, a significantly enhanced proportion is associated 
with cell wall modification and cell-cell signalling processes. Furthermore, 
microarrays were used to detect and compare quantitative differences in TCP 
target genes in transgenic Arabidopsis plants ectopically expressing different 
TCP transcription factors.
CONCLUSIONS: The increased occurrences of genes implicated in cell wall 
modification and signalling implies that unequal petal growth is achieved 
through an earlier stop of the cell proliferation phase in the small, adaxial 
petals, followed by the onset of cell expansion. This process, which forms the 
monosymmetric corolla of Iberis amara, is likely driven by the enhanced activity 
of IaTCP1 in adaxial petals.

DOI: 10.1186/s12870-014-0285-4
PMCID: PMC4245847
PMID: 25407089 [Indexed for MEDLINE]