1. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 21;9(11):e113789. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0113789. 
eCollection 2014.

Akt inhibition promotes ABCA1-mediated cholesterol efflux to ApoA-I through 
suppressing mTORC1.

Dong F(1), Mo Z(1), Eid W(2), Courtney KC(2), Zha X(3).

Author information:
(1)Chronic Disease Program, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, Ontario, 
Canada.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology & Immunology, University of Ottawa, 
Ontario, Canada.
(3)Chronic Disease Program, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, Ontario, 
Canada; Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology & Immunology, University of 
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

ATP-binding cassette transporter A1 (ABCA1) plays an essential role in mediating 
cholesterol efflux to apolipoprotein A-I (apoA-I), a major housekeeping 
mechanism for cellular cholesterol homeostasis. After initial engagement with 
ABCA1, apoA-I directly interacts with the plasma membrane to acquire 
cholesterol. This apoA-I lipidation process is also known to require cellular 
signaling processes, presumably to support cholesterol trafficking to the plasma 
membrane. We report here that one of major signaling pathways in mammalian 
cells, Akt, is also involved. In several cell models that express ABCA1 
including macrophages, pancreatic beta cells and hepatocytes, inhibition of Akt 
increases cholesterol efflux to apoA-I. Importantly, Akt inhibition has little 
effect on cells expressing non-functional mutant of ABCA1, implicating a 
specific role of Akt in ABCA1 function. Furthermore, we provide evidence that 
mTORC1, a major downstream target of Akt, is also a negative regulator of 
cholesterol efflux. In cells where mTORC1 is constitutively activated due to 
tuberous sclerosis complex 2 deletion, cholesterol efflux to apoA-I is no longer 
sensitive to Akt activity. This suggests that Akt suppresses cholesterol efflux 
through mTORC1 activation. Indeed, inhibition of mTORC1 by rapamycin or Torin-1 
promotes cholesterol efflux. On the other hand, autophagy, one of the major 
pathways of cholesterol trafficking, is increased upon Akt inhibition. 
Furthermore, Akt inhibition disrupts lipid rafts, which is known to promote 
cholesterol efflux to apoA-I. We therefore conclude that Akt, through its 
downstream targets, mTORC1 and hence autophagy, negatively regulates cholesterol 
efflux to apoA-I.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0113789
PMCID: PMC4240609
PMID: 25415591 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.