1. Pathogens. 2014 Oct 3;3(4):791-821. doi: 10.3390/pathogens3040791.

Evolution of antimicrobial peptides to self-assembled peptides for biomaterial 
applications.

McCloskey AP(1), Gilmore BF(2), Laverty G(3).

Author information:
(1)Biomaterials, Biofilm and Infection Control Research Group, School of 
Pharmacy, Queen's University Belfast, Medical Biology Centre, 97 Lisburn Road, 
Belfast BT9 7BL, N. Ireland. amccloskey16@qub.ac.uk.
(2)Biomaterials, Biofilm and Infection Control Research Group, School of 
Pharmacy, Queen's University Belfast, Medical Biology Centre, 97 Lisburn Road, 
Belfast BT9 7BL, N. Ireland. b.gilmore@qub.ac.uk.
(3)Biomaterials, Biofilm and Infection Control Research Group, School of 
Pharmacy, Queen's University Belfast, Medical Biology Centre, 97 Lisburn Road, 
Belfast BT9 7BL, N. Ireland. garry.laverty@qub.ac.uk.

Biomaterial-related infections are a persistent burden on patient health, 
recovery, mortality and healthcare budgets. Self-assembled antimicrobial 
peptides have evolved from the area of antimicrobial peptides. Peptides serve as 
important weapons in nature, and increasingly medicine, for combating microbial 
infection and biofilms. Self-assembled peptides harness a "bottom-up" approach, 
whereby the primary peptide sequence may be modified with natural and unnatural 
amino acids to produce an inherently antimicrobial hydrogel. Gelation may be 
tailored to occur in the presence of physiological and infective indicators 
(e.g. pH, enzymes) and therefore allow local, targeted antimicrobial therapy at 
the site of infection. Peptides demonstrate inherent biocompatibility, 
antimicrobial activity, biodegradability and numerous functional groups. They 
are therefore prime candidates for the production of polymeric molecules that 
have the potential to be conjugated to biomaterials with precision. Non-native 
chemistries and functional groups are easily incorporated into the peptide 
backbone allowing peptide hydrogels to be tailored to specific functional 
requirements. This article reviews an area of increasing interest, namely 
self-assembled peptides and their potential therapeutic applications as 
innovative hydrogels and biomaterials in the prevention of biofilm-related 
infection.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens3040791
PMCID: PMC4282886
PMID: 25436505