1. BMC Bioinformatics. 2014;15 Suppl 12(Suppl 12):S2. doi: 
10.1186/1471-2105-15-S12-S2. Epub 2014 Nov 6.

Discovering co-occurring patterns and their biological significance in protein 
families.

Lee ES, Fung S, Sze-To HY, Wong AK.

BACKGROUND: The large influx of biological sequences poses the importance of 
identifying and correlating conserved regions in homologous sequences to acquire 
valuable biological knowledge. These conserved regions contain statistically 
significant residue associations as sequence patterns. Thus, patterns from two 
conserved regions co-occurring frequently on the same sequences are inferred to 
have joint functionality. A method for finding conserved regions in protein 
families with frequent co-occurrence patterns is proposed. The biological 
significance of the discovered clusters of conserved regions with co-occurrences 
patterns can be validated by their three-dimensional closeness of amino acids 
and the biological functionality found in those regions as supported by 
published work.
METHODS: Using existing algorithms, we discovered statistically significant 
amino acid associations as sequence patterns. We then aligned and clustered them 
into Aligned Pattern Clusters (APCs) corresponding to conserved regions with 
amino acid conservation and variation. When one APC frequently co-occurred with 
another APC, the two APCs have high co-occurrence. We then clustered APCs with 
high co-occurrence into what we refer to as Co-occurrence APC Clusters 
(Co-occurrence Clusters).
RESULTS: Our results show that for Co-occurrence Clusters, the three-dimensional 
distance between their amino acids is closer than average amino acid distances. 
For the Co-occurrence Clusters of the ubiquitin and the cytochrome c families, 
we observed biological significance among the residing amino acids of the APCs 
within the same cluster. In ubiquitin, the residues are responsible for 
ubiquitination as well as conventional and unconventional ubiquitin-bindings. In 
cytochrome c, amino acids in the first co-occurrence cluster contribute to 
binding of other proteins in the electron transport chain, and amino acids in 
the second co-occurrence cluster contribute to the stability of the axial heme 
ligand.
CONCLUSIONS: Thus, our co-occurrence clustering algorithm can efficiently find 
and rank conserved regions that contain patterns that frequently co-occurring on 
the same proteins. Co-occurring patterns are biologically significant due to 
their three-dimensional closeness and other evidences reported in literature. 
These results play an important role in drug discovery as biologists can quickly 
identify the target for drugs to conduct detailed preclinical studies.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-15-S12-S2
PMCID: PMC4243116
PMID: 25474736 [Indexed for MEDLINE]