1. BMC Genomics. 2014;15 Suppl 9(Suppl 9):S8. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-S9-S8.
Epub  2014 Dec 8.

Homopharma: a new concept for exploring the molecular binding mechanisms and 
drug repurposing.

Chiu YY, Tseng JH, Liu KH, Lin CT, Hsu KC, Yang JM.

BACKGROUND: Drugs that simultaneously target multiple proteins often improve 
efficacy, particularly in the treatment of complex diseases such as cancers and 
central nervous system disorders. Many approaches have been proposed to identify 
the potential targets of a drug. Recently, we have introduced Space-Related 
Pharmamotif (SRPmotif) method to recognize the proteins that share similar 
binding environments. In addition, compounds with similar topology may bind to 
similar proteins and have similar protein-compound interactions. However, few 
studies have focused on exploring the relationships between binding environments 
and protein-compound interactions, which is important for understanding 
molecular binding mechanisms and helpful to be used in discovering drug 
repurposing.
RESULTS: In this study, we propose a new concept of "Homopharma", combining 
similar binding environments and protein-compound interaction profiles, to 
explore the molecular binding mechanisms and drug repurposing. A Homopharma 
consists of a set of proteins which have the conserved binding environment and a 
set of compounds that share similar structures and functional groups. These 
proteins and compounds present conserved interactions and similar 
physicochemical properties. Therefore, these compounds are often able to inhibit 
the proteins in a Homopharma. Our experimental results show that the proteins 
and compounds in a Homopharma often have similar protein-compound interactions, 
comprising conserved specific residues and functional sites. Based on the 
Homopharma concept, we selected four flavonoid derivatives and 32 human protein 
kinases for enzymatic profiling. Among these 128 bioassays, the IC50 of 56 and 
25 flavonoid-kinase inhibitions are less than 10 μM and 1 μM, respectively. 
Furthermore, these experimental results suggest that these flavonoids can be 
used as anticancer compounds, such as oral and colorectal cancer drugs.
CONCLUSIONS: The experimental results show that the Homopharma is useful for 
identifying key binding environments of proteins and compounds and discovering 
new inhibitory effects. We believe that the Homopharma concept can have the 
potential for understanding molecular binding mechanisms and providing new clues 
for drug development.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-S9-S8
PMCID: PMC4290623
PMID: 25521038 [Indexed for MEDLINE]