1. Diabetes Metab Syndr Obes. 2015 Feb 4;8:89-96. doi: 10.2147/DMSO.S78877. 
eCollection 2015.

Clinical role of a fixed combination of standardized Berberis aristata and 
Silybum marianum extracts in diabetic and hypercholesterolemic patients 
intolerant to statins.

Di Pierro F(1), Bellone I(2), Rapacioli G(3), Putignano P(4).

Author information:
(1)Scientific Department, Velleja Research, Milan, Italy.
(2)ASL TO1, Turin, Italy.
(3)AIOR, Pontenure, Province of Piacenza, Italy.
(4)University Hospital San Gerardo, Monza, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Statin intolerance is a medical condition often leading patients to 
nonadherence to the prescribed therapy or to a relevant reduction of the statin 
dosage. Both situations determine a totally or partially uncontrolled lipid 
profile, and these conditions unquestionably increase the risk of cardiovascular 
events.
METHODS: We enrolled hypercholesterolemic, type 2 diabetic patients complaining 
of intolerance to statins. Some of them had reduced the statin dose 'until the 
disappearance of symptoms'; others had opted for treatment with ezetimibe; and 
yet others were not undergoing any treatment at all. All patients of the three 
groups were then given a fixed combination of berberine and silymarin 
(Berberol(®)), known from previous papers to be able to control both lipidic and 
glycemic profiles.
RESULTS: The tested product both as a single therapy and as add-on therapy to 
low-dose statin or to ezetimibe reduced triglycerides, low-density lipoprotein 
cholesterol, fasting blood glucose, and glycosylated hemoglobin in a significant 
manner without inducing toxicity conditions that might be somehow ascribed to a 
statin-intolerant condition.
CONCLUSION: Our study demonstrates that use of Berberol(®), administered as a 
single or add-on therapy in statin-intolerant subjects affected by diabetes and 
hypercholesterolemia is a safe and effective tool capable of improving the 
patients' lipidic and glycemic profiles.

DOI: 10.2147/DMSO.S78877
PMCID: PMC4322873
PMID: 25678808