1. Semin Hematol. 2015 Apr;52(2):77-85. doi: 10.1053/j.seminhematol.2015.01.008. 
Epub 2015 Jan 15.

B-cell receptor signaling in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Young RM(1), Shaffer AL 3rd(1), Phelan JD(1), Staudt LM(2).

Author information:
(1)Lymphoid Malignancies Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer 
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD.
(2)Lymphoid Malignancies Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer 
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD. Electronic address: 
lstaudt@mail.nih.gov.

The importance of understanding the genetic and biochemical basis of B-cell 
receptor (BCR) survival signaling in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is 
underscored by the recent clinical success of agents that target the BCR 
pathway. DLBCL is composed of multiple distinct molecular subtypes with 
divergent clinical outcomes. The activated B-cell-like (ABC) subtype is the most 
aggressive form of DLBCL and is often resistant to standard chemotherapies. ABC 
DLBCL expresses numerous genes found in antigen-activated B cells, and genetic 
and pharmacologic studies have demonstrated that ABC DLBCL tumors are addicted 
to NF-κB activity. The origins of this NF-κB activity remained obscure until RNA 
interference screens established that the majority of ABC DLBCL cell lines rely 
on expression of BCR components and downstream signaling effectors for NF-κB 
activation. Pharmacological inhibition with ibrutinib of Bruton's tyrosine 
kinase, a kinase that is required for BCR signaling to engage NF-κB, is 
selectively toxic for ABC DLBCL tumors; a finding that has now been translated 
to the clinic. These novel targets not only offer a promising new therapy option 
for ABC DLBCL, but also demonstrate the value of a deep molecular understanding 
of oncogenic signaling pathways.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1053/j.seminhematol.2015.01.008
PMCID: PMC4374122
PMID: 25805587 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest or competing financial or personal relationships that could 
inappropriately influence the content of this article