1. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2015 Jun;8(6):475-86. doi: 
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-14-0362. Epub 2015 Mar 24.

Nrf2 Activation Protects against Solar-Simulated Ultraviolet Radiation in Mice 
and Humans.

Knatko EV(1), Ibbotson SH(2), Zhang Y(1), Higgins M(1), Fahey JW(3), Talalay 
P(4), Dawe RS(2), Ferguson J(2), Huang JT(1), Clarke R(5), Zheng S(6), Saito 
A(6), Kalra S(1), Benedict AL(4), Honda T(7), Proby CM(8), Dinkova-Kostova 
AT(9).

Author information:
(1)Jacqui Wood Cancer Centre, Division of Cancer Research, Medical Research 
Institute, University of Dundee, Dundee, Scotland, United Kingdom.
(2)Photobiology Unit, Ninewells Hospital and Medical School, University of 
Dundee, Dundee, Scotland, United Kingdom.
(3)Lewis B. and Dorothy Cullman Chemoprotection Center, Department of 
Pharmacology and Molecular Sciences, Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland. Center for Human Nutrition, Department of 
International Health, Johns Hopkins University Bloomberg School of Public 
Health, Baltimore, Maryland.
(4)Lewis B. and Dorothy Cullman Chemoprotection Center, Department of 
Pharmacology and Molecular Sciences, Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.
(5)Division of Cell Signaling and Immunology, College of Life Sciences, 
University of Dundee, Dundee, Scotland, United Kingdom.
(6)Institute of Chemical Biology and Drug Discovery, Stony Brook University, 
Stony Brook, New York.
(7)Institute of Chemical Biology and Drug Discovery, Stony Brook University, 
Stony Brook, New York. Department of Chemistry, Stony Brook University, Stony 
Brook, New York.
(8)Jacqui Wood Cancer Centre, Division of Cancer Research, Medical Research 
Institute, University of Dundee, Dundee, Scotland, United Kingdom. Photobiology 
Unit, Ninewells Hospital and Medical School, University of Dundee, Dundee, 
Scotland, United Kingdom.
(9)Jacqui Wood Cancer Centre, Division of Cancer Research, Medical Research 
Institute, University of Dundee, Dundee, Scotland, United Kingdom. Lewis B. and 
Dorothy Cullman Chemoprotection Center, Department of Pharmacology and Molecular 
Sciences, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland. 
a.dinkovakostova@dundee.ac.uk.

The transcription factor Nrf2 determines the ability to adapt and survive under 
conditions of electrophilic, oxidative, and inflammatory stress by regulating 
the expression of elaborate networks comprising nearly 500 genes encoding 
proteins with versatile cytoprotective functions. In mice, disruption of Nrf2 
increases susceptibility to carcinogens and accelerates disease pathogenesis. 
Paradoxically, Nrf2 is upregulated in established human tumors, but whether this 
upregulation drives carcinogenesis is not known. Here we show that the 
incidence, multiplicity, and burden of solar-simulated UV radiation-mediated 
cutaneous tumors that form in SKH-1 hairless mice in which Nrf2 is genetically 
constitutively activated are lower than those that arise in their wild-type 
counterparts. Pharmacologic Nrf2 activation by topical biweekly applications of 
small (40 nmol) quantities of the potent bis(cyano enone) inducer TBE-31 has a 
similar protective effect against solar-simulated UV radiation in animals 
receiving long-term treatment with the immunosuppressive agent azathioprine. 
Genetic or pharmacologic Nrf2 activation lowers the expression of the 
pro-inflammatory factors IL6 and IL1β, and COX2 after acute exposure of mice to 
UV radiation. In healthy human subjects, topical applications of extracts 
delivering the Nrf2 activator sulforaphane reduced the degree of solar-simulated 
UV radiation-induced skin erythema, a quantifiable surrogate endpoint for 
cutaneous damage and skin cancer risk. Collectively, these data show that Nrf2 
is not a driver for tumorigenesis even upon exposure to a very potent and 
complete carcinogen and strongly suggest that the frequent activation of Nrf2 in 
established human tumors is a marker of metabolic adaptation.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-14-0362
PMCID: PMC4454593
PMID: 25804610 [Indexed for MEDLINE]