1. Heart Rhythm. 2015 Jul;12(7):1599-610. doi: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2015.03.043. Epub 
2015 Mar 23.

Calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII) inhibition ameliorates 
arrhythmias elicited by junctin ablation under stress conditions.

Tzimas C(1), Terrovitis J(2), Lehnart SE(3), Kranias EG(4), Sanoudou D(5).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Biology Division, Biomedical Research Foundation of the Academy of 
Athens, Athens, Greece.
(2)3rd Department of Cardiology, Medical School, National and Kapodistrian 
University of Athens, Athens, Greece.
(3)Clinic of Cardiology & Pulmonology, University Medical Center Goettingen, 
Goettingen, Germany.
(4)Molecular Biology Division, Biomedical Research Foundation of the Academy of 
Athens, Athens, Greece; Department of Pharmacology and Cell Biophysics, College 
of Medicine, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio.
(5)Molecular Biology Division, Biomedical Research Foundation of the Academy of 
Athens, Athens, Greece; Department of Pharmacology, Medical School, National and 
Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece. Electronic address: 
dsanoudou@med.uoa.gr.

BACKGROUND: Aberrant calcium signaling is considered one of the key mechanisms 
contributing to arrhythmias, especially in the context of heart failure. In 
human heart failure, there is significant down-regulation of the sarcoplasmic 
reticulum (SR) protein junctin, and junctin deficiency in mice is associated 
with stress-induced arrhythmias.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to determine whether the increased SR 
Ca(2+) leak and arrhythmias associated with junctin ablation may be associated 
with increased calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII) activity 
and phosphorylation of the cardiac ryanodine receptor (RyR2) and whether 
pharmacologic inhibition of CaMKII activity may prevent these arrhythmias.
METHODS: Using a combination of biochemical, cellular, and in vivo approaches, 
we tested the ability of KN-93 to reverse aberrant CaMKII phosphorylation of 
RyR2. Specifically, we performed protein phosphorylation analysis, in vitro 
cardiomyocyte contractility and Ca(2+) kinetics, and in vivo ECG analysis in 
junctin-deficient mice.
RESULTS: In the absence of junctin, RyR2 channels displayed CaMKII-dependent 
hyperphosphorylation. Notably, CaMKII inhibition by KN-93 reduced the in vivo 
incidence of stress-induced ventricular tachycardia by 65% in junctin null mice. 
At the cardiomyocyte level, KN-93 reduced the percentage of junctin null cells 
exhibiting spontaneous Ca(2+) aftertransients and aftercontractions under stress 
conditions by 35% and 37%, respectively. At the molecular level, KN-93 blunted 
the CaMKII-mediated hyperphosphorylation of RyR2 and phospholamban under stress 
conditions.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggest that CaMKII inhibition is effective in preventing 
arrhythmogenesis in the setting of junctin ablation through modulation of both 
SR Ca(2+) release and uptake. Thus, it merits further investigation as promising 
molecular therapy.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2015.03.043
PMCID: PMC4485547
PMID: 25814413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interests: None