1. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 31;10(3):e0120564. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0120564. 
eCollection 2015.

Identification of the sAPRIL binding peptide and its growth inhibition effects 
in the colorectal cancer cells.

He XQ(1), Guan J(2), Liu F(3), Li J(3), He MR(3).

Author information:
(1)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Gastroenterology, Institute of 
Digestive Diseases, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 
510515, Guangdong Province, China; Oncology Department, Wuzhou Red Cross 
Hospital, Wuzhou 543002, Guangxi Province, China.
(2)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Gastroenterology, Institute of 
Digestive Diseases, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 
510515, Guangdong Province, China; Army Reserve Anti-aircraft Artillery 
Hospital, Zhengzhou 450002, Henan Province, China.
(3)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Gastroenterology, Institute of 
Digestive Diseases, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 
510515, Guangdong Province, China.

BACKGROUND: A proliferation-inducing ligand (APRIL) is a member of the tumor 
necrosis factor (TNF) super family. It binds to its specific receptors and is 
involved in multiple processes during tumorigenesis and tumor cells 
proliferation. High levels of APRIL expression are closely correlated to the 
growth, metastasis, and 5-FU drug resistance of colorectal cancer. The aim of 
this study was to identify a specific APRIL binding peptide (BP) able to block 
APRIL activity that could be used as a potential treatment for colorectal 
cancer.
METHODS: A phage display library was used to identify peptides that bound 
selectively to soluble recombinant human APRIL (sAPRIL). The peptides with the 
highest binding affinity for sAPRIL were identified using ELISA. The effects of 
sAPRIL-BP on cell proliferation and cell cycle/apoptosis in vitro were evaluated 
using the CCK-8 assay and flow cytometry, respectively. An in vivo mouse model 
of colorectal cancer was used to determine the anti-tumor efficacy of the 
sAPRIL-BP.
RESULTS: Three candidate peptides were characterized from eight phage clones 
with high binding affinity for sAPRIL. The peptide with the highest affinity was 
selected for further characterization. The identified sAPRIL-BP suppressed tumor 
cell proliferation and cell cycle progression in LOVO cells in a dose-dependent 
manner. In vivo in a mouse colorectal challenge model, the sAPRIL-BP reduced the 
growth of tumor xenografts in nude mice by inhibiting proliferation and inducing 
apoptosis intratumorally. Moreover, in an in vivo metastasis model, sAPRIL-BP 
reduced liver metastasis of colorectal cancer cells.
CONCLUSIONS: sAPRIL-BP significantly suppressed tumor growth in vitro and in 
vivo and might be a candidate for treating colorectal cancers that express high 
levels of APRIL.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0120564
PMCID: PMC4380366
PMID: 25826583 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.