1. Drug Des Devel Ther. 2015 Mar 18;9:1663-78. doi: 10.2147/DDDT.S75862. 
eCollection 2015.

Synthesis and biological evaluation of a novel class of curcumin analogs as 
anti-inflammatory agents for prevention and treatment of sepsis in mouse model.

Zhao C(1), Zhang Y(1), Zou P(2), Wang J(3), He W(4), Shi D(4), Li H(4), Liang 
G(4), Yang S(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Environmental and Biological Engineering, Nanjing University of 
Science and Technology, Nanjing, People's Republic of China ; Chemical Biology 
Research Center, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Wenzhou Medical University, 
Wenzhou, People's Republic of China.
(2)School of Environmental and Biological Engineering, Nanjing University of 
Science and Technology, Nanjing, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Orthopedics, The 1st Affiliated Hospital, Wenzhou Medical 
University, Wenzhou, People's Republic of China.
(4)Chemical Biology Research Center, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Wenzhou 
Medical University, Wenzhou, People's Republic of China.

A novel class of asymmetric mono-carbonyl analogs of curcumin (AMACs) were 
synthesized and screened for anti-inflammatory activity. These analogs are 
chemically stable as characterized by UV absorption spectra. In vitro, compounds 
3f, 3m, 4b, and 4d markedly inhibited lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced 
expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines tumor necrosis factor-α and 
interleukin-6 in a dose-dependent manner, with IC50 values in low micromolar 
range. In vivo, compound 3f demonstrated potent preventive and therapeutic 
effects on LPS-induced sepsis in mouse model. Compound 3f downregulated the 
phosphorylation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)1/2 MAPK and 
suppressed IκBα degradation, which suggests that the possible anti-inflammatory 
mechanism of compound 3f may be through downregulating nuclear factor kappa 
binding (NF-κB) and ERK pathways. Also, we solved the crystal structure of 
compound 3e to confirm the asymmetrical structure. The quantitative 
structure-activity relationship analysis reveals that the electron-withdrawing 
substituents on aromatic ring of lead structures could improve activity. These 
active AMACs represent a new class of anti-inflammatory agents with improved 
stability, bioavailability, and potency compared to curcumin. Our results 
suggest that 3f may be further developed as a potential agent for prevention and 
treatment of sepsis or other inflammation-related diseases.

DOI: 10.2147/DDDT.S75862
PMCID: PMC4370917
PMID: 25834403 [Indexed for MEDLINE]