1. PLoS One. 2015 May 7;10(5):e0125596. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0125596. 
eCollection 2015.

Rab27A Is Present in Mouse Pancreatic Acinar Cells and Is Required for Digestive 
Enzyme Secretion.

Hou Y(1), Ernst SA(2), Stuenkel EL(1), Lentz SI(3), Williams JA(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Michigan, 
Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States of America.
(2)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, Michigan, United States of America.
(3)Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States 
of America.
(4)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Michigan, 
Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States of America; Internal Medicine, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States of America.

The small G-protein Rab27A has been shown to regulate the intracellular 
trafficking of secretory granules in various cell types. However, the presence, 
subcellular localization and functional impact of Rab27A on digestive enzyme 
secretion by mouse pancreatic acinar cells are poorly understood. Ashen mice, 
which lack the expression of Rab27A due to a spontaneous mutation, were used to 
investigate the function of Rab27A in pancreatic acinar cells. Isolated 
pancreatic acini were prepared from wild-type or ashen mouse pancreas by 
collagenase digestion, and CCK- or carbachol-induced amylase secretion was 
measured. Secretion occurring through the major-regulated secretory pathway, 
which is characterized by zymogen granules secretion, was visualized by 
Dextran-Texas Red labeling of exocytotic granules. The minor-regulated secretory 
pathway, which operates through the endosomal/lysosomal pathway, was 
characterized by luminal cell surface labeling of lysosomal associated membrane 
protein 1 (LAMP1). Compared to wild-type, expression of Rab27B was slightly 
increased in ashen mouse acini, while Rab3D and digestive enzymes (amylase, 
lipase, chymotrypsin and elastase) were not affected. Localization of Rab27B, 
Rab3D and amylase by immunofluorescence was similar in both wild-type and ashen 
acinar cells. The GTP-bound states of Rab27B and Rab3D in wild-type and ashen 
mouse acini also remained similar in amount. In contrast, acini from ashen mice 
showed decreased amylase release induced by CCK- or carbachol. Rab27A deficiency 
reduced the apical cell surface labeling of LAMP1, but did not affect that of 
Dextran-Texas Red incorporation into the fusion pockets at luminal surface. 
These results show that Rab27A is present in mouse pancreatic acinar cells and 
mainly regulates secretion through the minor-regulated pathway.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0125596
PMCID: PMC4423933
PMID: 25951179 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.