1. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2015 Aug;85:48-57. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2015.05.008. Epub 
2015 May 16.

Elevated expression levels of lysyl oxidases protect against aortic aneurysm 
progression in Marfan syndrome.

Busnadiego O(1), Gorbenko Del Blanco D(2), González-Santamaría J(1), Habashi 
JP(3), Calderon JF(3), Sandoval P(1), Bedja D(3), Guinea-Viniegra J(4), 
Lopez-Cabrera M(1), Rosell-Garcia T(1), Snabel JM(5), Hanemaaijer R(5), Forteza 
A(6), Dietz HC(3), Egea G(2), Rodriguez-Pascual F(7).

Author information:
(1)Centro de Biología Molecular "Severo Ochoa" Consejo Superior de 
Investigaciones Científicas (C.S.I.C.)/Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (Madrid), 
Madrid, Spain.
(2)Departamento de Biología Celular, Inmunología y Neurociencias, Facultad de 
Medicina, Universidad de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; Institut d'Investigacions 
Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(4)Fundación Banco Bilbao Vizcaya-CNIO Cancer Cell Biology Program, Centro 
Nacional de Investigaciones Oncológicas, Madrid, Spain.
(5)TNO Metabolic Health Research, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(6)Hospital Universitario 12 de Octubre, Unidad de Marfan, Madrid, Spain.
(7)Centro de Biología Molecular "Severo Ochoa" Consejo Superior de 
Investigaciones Científicas (C.S.I.C.)/Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (Madrid), 
Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: frodriguez@cbm.csic.es.

Patients with Marfan syndrome (MFS) are at high risk of life-threatening aortic 
dissections. The condition is caused by mutations in the gene encoding 
fibrillin-1, an essential component in the formation of elastic fibers. While 
experimental findings in animal models of the disease have shown the involvement 
of transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β)- and angiotensin II-dependent pathways, 
alterations in the vascular extracellular matrix (ECM) may also play a role in 
the onset and progression of the aortic disease. Lysyl oxidases (LOX) are 
extracellular enzymes, which initiates the formation of covalent cross-linking 
of collagens and elastin, thereby contributing to the maturation of the ECM. 
Here we have explored the role of LOX in the formation of aortic aneurysms in 
MFS. We show that aortic tissue from MFS patients and MFS mouse model 
(Fbn1(C1039G/+)) displayed enhanced expression of the members of the LOX family, 
LOX and LOX-like 1 (LOXL1), and this is associated with the formation of mature 
collagen fibers. Administration of a LOX inhibitor for 8weeks blocked collagen 
accumulation and aggravated elastic fiber impairment, and these effects 
correlated with the induction of a strong and rapidly progressing aortic 
dilatation, and with premature death in the more severe MFS mouse model, 
Fbn1(mgR/mgR), without any significant effect on wild type animals. This 
detrimental effect occurred preferentially in the ascending portion of the 
aorta, with little or no involvement of the aortic root, and was associated to 
an overactivation of both canonical and non-canonical TGF-β signaling pathways. 
The blockade of angiotensin II type I receptor with losartan restored TGF-β 
signaling activation, normalized elastic fiber impairment and prevented the 
aortic dilatation induced by LOX inhibition in Fbn1(C1039G/+) mice. Our data 
indicate that LOX enzymes and LOX-mediated collagen accumulation play a critical 
protective role in aneurysm formation in MFS.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2015.05.008
PMID: 25988230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]