1. PLoS One. 2015 May 19;10(5):e0125998. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0125998. 
eCollection 2015.

Neural differentiation modulates the vertebrate brain specific splicing program.

Madgwick A(1), Fort P(2), Hanson PS(3), Thibault P(4), Gaudreau MC(5), Lutfalla 
G(6), Möröy T(5), Abou Elela S(4), Chaudhry B(1), Elliott DJ(1), Morris CM(3), 
Venables JP(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Central Parkway, 
Newcastle NE1 3BZ, United Kingdom.
(2)Centre Nationale de la Recherche Scientifique, CRBM-UMR5237, Université de 
Montpellier, Montpellier, France.
(3)Medical Toxicology Centre, Wolfson Building, Newcastle University, Newcastle 
upon Tyne, United Kingdom.
(4)Département de Microbiologie et d'Infectiologie, Faculté de Médecine et des 
Sciences de la Santé, Université de Sherbrooke, Québec, Canada.
(5)Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal, Université de Montréal, Québec, 
Canada; Département de Microbiologie, Infectiologie, et Immunologie, Université 
de Montréal, Québec, Canada.
(6)Dynamique des Interactions Membranaires Normales et Pathologiques, UMR 5235 
CNRS-Université de Montpellier, Montpellier, France.

Alternative splicing patterns are known to vary between tissues but these 
patterns have been found to be predominantly peculiar to one species or another, 
implying only a limited function in fundamental neural biology. Here we used 
high-throughput RT-PCR to monitor the expression pattern of all the annotated 
simple alternative splicing events (ASEs) in the Reference Sequence Database, in 
different mouse tissues and identified 93 brain-specific events that shift from 
one isoform to another (switch-like) between brain and other tissues. Consistent 
with an important function, regulation of a core set of 9 conserved switch-like 
ASEs is highly conserved, as they have the same pattern of tissue-specific 
splicing in all vertebrates tested: human, mouse and zebrafish. Several of these 
ASEs are embedded within genes that encode proteins associated with the neuronal 
microtubule network, and show a dramatic and concerted shift within a short time 
window of human neural stem cell differentiation. Similarly these exons are 
dynamically regulated in zebrafish development. These data demonstrate that 
although alternative splicing patterns often vary between species, there is 
nonetheless a core set of vertebrate brain-specific ASEs that are conserved 
between species and associated with neural differentiation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0125998
PMCID: PMC4438066
PMID: 25993117 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.