1. Transl Oncol. 2015 Jun;8(3):196-203. doi: 10.1016/j.tranon.2015.03.011.

Imaging and Therapy of Pancreatic Cancer with Phosphatidylserine-Targeted 
Nanovesicles.

Blanco VM(1), Latif T(1), Chu Z(2), Qi X(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, 
Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, University of Cincinnati College 
of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(2)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, 
Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, University of Cincinnati College 
of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, USA; Division of Human Genetics, Department of 
Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, University of 
Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(3)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, 
Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, University of Cincinnati College 
of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, USA; Division of Human Genetics, Department of 
Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, University of 
Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, USA. Electronic address: 
xiaoyang.qi@uc.edu.

Pancreatic cancer remains one of the most intractable cancers, with a dismal 
prognosis reflected by a 5-year survival of ~6%. Since early disease symptoms 
are undefined and specific biomarkers are lacking, about 80% of patients present 
with advanced, inoperable tumors that represent a daunting challenge. Despite 
many clinical trials, no single chemotherapy agent has been reliably associated 
with objective response rates above 10% or median survival longer than 5 to 7 
months. Although combination chemotherapy regimens have in recent years provided 
some improvement, overall survival (8-11 months) remains very poor. There is 
therefore a critical need for novel therapies that can improve outcomes for 
pancreatic cancer patients. Here, we present a summary of the current therapies 
used in the management of advanced pancreatic cancer and review novel 
therapeutic strategies that target tumor biomarkers. We also describe our recent 
research using phosphatidylserine-targeted saposin C-coupled 
dioleoylphosphatidylserine nanovesicles for imaging and therapy of pancreatic 
cancer.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tranon.2015.03.011
PMCID: PMC4486738
PMID: 26055177