1. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 11;10(6):e0130189. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0130189. 
eCollection 2015.

HIV-1 Myristoylated Nef Treatment of Murine Microglial Cells Activates Inducible 
Nitric Oxide Synthase, NO2 Production and Neurotoxic Activity.

Mangino G(1), Famiglietti M(2), Capone C(2), Veroni C(3), Percario ZA(2), Leone 
S(2), Fiorucci G(4), Lülf S(5), Romeo G(6), Agresti C(3), Persichini T(2), Geyer 
M(5), Affabris E(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Science, University Roma Tre, Rome, Italy; Department of 
Medico-Surgical Sciences and Biotechnologies, Sapienza University of Rome, 
Latina, Italy.
(2)Department of Science, University Roma Tre, Rome, Italy.
(3)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, 
Rome, Italy.
(4)Institute of Molecular Biology and Pathology, CNR, Rome, Italy.
(5)Center of Advanced European Studies and Research, Group of Physical 
Biochemistry, Bonn, Germany.
(6)Department of Medico-Surgical Sciences and Biotechnologies, Sapienza 
University of Rome, Latina, Italy; Institute of Molecular Biology and Pathology, 
CNR, Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The potential role of the human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) 
accessory protein Nef in the pathogenesis of neuroAIDS is still poorly 
understood. Nef is a molecular adapter that influences several cellular signal 
transduction events and membrane trafficking. In human macrophages, Nef 
expression induces the production of extracellular factors (e.g. 
pro-inflammatory chemokines and cytokines) and the recruitment of T cells, thus 
favoring their infection and its own transfer to uninfected cells via exosomes, 
cellular protrusions or cell-to-cell contacts. Murine cells are normally not 
permissive for HIV-1 but, in transgenic mice, Nef is a major disease 
determinant. Both in human and murine macrophages, myristoylated Nef (myr+Nef) 
treatment has been shown to activate NF-κB, MAP kinases and interferon 
responsive factor 3 (IRF-3), thereby inducing tyrosine phosphorylation of signal 
transducers and activator of transcription (STAT)-1, STAT-2 and STAT-3 through 
the production of proinflammatory factors.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We report that treatment of BV-2 murine 
microglial cells with myr+Nef leads to STAT-1, -2 and -3 tyrosine 
phosphorylation and upregulates the expression of inducible nitric oxide 
synthase (iNOS) with production of nitric oxide. We provide evidence that 
extracellular Nef regulates iNOS expression through NF-κB activation and, at 
least in part, interferon-β (IFNβ) release that acts in concert with Nef. All of 
these effects require both myristoylation and a highly conserved acidic cluster 
in the viral protein. Finally, we report that Nef induces the release of 
neurotoxic factors in the supernatants of microglial cells.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest a potential role of extracellular Nef in 
promoting neuronal injury in the murine model. They also indicate a possible 
interplay between Nef and host factors in the pathogenesis of neuroAIDS through 
the production of reactive nitrogen species in microglial cells.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0130189
PMCID: PMC4465743
PMID: 26066624 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.