1. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 15;10(6):e0130197. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0130197. 
eCollection 2015.

The O-Linked Glycome and Blood Group Antigens ABO on Mucin-Type Glycoproteins in 
Mucinous and Serous Epithelial Ovarian Tumors.

Vitiazeva V(1), Kattla JJ(1), Flowers SA(1), Lindén SK(1), Premaratne P(1), 
Weijdegård B(2), Sundfeldt K(2), Karlsson NG(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, 
Sweden.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Institute of Clinical Sciences, 
Sahlgrenska Cancer Center, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Mucins are heavily O-glycosylated proteins where the glycosylation 
has been shown to play an important role in cancer. Normal epithelial ovarian 
cells do not express secreted mucins, but their abnormal expression has 
previously been described in epithelial ovarian cancer and may relate to tumor 
formation and progression. The cyst fluids were shown to be a rich source for 
acidic glycoproteins. The study of these proteins can potentially lead to the 
identification of more effective biomarkers for ovarian cancer.
METHODS: In this study, we analyzed the expression of the MUC5AC and the 
O-glycosylation of acidic glycoproteins secreted into ovarian cyst fluids. The 
samples were obtained from patients with serous and mucinous ovarian tumors of 
different stages (benign, borderline, malignant) and grades. The O-linked 
oligosaccharides were released and analyzed by negative-ion graphitized carbon 
Liquid Chromatography (LC) coupled to Electrospray Ionization tandem Mass 
Spectrometry (ESI-MSn). The LC-ESI-MSn of the oligosaccharides from ovarian cyst 
fluids displayed differences in expression of fucose containing structures such 
as blood group ABO antigens and Lewis-type epitopes.
RESULTS: The obtained data showed that serous and mucinous benign adenomas, 
mucinous low malignant potential carcinomas (LMPs, borderline) and mucinous 
low-grade carcinomas have a high level of blood groups and Lewis type epitopes. 
In contrast, this type of fucosylated structures were low abundant in the 
high-grade mucinous carcinomas or in serous carcinomas. In addition, the ovarian 
tumors that showed a high level of expression of blood group antigens also 
revealed a strong reactivity towards the MUC5AC antibody. To visualize the 
differences between serous and mucinous ovarian tumors based on the 
O-glycosylation, a hierarchical cluster analysis was performed using mass 
spectrometry average compositions (MSAC).
CONCLUSION: Mucinous benign and LMPs along with mucinous low-grade carcinomas 
appear to be different from serous and high-grade mucinous carcinomas based on 
their O-glycan profiles.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0130197
PMCID: PMC4468167
PMID: 26075384 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.