1. J Cheminform. 2015 Jun 12;7:27. doi: 10.1186/s13321-015-0075-5. eCollection 
2015.

Verifying the fully "Laplacianised" posterior Na誰ve Bayesian approach and more.

Mussa HY(1), Marcus D(2), Mitchell JB(3), Glen RC(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Centre for Molecular Informatics, Lensfield Road, 
Cambridge, England CB2 1EW UK ; EaStCHEM School of Chemistry and Biomedical 
Sciences Research Complex, University of St Andrews, North Haugh, St Andrews, 
Scotland KY16 9ST UK.
(2)European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI), European Molecular Biology 
Laboratory, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge, England CB10 1SD 
UK.
(3)EaStCHEM School of Chemistry and Biomedical Sciences Research Complex, 
University of St Andrews, North Haugh, St Andrews, Scotland KY16 9ST UK.
(4)Department of Chemistry, Centre for Molecular Informatics, Lensfield Road, 
Cambridge, England CB2 1EW UK.

BACKGROUND: In a recent paper, Mussa, Mitchell and Glen (MMG) have 
mathematically demonstrated that the "Laplacian Corrected Modified Na誰ve Bayes" 
(LCMNB) algorithm can be viewed as a variant of the so-called Standard Na誰ve 
Bayes (SNB) scheme, whereby the role played by absence of compound features in 
classifying/assigning the compound to its appropriate class is ignored. MMG have 
also proffered guidelines regarding the conditions under which this omission may 
hold. Utilising three data sets, the present paper examines the validity of 
these guidelines in practice. The paper also extends MMG's work and introduces a 
new version of the SNB classifier: "Tapered Na誰ve Bayes" (TNB). TNB does not 
discard the role of absence of a feature out of hand, nor does it fully consider 
its role. Hence, TNB encapsulates both SNB and LCMNB.
RESULTS: LCMNB, SNB and TNB performed differently on classifying 4,658, 5,031 
and 1,149 ligands (all chosen from the ChEMBL Database) distributed over 31 
enzymes, 23 membrane receptors, and one ion-channel, four transporters and one 
transcription factor as their target proteins. When the number of features 
utilised was equal to or smaller than the "optimal" number of features for a 
given data set, SNB classifiers systematically gave better classification 
results than those yielded by LCMNB classifiers. The opposite was true when the 
number of features employed was markedly larger than the "optimal" number of 
features for this data set. Nonetheless, these LCMNB performances were worse 
than the classification performance achieved by SNB when the "optimal" number of 
features for the data set was utilised. TNB classifiers systematically 
outperformed both SNB and LCMNB classifiers.
CONCLUSIONS: The classification results obtained in this study concur with the 
mathematical based guidelines given in MMG's paper-that is, ignoring the role of 
absence of a feature out of hand does not necessarily improve classification 
performance of the SNB approach; if anything, it could make the performance of 
the SNB method worse. The results obtained also lend support to the rationale, 
on which the TNB algorithm rests: handled judiciously, taking into account 
absence of features can enhance (not impair) the discriminatory classification 
power of the SNB approach.

DOI: 10.1186/s13321-015-0075-5
PMCID: PMC4464057
PMID: 26075027