1. Front Neurosci. 2015 Jun 16;9:204. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2015.00204. eCollection 
2015.

Aberrant insulin signaling in Alzheimer's disease: current knowledge.

Bedse G(1), Di Domenico F(2), Serviddio G(3), Cassano T(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology "V. Erspamer," Sapienza University 
of Rome Rome, Italy ; Department of Biochemical Sciences, Sapienza University of 
Rome Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Biochemical Sciences, Sapienza University of Rome Rome, Italy.
(3)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, University of Foggia Foggia, 
Italy.
(4)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Foggia 
Foggia, Italy.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common form of dementia affecting elderly 
people. AD is a multifaceted pathology characterized by accumulation of 
extracellular neuritic plaques, intracellular neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) and 
neuronal loss mainly in the cortex and hippocampus. AD etiology appears to be 
linked to a multitude of mechanisms that have not been yet completely 
elucidated. For long time, it was considered that insulin signaling has only 
peripheral actions but now it is widely accepted that insulin has 
neuromodulatory actions in the brain. Insulin signaling is involved in numerous 
brain functions including cognition and memory that are impaired in AD. Recent 
studies suggest that AD may be linked to brain insulin resistance and patients 
with diabetes have an increased risk of developing AD compared to healthy 
individuals. Indeed insulin resistance, increased inflammation and impaired 
metabolism are key pathological features of both AD and diabetes. However, the 
precise mechanisms involved in the development of AD in patients with diabetes 
are not yet fully understood. In this review we will discuss the role played by 
aberrant brain insulin signaling in AD. In detail, we will focus on the role of 
insulin signaling in the deposition of neuritic plaques and intracellular NFTs. 
Considering that insulin mitigates beta-amyloid deposition and phosphorylation 
of tau, pharmacological strategies restoring brain insulin signaling, such as 
intranasal delivery of insulin, could have significant therapeutic potential in 
AD treatment.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2015.00204
PMCID: PMC4468388
PMID: 26136647