1. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 10;10(7):e0129681. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0129681. 
eCollection 2015.

A Targeting Microbubble for Ultrasound Molecular Imaging.

Yeh JS(1), Sennoga CA(2), McConnell E(3), Eckersley R(4), Tang MX(5), Nourshargh 
S(6), Seddon JM(7), Haskard DO(3), Nihoyannopoulos P(8).

Author information:
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London, United 
Kingdom; Department of Cardiology, Hammersmith Hospital, London, United Kingdom; 
Imaging Sciences Department, Medical Research Council, Imperial College London, 
London, United Kingdom.
(2)Imaging Sciences Department, Medical Research Council, Imperial College 
London, London, United Kingdom; Department of Chemistry, Imperial College 
London, London, United Kingdom.
(3)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London, United 
Kingdom.
(4)Imaging Sciences Department, Medical Research Council, Imperial College 
London, London, United Kingdom.
(5)Department of Bioengineering, Imperial College London, London, United 
Kingdom.
(6)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London, United 
Kingdom; William Harvey Research Institute, Queen Mary, University of London, 
London, United Kingdom.
(7)Department of Chemistry, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom.
(8)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London, United 
Kingdom; Department of Cardiology, Hammersmith Hospital, London, United Kingdom.

RATIONALE: Microbubbles conjugated with targeting ligands are used as contrast 
agents for ultrasound molecular imaging. However, they often contain immunogenic 
(strept)avidin, which impedes application in humans. Although targeting bubbles 
not employing the biotin-(strept)avidin conjugation chemistry have been 
explored, only a few reached the stage of ultrasound imaging in vivo, none were 
reported/evaluated to show all three of the following properties desired for 
clinical applications: (i) low degree of non-specific bubble retention in more 
than one non-reticuloendothelial tissue; (ii) effective for real-time imaging; 
and (iii) effective for acoustic quantification of molecular targets to a high 
degree of quantification. Furthermore, disclosures of the compositions and 
methodologies enabling reproduction of the bubbles are often withheld.
OBJECTIVE: To develop and evaluate a targeting microbubble based on 
maleimide-thiol conjugation chemistry for ultrasound molecular imaging.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Microbubbles with a previously unreported generic 
(non-targeting components) composition were grafted with anti-E-selectin F(ab')2 
using maleimide-thiol conjugation, to produce E-selectin targeting microbubbles. 
The resulting targeting bubbles showed high specificity to E-selectin in vitro 
and in vivo. Non-specific bubble retention was minimal in at least three 
non-reticuloendothelial tissues with inflammation (mouse heart, kidneys, 
cremaster). The bubbles were effective for real-time ultrasound imaging of 
E-selectin expression in the inflamed mouse heart and kidneys, using a clinical 
ultrasound scanner. The acoustic signal intensity of the targeted bubbles 
retained in the heart correlated strongly with the level of E-selectin 
expression (|r|≥0.8), demonstrating a high degree of non-invasive molecular 
quantification.
CONCLUSIONS: Targeting microbubbles for ultrasound molecular imaging, based on 
maleimide-thiol conjugation chemistry and the generic composition described, may 
possess properties (i)-(iii) desired for clinical applications.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0129681
PMCID: PMC4498921
PMID: 26161541 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have read the 
journal's policy and have the following competing interests: JY was recipient of 
the Bristol-Myers Squibb Cardiovascular Prize Fellowship. JY is applicant of 
patents pending on Microparticle Compositions (UK Patent Application GB1223332.6 
and GB1300064.1; International Patent Application reference PCT/GB2013/053398). 
These do not alter the authors' adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data 
and materials.