1. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 12;10(8):e0135415. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0135415. 
eCollection 2015.

Custom 4-Plex DiLeu Isobaric Labels Enable Relative Quantification of Urinary 
Proteins in Men with Lower Urinary Tract Symptoms (LUTS).

Greer T(1), Hao L(2), Nechyporenko A(2), Lee S(3), Vezina CM(4), Ricke WA(3), 
Marker PC(2), Bjorling DE(4), Bushman W(3), Li L(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, 
United States of America.
(2)School of Pharmacy, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, 
United States of America.
(3)Department of Urology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, 
United States of America.
(4)School of Veterinary Medicine, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, 
Wisconsin, United States of America.
(5)Department of Chemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, 
United States of America; School of Pharmacy, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 
Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America.

The relative quantification of proteins using liquid chromatography mass 
spectrometry (LC-MS) has allowed researchers to compile lists of potential 
disease markers. These complex quantitative workflows often include isobaric 
labeling of enzymatically-produced peptides to analyze their relative abundances 
across multiple samples in a single LC-MS run. Recent efforts by our lab have 
provided scientists with cost-effective alternatives to expensive commercial 
labels. Although the quantitative performance of these dimethyl leucine (DiLeu) 
labels has been reported using known ratios of complex protein and peptide 
standards, their potential in large-scale proteomics studies using a clinically 
relevant system has never been investigated. Our work rectifies this oversight 
by implementing 4-plex DiLeu to quantify proteins in the urine of aging human 
males who suffer from lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS). Protein abundances in 
25 LUTS and 15 control patients were compared, revealing that of the 836 
proteins quantified, 50 were found to be differentially expressed (>20% change) 
and statistically significant (p-value <0.05). Gene ontology (GO) analysis of 
the differentiated proteins showed that many were involved in inflammatory 
responses and implicated in fibrosis. While confirmation of individual protein 
abundance changes would be required to verify protein expression, this study 
represents the first report using the custom isobaric label, 4-plex DiLeu, to 
quantify protein abundances in a clinically relevant system.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0135415
PMCID: PMC4534462
PMID: 26267142 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.