1. PLoS Genet. 2015 Aug 20;11(8):e1005453. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005453. 
eCollection 2015 Aug.

The Drosophila bag of marbles Gene Interacts Genetically with Wolbachia and 
Shows Female-Specific Effects of Divergence.

Flores HA(1), Bubnell JE(1), Aquadro CF(1), Barbash DA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, New 
York, United States of America.

Many reproductive proteins from diverse taxa evolve rapidly and adaptively. 
These proteins are typically involved in late stages of reproduction such as 
sperm development and fertilization, and are more often functional in males than 
females. Surprisingly, many germline stem cell (GSC) regulatory genes, which are 
essential for the earliest stages of reproduction, also evolve adaptively in 
Drosophila. One example is the bag of marbles (bam) gene, which is required for 
GSC differentiation and germline cyst development in females and for regulating 
mitotic divisions and entry to spermatocyte differentiation in males. Here we 
show that the extensive divergence of bam between Drosophila melanogaster and D. 
simulans affects bam function in females but has no apparent effect in males. We 
further find that infection with Wolbachia pipientis, an endosymbiotic bacterium 
that can affect host reproduction through various mechanisms, partially 
suppresses female sterility caused by bam mutations in D. melanogaster and 
interacts differentially with bam orthologs from D. melanogaster and D. 
simulans. We propose that the adaptive evolution of bam has been driven at least 
in part by the long-term interactions between Drosophila species and Wolbachia. 
More generally, we suggest that microbial infections of the germline may explain 
the unexpected pattern of evolution of several GSC regulatory genes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005453
PMCID: PMC4546362
PMID: 26291077 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.