1. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 18;10(9):e0138956. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0138956. 
eCollection 2015.

High-Throughput Ligand Discovery Reveals a Sitewise Gradient of Diversity in 
Broadly Evolved Hydrophilic Fibronectin Domains.

Woldring DR(1), Holec PV(1), Zhou H(1), Hackel BJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, United States of America.

Discovering new binding function via a combinatorial library in small protein 
scaffolds requires balance between appropriate mutations to introduce favorable 
intermolecular interactions while maintaining intramolecular integrity. Sitewise 
constraints exist in a non-spatial gradient from diverse to conserved in evolved 
antibody repertoires; yet non-antibody scaffolds generally do not implement this 
strategy in combinatorial libraries. Despite the fact that biased amino acid 
distributions, typically elevated in tyrosine, serine, and glycine, have gained 
wider use in synthetic scaffolds, these distributions are still predominantly 
applied uniformly to diversified sites. While select sites in fibronectin 
domains and DARPins have shown benefit from sitewise designs, they have not been 
deeply evaluated. Inspired by this disparity between diversity distributions in 
natural libraries and synthetic scaffold libraries, we hypothesized that binders 
resulting from discovery and evolution would exhibit a non-spatial, sitewise 
gradient of amino acid diversity. To identify sitewise diversities consistent 
with efficient evolution in the context of a hydrophilic fibronectin domain, 
>105 binders to six targets were evolved and sequenced. Evolutionarily favorable 
amino acid distributions at 25 sites reveal Shannon entropies (range: 0.3-3.9; 
median: 2.1; standard deviation: 1.1) supporting the diversity gradient 
hypothesis. Sitewise constraints in evolved sequences are consistent with 
complementarity, stability, and consensus biases. Implementation of sitewise 
constrained diversity enables direct selection of nanomolar affinity binders 
validating an efficient strategy to balance inter- and intra-molecular 
interaction demands at each site.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0138956
PMCID: PMC4575168
PMID: 26383268 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have read the 
journal's policy and the authors of this manuscript have the following competing 
interests: Benjamin Hackel, Daniel Woldring, and Hong Zhou are inventors on U.S. 
Provisional Patent Application 62/186,498 (“Compositions and methods that 
involve protein scaffolds that specifically bind to hepatocyte growth factor 
receptor”), filed by the University of Minnesota, related to ligands engineered 
to bind MET. This does not alter the authors' adherence to all the PLOS ONE 
policies on sharing data and materials.