1. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 21;10(9):e0138209. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0138209. 
eCollection 2015.

Cold Plasma Inactivation of Bacterial Biofilms and Reduction of Quorum Sensing 
Regulated Virulence Factors.

Ziuzina D(1), Boehm D(1), Patil S(1), Cullen PJ(2), Bourke P(1).

Author information:
(1)Plasma Research Group, School of Food Science and Environmental Health, 
Dublin Institute of Technology, Dublin 1, Ireland.
(2)School of Chemical Engineering, University of New South Wales, Sydney, 
Australia.

The main objectives of this work were to investigate the effect of atmospheric 
cold plasma (ACP) against a range of microbial biofilms commonly implicated in 
foodborne and healthcare associated human infections and against P. aeruginosa 
quorum sensing (QS)-regulated virulence factors, such as pyocyanin, elastase 
(Las B) and biofilm formation capacity post-ACP treatment. The effect of 
processing factors, namely treatment time and mode of plasma exposure on 
antimicrobial activity of ACP were also examined. Antibiofilm activity was 
assessed for E. coli, L. monocytogenes and S. aureus in terms of reduction of 
culturability and retention of metabolic activity using colony count and XTT 
assays, respectively. All samples were treated 'inpack' using sealed 
polypropylene containers with a high voltage dielectric barrier discharge ACP 
generated at 80 kV for 0, 60, 120 and 300 s and a post treatment storage time of 
24 h. According to colony counts, ACP treatment for 60 s reduced populations of 
E. coli to undetectable levels, whereas 300 s was necessary to significantly 
reduce populations of L. monocytogenes and S. aureus biofilms. The results 
obtained from XTT assay indicated possible induction of viable but non 
culturable state of bacteria. With respect to P. aeruginosa QS-related virulence 
factors, the production of pyocyanin was significantly inhibited after short 
treatment times, but reduction of elastase was notable only after 300 s and no 
reduction in actual biofilm formation was achieved post-ACP treatment. 
Importantly, reduction of virulence factors was associated with reduction of the 
cytotoxic effects of the bacterial supernatant on CHO-K1 cells, regardless of 
mode and duration of treatment. The results of this study point to ACP 
technology as an effective strategy for inactivation of established biofilms and 
may play an important role in attenuation of virulence of pathogenic bacteria. 
Further investigation is warranted to propose direct evidence for the inhibition 
of QS and mechanisms by which this may occur.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0138209
PMCID: PMC4577073
PMID: 26390435 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.