1. Cancer Res. 2015 Dec 1;75(23):5023-33. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3538.
Epub  2015 Sep 30.

Fluorophore-NanoLuc BRET Reporters Enable Sensitive In Vivo Optical Imaging and 
Flow Cytometry for Monitoring Tumorigenesis.

Schaub FX(1), Reza MS(2), Flaveny CA(3), Li W(1), Musicant AM(4), Hoxha S(5), 
Guo M(2), Cleveland JL(1), Amelio AL(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Tumor Biology, Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, 
Tampa, Florida.
(2)Department of Cancer Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, Scripps 
Florida, Jupiter, Florida.
(3)Department of Pharmacological & Physiological Science, School of Medicine, 
Saint Louis University, St. Louis, Missouri.
(4)UNC Biological and Biomedical Sciences Graduate Program, University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina.
(5)Scripps Graduate Program, The Scripps Research Institute, Scripps Florida, 
Jupiter, Florida.
(6)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina. Biomedical Research Imaging Center, 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina. 
antonio_amelio@unc.edu.

Fluorescent proteins are widely used to study molecular and cellular events, yet 
this traditionally relies on delivery of excitation light, which can trigger 
autofluorescence, photoxicity, and photobleaching, impairing their use in vivo. 
Accordingly, chemiluminescent light sources such as those generated by 
luciferases have emerged, as they do not require excitation light. However, 
current luciferase reporters lack the brightness needed to visualize events in 
deep tissues. We report the creation of chimeric eGFP-NanoLuc (GpNLuc) and 
LSSmOrange-NanoLuc (OgNLuc) fusion reporter proteins coined LumiFluors, which 
combine the benefits of eGFP or LSSmOrange fluorescent proteins with the bright, 
glow-type bioluminescent light generated by an enhanced small luciferase subunit 
(NanoLuc) of the deep-sea shrimp Oplophorus gracilirostris. The intramolecular 
bioluminescence resonance energy transfer that occurs between NanoLuc and the 
fused fluorophore generates the brightest bioluminescent signal known to date, 
including improved intensity, sensitivity, and durable spectral properties, 
thereby dramatically reducing image acquisition times and permitting highly 
sensitive in vivo imaging. Notably, the self-illuminating and bifunctional 
nature of these LumiFluor reporters enables greatly improved spatiotemporal 
monitoring of very small numbers of tumor cells via in vivo optical imaging and 
also allows the isolation and analyses of single cells by flow cytometry. Thus, 
LumiFluor reporters are inexpensive, robust, noninvasive tools that allow for 
markedly improved in vivo optical imaging of tumorigenic processes.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3538
PMCID: PMC4668208
PMID: 26424696 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest: 
F.X. Schaub, J.L. Cleveland, and A.L. Amelio declare a patent application 
related to this work. The remaining authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.