1. BMC Cancer. 2015 Oct 24;15:777. doi: 10.1186/s12885-015-1791-y.

TrkA is amplified in malignant melanoma patients and induces an 
anti-proliferative response in cell lines.

Pasini L(1), Re A(2), Tebaldi T(3), Ricci G(4), Boi S(5), Adami V(6), 
Barbareschi M(7), Quattrone A(8).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Integrative Biology (CIBIO), University of Trento, Trento, Italy. 
luigi.pasini@unitn.it.
(2)Centre for Integrative Biology (CIBIO), University of Trento, Trento, Italy. 
angela.re@unitn.it.
(3)Centre for Integrative Biology (CIBIO), University of Trento, Trento, Italy. 
t.tebaldi@unitn.it.
(4)Centre for Integrative Biology (CIBIO), University of Trento, Trento, Italy. 
gianluca.ricci@unitn.it.
(5)Department of Pathology, Santa Chiara Hospital, Trento, Italy. 
sebastiana.boi@apss.tn.it.
(6)High Throughput Screening Facility, Centre for Integrative Biology (CIBIO), 
University of Trento, Trento, Italy. valentina.adami@unitn.it.
(7)Department of Pathology, Santa Chiara Hospital, Trento, Italy. 
mattia.barbareschi@apss.tn.it.
(8)Centre for Integrative Biology (CIBIO), University of Trento, Trento, Italy. 
alessandro.quattrone@unitn.it.

BACKGROUND: The nerve growth factor (NGF) receptor tyrosine-kinase TrkA is a 
well-known determinant of the melanocytic lineage, through modulation of the 
MAPK and AKT cascades. While TrkA gene is frequently rearranged in cancers, its 
involvement in malignant melanoma (MM) development is still unclear.
METHODS: We analyzed a dataset of primary cutaneous MM (n = 31) by array 
comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH), to identify genomic amplifications 
associated with tumor progression. The analysis was validated by genomic 
quantitative PCR (qPCR) on an extended set of cases (n = 64) and the results 
were correlated with the clinical outcome. To investigate TrkA molecular 
pathways and cellular function, we generated inducible activation of the 
NGF-TrkA signaling in human MM cell lines.
RESULTS: We identified amplification of 1q23.1, where the TrkA locus resides, as 
a candidate hotspot implicated in the progression of MM. Across 40 amplicons 
detected, segmental amplification of 1q23.1 showed the strongest association 
with tumor thickness. By validation of the analysis, TrkA gene amplification 
emerged as a frequent event in primary melanomas (50 % of patients), and 
correlated with worse clinical outcome. However, experiments in cell lines 
revealed that induction of the NGF-TrkA signaling produced a phenotype of 
dramatic suppression of cell proliferation through inhibition of cell division 
and pronounced intracellular vacuolization, in a way straightly dependent on NGF 
activation of TrkA. These events were triggered via MAPK activity but not via 
AKT, and involved p21(cip1) protein increase, compatibly with a mechanism of 
oncogene-induced growth arrest.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our findings point to TrkA as a candidate oncogene 
in MM and support a model in which the NGF-TrkA-MAPK pathway may mediate a 
trade-off between neoplastic transformation and adaptive anti-proliferative 
response.

DOI: 10.1186/s12885-015-1791-y
PMCID: PMC4619539
PMID: 26496938 [Indexed for MEDLINE]