1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016 Jan 8;44(1):14-23. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv1218. Epub 2015
 Nov 17.

Death of a dogma: eukaryotic mRNAs can code for more than one protein.

Mouilleron H(1), Delcourt V(2), Roucou X(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of biochemistry, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Quebec J1E 
4K8, Canada PROTEO, Quebec Network for Research on Protein Function, Structure, 
and Engineering, Quebec, Canada.
(2)Department of biochemistry, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Quebec J1E 
4K8, Canada PROTEO, Quebec Network for Research on Protein Function, Structure, 
and Engineering, Quebec, Canada Inserm U-1192, Laboratoire de Protéomique, 
Réponse Inflammatoire, Spectrométrie de Masse (PRISM), Université de Lille 1, 
Cité Scientifique, 59655 Villeneuve D'Ascq, France.
(3)Department of biochemistry, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Quebec J1E 
4K8, Canada PROTEO, Quebec Network for Research on Protein Function, Structure, 
and Engineering, Quebec, Canada xavier.roucou@usherbrooke.ca.

mRNAs carry the genetic information that is translated by ribosomes. The 
traditional view of a mature eukaryotic mRNA is a molecule with three main 
regions, the 5' UTR, the protein coding open reading frame (ORF) or coding 
sequence (CDS), and the 3' UTR. This concept assumes that ribosomes translate 
one ORF only, generally the longest one, and produce one protein. As a result, 
in the early days of genomics and bioinformatics, one CDS was associated with 
each protein-coding gene. This fundamental concept of a single CDS is being 
challenged by increasing experimental evidence indicating that annotated 
proteins are not the only proteins translated from mRNAs. In particular, mass 
spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics and ribosome profiling have detected 
productive translation of alternative open reading frames. In several cases, the 
alternative and annotated proteins interact. Thus, the expression of two or more 
proteins translated from the same mRNA may offer a mechanism to ensure the 
co-expression of proteins which have functional interactions. Translational 
mechanisms already described in eukaryotic cells indicate that the cellular 
machinery is able to translate different CDSs from a single viral or cellular 
mRNA. In addition to summarizing data showing that the protein coding potential 
of eukaryotic mRNAs has been underestimated, this review aims to challenge the 
single translated CDS dogma.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkv1218
PMCID: PMC4705651
PMID: 26578573 [Indexed for MEDLINE]