1. PLoS One. 2016 Jan 13;11(1):e0146885. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0146885. 
eCollection 2016.

L1 Cell Adhesion Molecule-Specific Chimeric Antigen Receptor-Redirected Human T 
Cells Exhibit Specific and Efficient Antitumor Activity against Human Ovarian 
Cancer in Mice.

Hong H(1), Brown CE(1), Ostberg JR(1), Priceman SJ(1), Chang WC(1), Weng L(1), 
Lin P(2), Wakabayashi MT(2), Jensen MC(3), Forman SJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cancer Immunotherapeutics & Tumor Immunology and Hematology & 
Hematopoietic Cell Transplantation, Beckman Research Institute, City of Hope 
National Medical Center, Duarte, California, United States of America.
(2)Department of Gynecologic Oncology, Beckman Research Institute, City of Hope 
National Medical Center, Duarte, California, United States of America.
(3)Ben Towne Center for Childhood Cancer Research, Seattle Children's Research 
Institute, Seattle, Washington, United States of America.

New therapeutic modalities are needed for ovarian cancer, the most lethal 
gynecologic malignancy. Recent clinical trials have demonstrated the impressive 
therapeutic potential of adoptive therapy using chimeric antigen receptor 
(CAR)-redirected T cells to target hematological cancers, and emerging studies 
suggest a similar impact may be achieved for solid cancers. We sought determine 
whether genetically-modified T cells targeting the CE7-epitope of L1-CAM, a cell 
adhesion molecule aberrantly expressed in several cancers, have promise as an 
immunotherapy for ovarian cancer, first demonstrating that L1-CAM was highly 
over-expressed on a panel of ovarian cancer cell lines, primary ovarian tumor 
tissue specimens, and ascites-derived primary cancer cells. Human central memory 
derived T cells (TCM) were then genetically modified to express an anti-L1-CAM 
CAR (CE7R), which directed effector function upon tumor antigen stimulation as 
assessed by in vitro cytokine secretion and cytotoxicity assays. We also found 
that CE7R+ T cells were able to target primary ovarian cancer cells. 
Intraperitoneal (i.p.) administration of CE7R+ TCM induced a significant 
regression of i.p. established SK-OV-3 xenograft tumors in mice, inhibited 
ascites formation, and conferred a significant survival advantage compared with 
control-treated animals. Taken together, these studies indicate that adoptive 
transfer of L1-CAM-specific CE7R+ T cells may offer a novel and effective 
immunotherapy strategy for advanced ovarian cancer.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0146885
PMCID: PMC4711972
PMID: 26761817 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: MCJ reports receiving 
commercial research support from, has ownership interest (including patents) in, 
and is a consultant/advisory board member for Juno Therapeutics, Inc. This does 
not alter the authors' adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and 
materials. All other authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.