1. Oncotarget. 2016 Jan 26;7(4):3692-701. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6923.

Core level regulatory network of osteoblast as molecular mechanism for 
osteoporosis and treatment.

Yuan R(1)(2), Ma S(3), Zhu X(4), Li J(5), Liang Y(5), Liu T(5), Zhu Y(5), Zhang 
B(5), Tan S(5), Guo H(5), Guan S(3), Ao P(1)(2), Zhou G(5).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Systems Biomedicine, Ministry of Education, Shanghai Center 
for Systems Biomedicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(2)School of Biomedical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 
China.
(3)Department of Physics, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China.
(4)GeneMath, N.E., Seattle, WA, USA.
(5)The Center for Anti-Ageing and Regenerative Medicine, Shenzhen University, 
Shenzhen, China.

To develop and evaluate the long-term prophylactic treatment for chronic 
diseases such as osteoporosis requires a clear view of mechanism at the 
molecular and systems level. While molecular signaling pathway studies for 
osteoporosis are extensive, a unifying mechanism is missing. In this work, we 
provide experimental and systems-biology evidences that a tightly connected 
top-level regulatory network may exist, which governs the normal and 
osteoporotic phenotypes of osteoblast. Specifically, we constructed a hub-like 
interaction network from well-documented cross-talks among estrogens, 
glucocorticoids, retinoic acids, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor, 
vitamin D receptor and calcium-signaling pathways. The network was verified with 
transmission electron microscopy and gene expression profiling for bone tissues 
of ovariectomized (OVX) rats before and after strontium gluconate (GluSr) 
treatment. Based on both the network structure and the experimental data, the 
dynamical modeling predicts calcium and glucocorticoids signaling pathways as 
targets for GluSr treatment. Modeling results further reveal that in the context 
of missing estrogen signaling, the GluSr treated state may be an outcome that is 
closest to the healthy state.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.6923
PMCID: PMC4826162
PMID: 26783964 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTERESTS The authors declare no 
competing financial interests.