1. Oncotarget. 2016 Mar 1;7(9):10271-82. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7171.

Phenylethyl isothiocyanate reverses cisplatin resistance in biliary tract cancer 
cells via glutathionylation-dependent degradation of Mcl-1.

Li Q(1), Zhan M(1), Chen W(1), Zhao B(2), Yang K(2), Yang J(2), Yi J(2), Huang 
Q(3), Mohan M(2), Hou Z(2), Wang J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biliary-Pancreatic Surgery, Ren Ji Hospital, School of 
Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Cell Biology, Shanghai Key 
Laboratory of Tumor Microenvironment and Inflammation, Institutes of Medical 
Sciences, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(3)The Wistar Institute, University of Pennsylvania and Veterans Affairs Medical 
Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Biliary tract cancer (BTC) is a highly malignant cancer. BTC exhibits a low 
response rate to cisplatin (CDDP) treatment, and therefore, an understanding of 
the mechanism of CDDP resistance is urgently needed. Here, we show that BTC 
cells develop CDDP resistance due, in part, to upregulation of myeloid cell 
leukemia 1 (Mcl-1). Phenylethyl isothiocyanate (PEITC), a natural compound found 
in watercress, could enhance the efficacy of CDDP by degrading Mcl-1. PEITC-CDDP 
co-treatment also increased the rate of apoptosis of cancer stem-like side 
population (SP) cells and inhibited xenograft tumor growth without obvious toxic 
effects. In vitro, PEITC decreased reduced glutathione (GSH), which resulted in 
decreased GSH/oxidized glutathione (GSSG) ratio and increased glutathionylation 
of Mcl-1, leading to rapid proteasomal degradation of Mcl-1. Furthermore, we 
identified Cys16 and Cys286 as Mcl-1 glutathionylation sites, and mutating them 
resulted in PEITC-mediated degradation resistant Mcl-1 protein. In conclusion, 
we demonstrate for the first time that CDDP resistance is partially associated 
with Mcl-1 in BTC cells and we identify a novel mechanism that PEITC can enhance 
CDDP-induced apoptosis via glutathionylation-dependent degradation of Mcl-1. 
Hence, our results provide support that dietary intake of watercress may help 
reverse CDDP resistance in BTC patients.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.7171
PMCID: PMC4891119
PMID: 26848531 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST No potential conflicts of 
interest were disclosed.