1. Oncotarget. 2016 Mar 22;7(12):15200-14. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7710.

Hypotaurine evokes a malignant phenotype in glioma through aberrant hypoxic 
signaling.

Gao P(1)(2), Yang C(3)(4), Nesvick CL(3), Feldman MJ(3), Sizdahkhani S(3), Liu 
H(5), Chu H(6), Yang F(1)(7), Tang L(1), Tian J(7), Zhao S(5), Li G(6), Heiss 
JD(3), Liu Y(1), Zhuang Z(3), Xu G(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Separation Science for Analytical Chemistry, Dalian 
Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian, China.
(2)Clinical Laboratory, Dalian Sixth People's Hospital, Dalian, China.
(3)Surgical Neurology Branch, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and 
Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(4)Neuro-Oncology Branch, National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(5)Department of Neurosurgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical 
University, Harbin, China.
(6)Laboratory of Molecular Modeling and Design, State Key Laboratory of 
Molecular Reaction Dynamics, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese 
Academy of Science, Dalian, China.
(7)School of Bioengineering, Dalian Polytechnic University, Dalian, China.

Metabolomics has shown significant potential in identifying small molecules 
specific to tumor phenotypes. In this study we analyzed resected tissue 
metabolites using capillary electrophoresis-mass spectrometry and found that 
tissue hypotaurine levels strongly and positively correlated with glioma grade. 
In vitro studies were conducted to show that hypotaurine activates hypoxia 
signaling through the competitive inhibition of prolyl hydroxylase domain-2. 
This leads to the activation of hypoxia signaling as well as to the enhancement 
of glioma cell proliferation and invasion. In contrast, taurine, the oxidation 
metabolite of hypotaurine, decreased intracellular hypotaurine and resulted in 
glioma cell growth arrest. Lastly, a glioblastoma xenograft mice model was 
supplemented with taurine feed and exhibited impaired tumor growth. Taken 
together, these findings suggest that hypotaurine is an aberrantly produced 
oncometabolite, mediating tumor molecular pathophysiology and progression. The 
hypotaurine metabolic pathway may provide a potentially new target for 
glioblastoma diagnosis and therapy.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.7710
PMCID: PMC4924780
PMID: 26934654 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors report no 
actual, potential, or potentially perceived conflicts of interest.