1. Oncotarget. 2016 Mar 15;7(11):11959-71. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7867.

Accelerated geroncogenesis in hereditary breast-ovarian cancer syndrome.

Menendez JA(1)(2), Folguera-Blasco N(3), Cuyàs E(1)(2), Fernández-Arroyo S(4), 
Joven J(4), Alarcón T(3)(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)ProCURE (Program Against Cancer Therapeutic Resistance), Metabolism and 
Cancer Group, Catalan Institute of Oncology, Girona, Catalonia, Spain.
(2)Molecular Oncology Group, Girona Biomedical Research Institute (IDIBGI), 
Salt, Catalonia, Spain.
(3)Computational and Mathematical Biology Research Group, Centre de Recerca 
Matemàtica (CRM), Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Unitat de Recerca Biomèdica, Hospital Universitari de Sant Joan, IISPV, 
Universitat Rovira i Virgili, Campus of International Excellence Southern 
Catalonia, Reus, Spain.
(5)Institució Catalana d'Estudis i Recerca Avançats (ICREA), Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Departament de Matemàtiques, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, 
Spain.
(7)Barcelona Graduate School of Mathematics (BGSMath), Barcelona, Spain.

The geroncogenesis hypothesis postulates that the decline in metabolic cellular 
health that occurs naturally with aging drives a "field effect" predisposing 
normal tissues for cancer development. We propose that mutations in the cancer 
susceptibility genes BRCA1/2 might trigger "accelerated geroncogenesis" in 
breast and ovarian epithelia. By speeding up the rate at which the metabolic 
threshold becomes "permissive" with survival and expansion of genomically 
unstable pre-tumoral epithelial cells, BRCA haploinsufficiency-driven metabolic 
reprogramming would operate as a bona fide oncogenic event enabling malignant 
transformation and tumor formation in BRCA carriers. The metabolic facet of 
BRCA1 one-hit might involve tissue-specific alterations in acetyl-CoA, 
α-ketoglutarate, NAD+, FAD, or S-adenosylmethionine, critical factors for 
de/methylation or de/acetylation dynamics in the nuclear epigenome. This in turn 
might induce faulty epigenetic reprogramming at the "install phase" that directs 
cell-specific differentiation of breast/ovarian epithelial cells, which can 
ultimately determine the penetrance of BRCA defects during developmental windows 
of susceptibility. This model offers a framework to study whether metabolic 
drugs that prevent or revert metabolic reprogramming induced by BRCA 
haploinsufficiency might displace the "geroncogenic risk" of BRCA carriers to 
the age typical for those without the mutation. The identification of the key 
nodes that directly communicate changes in cellular metabolism to the chromatin 
in BRCA haploinsufficient cells may allow the epigenetic targeting of genomic 
instability using exclusively metabolic means. The validation of accelerated 
geroncogenesis as an inherited "one-hit" metabolic "field effect" might offer 
new strategies to therapeutically revisit the apparently irreversible 
genetic-hereditary fate of women with hereditary breast-ovarian cancer syndrome.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.7867
PMCID: PMC4914261
PMID: 26943589 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors declare no 
conflict of interest.