1. J Med Genet. 2016 Jul;53(7):441-9. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2015-103439. Epub
2016  Apr 1.

Meta-analysis of 49 549 individuals imputed with the 1000 Genomes Project 
reveals an exonic damaging variant in ANGPTL4 determining fasting TG levels.

van Leeuwen EM(1), Sabo A(2), Bis JC(3), Huffman JE(4), Manichaikul A(5), Smith 
AV(6), Feitosa MF(7), Demissie S(8), Joshi PK(9), Duan Q(10), Marten J(11), van 
Klinken JB(12), Surakka I(13), Nolte IM(14), Zhang W(15), Mbarek H(16), Li-Gao 
R(17), Trompet S(18), Verweij N(19), Evangelou E(20), Lyytikäinen LP(21), Tayo 
BO(22), Deelen J(23), van der Most PJ(14), van der Laan SW(24), Arking DE(25), 
Morrison A(26), Dehghan A(1), Franco OH(1), Hofman A(1), Rivadeneira F(27), 
Sijbrands EJ(27), Uitterlinden AG(28), Mychaleckyj JC(5), Campbell A(29), 
Hocking LJ(30), Padmanabhan S(31), Brody JA(3), Rice KM(32), White CC(33), 
Harris T(34), Isaacs A(1), Campbell H(9), Lange LA(10), Rudan I(35), Kolcic 
I(36), Navarro P(11), Zemunik T(36), Salomaa V(37); LifeLines Cohort Study; 
Kooner AS(38), Kooner JS(39), Lehne B(40), Scott WR(15), Tan ST(38), de Geus 
EJ(16), Milaneschi Y(41), Penninx BW(41), Willemsen G(16), de Mutsert R(17), 
Ford I(42), Gansevoort RT(43), Segura-Lepe MP(40), Raitakari OT(44), Viikari 
JS(45), Nikus K(46), Forrester T(47), McKenzie CA(47), de Craen AJ(48), de 
Ruijter HM(24); CHARGE Lipids Working Group; Pasterkamp G(49), Snieder H(14), 
Oldehinkel AJ(50), Slagboom PE(23), Cooper RS(22), Kähönen M(51), Lehtimäki 
T(21), Elliott P(52), van der Harst P(53), Jukema JW(54), Mook-Kanamori DO(55), 
Boomsma DI(16), Chambers JC(56), Swertz M(57), Ripatti S(58), Willems van Dijk 
K(59), Vitart V(11), Polasek O(36), Hayward C(11), Wilson JG(60), Wilson JF(61), 
Gudnason V(6), Rich SS(5), Psaty BM(62), Borecki IB(7), Boerwinkle E(63), Rotter 
JI(64), Cupples LA(65), van Duijn CM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(2)Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, USA.
(4)Medical Research Council Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and 
Molecular Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK The Framingham Heart 
Study, NHLBI Cardiovascular Epidemiology and Human Genomics Branch, Framingham, 
USA.
(5)Center for Public Health Genomics, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, 
USA.
(6)Icelandic Heart Association, Kopavogur, Iceland Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland.
(7)Department of Genetics, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, 
USA.
(8)Department of Biostatistics, Boston University School of Public Health, 
Boston, USA.
(9)Usher Institute for Population Health Sciences and Informatics, University of 
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(10)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, USA.
(11)Medical Research Council Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and 
Molecular Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(12)Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The 
Netherlands.
(13)Human Genomics Unit, Institute for Molecular Medicine, University of 
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(14)Department of Epidemiology, University of Groningen, University Medical 
Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(15)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, 
Imperial College London, London, UK Department of Cardiology, Ealing Hospital 
NHS Trust, Middlesex, UK.
(16)Department of Biological Psychology, VU University Amsterdam and EMGO+ 
Institute for Health and Care Research, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(17)Department of Clinical Epidemiology, Leiden University Medical Center, 
Leiden, The Netherlands.
(18)Department of Cardiology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The 
Netherlands Department of Gerontology and Geriatrics, Leiden University Medical 
Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(19)Department of Cardiology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of 
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(20)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, 
Imperial College London, London, UK Department of Hygiene and Epidemiology, 
University of Ioannina Medical School, Ioannina, Greece.
(21)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Fimlab Laboratories, Tampere, Finland 
Department of Clinical Chemistry, University of Tampere School of Medicine, 
Tampere, Finland.
(22)Public Health Sciences, Loyola University Chicago Stritch School of 
Medicine, Maywood, USA.
(23)Department of Molecular Epidemiology, Leiden University Medical Center, 
Leiden, The Netherlands.
(24)Laboratory of Experimental Cardiology, University Medical Center Utrecht, 
Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(25)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, USA.
(26)Human Genetics Center, The University of Texas School of Public Health, 
Houston, USA.
(27)Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(28)Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, 
The Netherlands.
(29)Generation Scotland, Centre for Genomic and Experimental Medicine, Institute 
of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(30)Musculoskeletal Research Programme, Division of Applied Medicine, University 
of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK.
(31)British Heart Foundation Glasgow Cardiovascular Research Centre, Institute 
of Cardiovascular and Medical Sciences, College of Medical, Veterinary and Life 
Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK.
(32)Department of Biostatistics, University of Washington, Seattle, USA.
(33)Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, USA.
(34)Laboratory of Epidemiology and Population Sciences, National Institute on 
Aging, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, USA.
(35)Centre for Population Health Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, 
UK.
(36)Faculty of Medicine, University of Split, Split, Croatia.
(37)Department of Health, National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, 
Finland.
(38)Cardiovascular Science, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College 
London, London, UK.
(39)Department of Cardiology, Ealing Hospital NHS Trust, Middlesex, UK 
Cardiovascular Science, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College 
London, London, UK Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trus, Imperial College 
London, London, UK.
(40)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, 
Imperial College London, London, UK.
(41)Department of Psychiatry, VU University Medical Center Amsterdam/GGZinGeest 
and EMGO+ Institute for Health and Care Research and Neuroscience Campus 
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(42)Robertson Center for Biostatistics, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK.
(43)Department of Nephrology, University of Groningen, University Medical Center 
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(44)Department of Clinical Physiology, Turku University Hospital, Turku, Finland 
Research Centre of Applied and Preventive Cardiovascular Medicine, University of 
Turku, Turku, Finland.
(45)Division of Medicine, Turku University Hospital, Turku, Finland Department 
of Medicine, University of Turku, Turku, Finland.
(46)Department of Cardiology, Heart Hospital, Tampere University Hospital, 
Tampere, Finland School of Medicine, University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland.
(47)Tropical Metabolism Research Unit, Tropical Medicine Research Institute, 
University of the West Indies, Mona, Jamaica.
(48)Department of Gerontology and Geriatrics, Leiden University Medical Center, 
Leiden, The Netherlands.
(49)Laboratory of Experimental Cardiology, University Medical Center Utrecht, 
Utrecht, The Netherlands Laboratory of Clinical Chemistry and Hematology, 
University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(50)Department of Psychiatry, University of Groningen, University Medical Center 
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(51)Department of Clinical Physiology, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, 
Finland Department of Clinical Physiology, University of Tampere School of 
Medicine, Tampere, Finland.
(52)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, MRC-PHE Centre for Environment 
and Health, School of Public Health, Imperial College London, London, UK.
(53)Department of Cardiology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of 
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands Department of Genetics, University of 
Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(54)Department of Cardiology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The 
Netherlands.
(55)Department of Clinical Epidemiology, Leiden University Medical Center, 
Leiden, The Netherlands Department of Public Health and Primary Care, Leiden 
University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands Epidemiology Section, 
Department of BESC, King Faisal Medical Hospital and Research Centre, Riyadh, 
Saudi Arabia.
(56)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, 
Imperial College London, London, UK Department of Cardiology, Ealing Hospital 
NHS Trust, Middlesex, UK Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trus, Imperial College 
London, London, UK.
(57)Department of Genetics, University of Groningen, University Medical Center 
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands Genomics Coordination Center, University 
of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(58)Human Genomics Unit, Institute for Molecular Medicine, University of 
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland Public Health, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, 
Finland Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, UK.
(59)Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The 
Netherlands Department of General Internal Medicine, Leiden University Medical 
Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(60)Physiology and Biophysics, University of Mississippi Medical Center, 
Jackson, USA.
(61)Medical Research Council Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and 
Molecular Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK Usher Institute for 
Population Health Sciences and Informatics, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, 
UK.
(62)Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, USA Department of 
Epidemiology, University of Washington, Seattle, USA Department of Health 
Services, University of Washington, Seattle, USA Group Health Cooperative, Group 
Health Research Institute, Seattle, USA.
(63)Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, USA 
Human Genetics Center, The University of Texas School of Public Health, Houston, 
USA.
(64)Institute for Translational Genomics and Population Sciences, Los Angeles 
BioMedical Research Institute at Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Torrance, USA 
Division of Genomic Outcomes, Department of Pediatrics, Harbor-UCLA Medical 
Center, Torrance, USA Departments of Pediatrics, Medicine, and Human Genetics, 
UCLA, Los Angeles, USA.
(65)The Framingham Heart Study, NHLBI Cardiovascular Epidemiology and Human 
Genomics Branch, Framingham, USA Department of Genetics, Washington University 
School of Medicine, St Louis, USA.

BACKGROUND: So far, more than 170 loci have been associated with circulating 
lipid levels through genome-wide association studies (GWAS). These associations 
are largely driven by common variants, their function is often not known, and 
many are likely to be markers for the causal variants. In this study we aimed to 
identify more new rare and low-frequency functional variants associated with 
circulating lipid levels.
METHODS: We used the 1000 Genomes Project as a reference panel for the 
imputations of GWAS data from ∼60 000 individuals in the discovery stage and 
∼90 000 samples in the replication stage.
RESULTS: Our study resulted in the identification of five new associations with 
circulating lipid levels at four loci. All four loci are within genes that can 
be linked biologically to lipid metabolism. One of the variants, rs116843064, is 
a damaging missense variant within the ANGPTL4 gene.
CONCLUSIONS: This study illustrates that GWAS with high-scale imputation may 
still help us unravel the biological mechanism behind circulating lipid levels.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

DOI: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2015-103439
PMCID: PMC4941146
PMID: 27036123 [Indexed for MEDLINE]