1. PLoS One. 2016 Apr 4;11(4):e0153089. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0153089. 
eCollection 2016.

Relationship of 5-HTTLPR Polymorphism with Various Factors of Pain Processing: 
Subjective Experience, Motor Responsiveness and Catastrophizing.

Kunz M(1)(2), Hennig J(3), Karmann AJ(2), Lautenbacher S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Practice, Geriatrics Section, University Medical Center 
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(2)Physiological Psychology, Department of Psychology, University of Bamberg, 
Bamberg, Germany.
(3)Personality Psychology and Individual Differences, Department of Psychology, 
Justus-Liebig-University Giessen, Giessen, Germany.

Although serotonin is known to play an important role in pain processing, the 
relationship between the polymorphism in 5-HTTLPR and pain processing is not 
well understood. To examine the relationship more comprehensively, various 
factors of pain processing having putative associations with 5-HT functioning 
were studied, namely the subjective pain experience (pain threshold, rating of 
experimental pain), catastrophizing about pain (Pain Catastrophizing Scale = 
PCS) and motor responsiveness (facial expression of pain). In 60 female and 67 
male participants, heat pain stimuli were applied by a contact thermode to 
assess pain thresholds, supra-threshold ratings and a composite score of 
pain-relevant facial responses. Participants also completed the PCS and were 
grouped based on their 5-HTTLPR genotype (bi-allelic evaluation) into a group 
with s-allele carriers (ss, sl) and a second group without (ll). S-allele 
carriers proved to have lower pain thresholds and higher PCS scores. These two 
positive findings were unrelated to each other. No other difference between 
genotype groups became significant. In all analyses, "age" and "gender" were 
controlled for. In s-allele carriers the subjective pain experience and the 
tendency to catastrophize about pain was enhanced, suggesting that the s-allele 
might be a risk factor for the development and maintenance of pain. This risk 
factor seems to act via two independent routes, namely via the sensory processes 
of subjective pain experiences and via the booster effects of pain 
catastrophizing.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0153089
PMCID: PMC4820275
PMID: 27043930 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.