1. Front Neurosci. 2016 Mar 30;10:121. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2016.00121. eCollection
 2016.

Electrical Responses and Spontaneous Activity of Human iPS-Derived Neuronal 
Networks Characterized for 3-month Culture with 4096-Electrode Arrays.

Amin H(1), Maccione A(1), Marinaro F(2), Zordan S(1), Nieus T(1), Berdondini 
L(1).

Author information:
(1)NetS3 Laboratory, Neuroscience and Brain Technologies Department, Fondazione 
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia (IIT) Genova, Italy.
(2)Neurobiology of miRNA Laboratory, Neuroscience and Brain Technologies 
Department, Fondazione Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia (IIT) Genova, Italy.

The recent availability of human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) holds 
great promise as a novel source of human-derived neurons for cell and tissue 
therapies as well as for in vitro drug screenings that might replace the use of 
animal models. However, there is still a considerable lack of knowledge on the 
functional properties of hiPSC-derived neuronal networks, thus limiting their 
application. Here, upon optimization of cell culture protocols, we demonstrate 
that both spontaneous and evoked electrical spiking activities of these networks 
can be characterized on-chip by taking advantage of the resolution provided by 
CMOS multielectrode arrays (CMOS-MEAs). These devices feature a large and 
closely-spaced array of 4096 simultaneously recording electrodes and multi-site 
on-chip electrical stimulation. Our results show that networks of human-derived 
neurons can respond to electrical stimulation with a physiological repertoire of 
spike waveforms after 3 months of cell culture, a period of time during which 
the network undergoes the expression of developing patterns of spontaneous 
spiking activity. To achieve this, we have investigated the impact on the 
network formation and on the emerging network-wide functional properties induced 
by different biochemical substrates, i.e., poly-dl-ornithine (PDLO), 
poly-l-ornithine (PLO), and polyethylenimine (PEI), that were used as adhesion 
promoters for the cell culture. Interestingly, we found that neuronal networks 
grown on PDLO coated substrates show significantly higher spontaneous firing 
activity, reliable responses to low-frequency electrical stimuli, and an 
appropriate level of PSD-95 that may denote a physiological neuronal maturation 
profile and synapse stabilization. However, our results also suggest that even 
3-month culture might not be sufficient for human-derived neuronal network 
maturation. Taken together, our results highlight the tight relationship 
existing between substrate coatings and emerging network properties, i.e., 
spontaneous activity, responsiveness, synapse formation and maturation. 
Additionally, our results provide a baseline on the functional properties 
expressed over 3 months of network development for a commercially available line 
of hiPSC-derived neurons. This is a first step toward the development of 
functional pre-clinical assays to test pharmaceutical compounds on human-derived 
neuronal networks with CMOS-MEAs.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2016.00121
PMCID: PMC4811967
PMID: 27065786