1. Front Hum Neurosci. 2016 Mar 31;10:142. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2016.00142. 
eCollection 2016.

Alcohol Dependence and Altered Engagement of Brain Networks in Risky Decisions.

Zhu X(1), Sundby K(1), Bjork JM(2), Momenan R(1).

Author information:
(1)Clinical NeuroImaging Research Core, National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and 
Alcoholism, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda MD, USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond VA, USA.

Alcohol dependence is associated with heightened risk tolerance and altered 
decision-making. This raises the question as to whether alcohol dependent 
patients (ADP) are incapable of proper risk assessment. We investigated how 
healthy controls (HC) and ADP engage neural networks to cope with the increased 
cognitive demands of risky decisions. We collected fMRI data while 34 HC and 16 
ADP played a game that included "safe" and "risky" trials. In safe trials, 
participants accrued money at no risk of a penalty. In risky trials, reward and 
risk simultaneously increased as participants were instructed to decide when to 
stop a reward accrual period. If the participant failed to stop before an 
undisclosed time, the trial would "bust" and participants would not earn the 
money from that trial. Independent Component Analysis was used to identify 
networks engaged during the anticipation and the decision execution of risky 
compared with safe trials. Like HC, ADP demonstrated distinct network engagement 
for safe and risky trials at anticipation. However, at decision execution, ADP 
exhibited severely reduced discrimination in network engagement between safe and 
risky trials. Although ADP behaviorally responded to risk they failed to 
appropriately modify network engagement as the decision continued, leading ADP 
to assume similar network engagement regardless of risk prospects. This may 
reflect disorganized network switching and a facile response strategy uniformly 
adopted by ADP across risk conditions. We propose that aberrant salience network 
(SN) engagement in ADP might contribute to ineffective network switching and 
that the role of the SN in risky decisions warrants further investigation.

DOI: 10.3389/fnhum.2016.00142
PMCID: PMC4814760
PMID: 27064561