1. Curr Opin Hematol. 2016 Jul;23(4):331-8. doi: 10.1097/MOH.0000000000000265.

Heterogeneity of the bone marrow niche.

Yu VW(1), Scadden DT.

Author information:
(1)aCenter for Regenerative Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston 
bHarvard Stem Cell Institute cDepartment of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology, 
Harvard University dNovartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The bone marrow niche is increasingly recognized as 
heterogeneous with specific subtypes of mesenchymal niche cells governing the 
development or homeostasis of selective parenchymal hematopoietic subsets. The 
present review outlines recent efforts in dissecting these microniches regulated 
by unique cell pairings within the bone marrow and provides an overview of how 
the bone marrow orchestrates multiple facets of hematopoiesis.
RECENT FINDINGS: Recent advancement in technologies has significantly improved 
our understanding of the cellular and molecular constituents that contribute to 
regulation of hematopoiesis and to maintenance of the hematopoietic stem cells 
(HSCs). Transgenic mouse models that enable endogenous cell deletion or lineage 
tracing, coupled with advanced intravital microscopy has identified several 
mesenchymal cell types, including the osteolineage cells, megakaryocytes, 
macrophages, perivascular cells, and Schwann cells, to be indispensible 
regulators of hematopoiesis. These niche cells, when perturbed, each caused very 
specific hematopoietic consequences including impairment in B-cell maturation, T 
lineage development, erythropoiesis, and impact different aspects of HSC 
behavior such as quiescence, mobilization, and response to acute stress signals.
SUMMARY: The emerging concept is that the bone marrow environment is composed of 
multiple microniches, each consisting of unique pairing of distinct supportive 
stromal cells with distinct hematopoietic subtypes to regulate a particular 
branch of hematopoietic cell process. The bone marrow can be viewed as a carrier 
with subcompartments tailored to support different hematopoietic activities.

DOI: 10.1097/MOH.0000000000000265
PMCID: PMC6819995
PMID: 27177311 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest The authors declare no 
relevant conflicts of interest.