1. Oncogenesis. 2016 May 30;5(5):e228. doi: 10.1038/oncsis.2016.36.

Regulation of H-Ras-driven MAPK signaling, transformation and tumorigenesis, but 
not PI3K signaling and tumor progression, by plasma membrane microdomains.

Michael JV(1), Wurtzel JG(1), Goldfinger LE(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, The Sol Sherry Thrombosis Research 
Center, Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)Cancer Biology Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

In this study, we assessed the contributions of plasma membrane (PM) microdomain 
targeting to the functions of H-Ras and R-Ras. These paralogs have identical 
effector-binding regions, but variant C-terminal targeting domains (tDs) which 
are responsible for lateral microdomain distribution: activated H-Ras targets to 
lipid ordered/disordered (Lo/Ld) domain borders, and R-Ras to Lo domains 
(rafts). We hypothesized that PM distribution regulates Ras-effector 
interactions and downstream signaling. We used tD swap mutants, and assessed 
effects on signal transduction, cell proliferation, transformation and 
tumorigenesis. R-Ras harboring the H-Ras tD (R-Ras-tH) interacted with Raf, and 
induced Raf and ERK phosphorylation similar to H-Ras. R-Ras-tH stimulated 
proliferation and transformation in vitro, and these effects were blocked by 
both MEK and PI3K inhibition. Conversely, the R-Ras tD suppressed H-Ras-mediated 
Raf activation and ERK phosphorylation, proliferation and transformation. Thus, 
Ras access to Raf at the PM is sufficient for MAPK activation and is a principal 
component of Ras mitogenesis and transformation. Fusion of the R-Ras extended 
N-terminal domain to H-Ras had no effect on proliferation, but inhibited 
transformation and tumor progression, indicating that the R-Ras N-terminus also 
contributes negative regulation to these Ras functions. PI3K activation was tD 
independent; however, H-Ras was a stronger activator of PI3K than R-Ras, with 
either tD. PI3K inhibition nearly ablated transformation by R-Ras-tH, H-Ras and 
H-Ras-tR, whereas MEK inhibition had a modest effect on Ras-tH-driven 
transformation but no effect on H-Ras-tR transformation. R-Ras-tH supported 
tumor initiation, but not tumor progression. While H-Ras-tR-induced 
transformation was reduced relative to H-Ras, tumor progression was robust and 
similar to H-Ras. H-Ras tumor growth was moderately suppressed by MEK 
inhibition, which had no effect on H-Ras-tR tumor growth. In contrast, PI3K 
inhibition markedly suppressed tumor growth by H-Ras and H-Ras-tR, indicating 
that sustained PI3K signaling is a critical pathway for H-Ras-driven tumor 
progression, independent of microdomains.

DOI: 10.1038/oncsis.2016.36
PMCID: PMC4945753
PMID: 27239960