1. J Biomed Nanotechnol. 2016 Jun;12(6):1303-11. doi: 10.1166/jbn.2016.2242.

Polyanhydride Nanovaccines Induce Germinal Center B Cell Formation and Sustained 
Serum Antibody Responses.

Vela Ramirez JE, Tygrett LT, Hao J, Habte HH, Cho MW, Greenspan NS, Waldschmidt 
TJ, Narasimhan B.

Biodegradable polymeric nanoparticle-based subunit vaccines have shown promising 
characteristics by enhancing antigen presentation and inducing protective immune 
responses when compared with soluble protein. Specifically, polyanhydride 
nanoparticle-based vaccines (i.e., nanovaccines) have been shown to successfully 
encapsulate and release antigens, activate B and T cells, and induce both 
antibody- and cell-mediated immunity towards a variety of immunogens. One of the 
characteristics of strong thymus-dependent antibody responses is the formation 
of germinal centers (GC) and the generation of GC B cells, which is part of the 
T helper cell driven cellular response. In order to further understand the role 
of nanovaccines in the induction of antigen-specific immune responses, their 
ability to induce germinal center B cell formation and isotype switching and the 
effects thereof on serum antibody responses were investigated in these studies. 
Polyanhydride nanovaccines based on 1,6-bis(p-carboxyphenoxy)hexane and 
1,8-bis(p-carboxyphenoxy)-3,6-dioxaoctane were used to subcutaneously administer 
a viral antigen. GC B cell formation and serum antibody responses induced by the 
nanovaccines were compared to that induced by alum-based vaccine formulations. 
It was demonstrated that a single dose of polyanhydride nanovaccines resulted in 
the formation of robust GCs and serum antibody in comparison to that induced by 
the alum-based formulation. This was attributed to the sustained release of 
antigen provided by the nanovaccines. When administered in a multiple dose 
regimen, the highest post-immunization titer and GC B cell number was enhanced, 
and the immune response induced by the nanovaccines was further sustained. These 
studies provide foundational information on the mechanism of action of 
polyanhydride nanovaccines.

DOI: 10.1166/jbn.2016.2242
PMCID: PMC5438750
PMID: 27319223 [Indexed for MEDLINE]