1. PLoS One. 2016 Jun 17;11(6):e0157427. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0157427. 
eCollection 2016.

Molecular Properties of Guar Gum and Pectin Modify Cecal Bile Acids, Microbiota, 
and Plasma Lipopolysaccharide-Binding Protein in Rats.

Ghaffarzadegan T(1), Marungruang N(1), Fåk F(1), Nyman M(1).

Author information:
(1)Food for Health Science Centre, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.

Bile acids (BAs) act as signaling molecules in various physiological processes, 
and are related to colonic microbiota composition as well as to different types 
of dietary fat and fiber. This study investigated whether guar gum and 
pectin-two fibers with distinct functional characteristics-affect BA profiles, 
microbiota composition, and gut metabolites in rats. Low- (LM) or 
high-methoxylated (HM) pectin, and low-, medium-, or high-molecular-weight (MW) 
guar gum were administered to rats that were fed either low- or high-fat diets. 
Cecal BAs, short-chain fatty acids (SCFA) and microbiota composition, and plasma 
lipopolysaccharide-binding protein (LBP) levels were analyzed, by using novel 
methodologies based on gas chromatography (BAs and SCFAs) and 16S rRNA gene 
sequencing on the Illumina MiSeq platform. Strong correlations were observed 
between cecal BA and SCFA levels, microbiota composition, and portal plasma LBP 
levels in rats on a high-fat diet. Notably, guar gum consumption with medium-MW 
increased the cecal amounts of cholic-, chenodeoxycholic-, and ursodeoxycholic 
acids as well as α-, β-, and ω-muricholic acids to a greater extent than other 
types of guar gum or the fiber-free control diet. In contrast, the amounts of 
cecal deoxycholic- and hyodeoxycholic acid were reduced with all types of guar 
gum independent of chain length. Differences in BA composition between pectin 
groups were less obvious, but cecal levels of α- and ω-muricholic acids were 
higher in rats fed LM as compared to HM pectin or the control diet. The 
inflammatory marker LBP was downregulated in rats fed medium-MW guar gum and HM 
pectin; these two fibers decreased the cecal abundance of Oscillospira and an 
unclassified genus in Ruminococcaceae, and increased that of an unclassified 
family in RF32. These results indicate that the molecular properties of guar gum 
and pectin are important for their ability to modulate cecal BA formation, gut 
microbiota composition, and high-fat diet induced inflammation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0157427
PMCID: PMC4912110
PMID: 27315087 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.