1. Cancer Res. 2016 Aug 1;76(15):4504-15. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-0396.
Epub  2016 Jun 16.

Molecular Landscape of Acquired Resistance to Targeted Therapy Combinations in 
BRAF-Mutant Colorectal Cancer.

Oddo D(1), Sennott EM(2), Barault L(1), Valtorta E(3), Arena S(1), Cassingena 
A(3), Filiciotto G(1), Marzolla G(1), Elez E(4), van Geel RM(5), Bartolini A(6), 
Crisafulli G(6), Boscaro V(7), Godfrey JT(2), Buscarino M(6), Cancelliere C(6), 
Linnebacher M(8), Corti G(6), Truini M(3), Siravegna G(9), Grasselli J(4), 
Gallicchio M(7), Bernards R(5), Schellens JH(5), Tabernero J(4), Engelman 
JA(10), Sartore-Bianchi A(3), Bardelli A(1), Siena S(11), Corcoran RB(10), Di 
Nicolantonio F(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, University of Torino, Candiolo, Torino, Italy. 
Candiolo Cancer Institute-FPO, IRCCS, Candiolo, Torino, Italy.
(2)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Boston, Massachusetts.
(3)Niguarda Cancer Center, Grande Ospedale Metropolitano Niguarda, Milan, Italy.
(4)Vall d'Hebron University Hospital and Institute of Oncology (VHIO), 
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(5)The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(6)Candiolo Cancer Institute-FPO, IRCCS, Candiolo, Torino, Italy.
(7)Department of Drug Science and Technology, University of Turin, Turin, Italy.
(8)Department of General Surgery, Division of Molecular Oncology and 
Immunotherapy, University of Rostock, Rostock, Germany.
(9)Department of Oncology, University of Torino, Candiolo, Torino, Italy. 
Candiolo Cancer Institute-FPO, IRCCS, Candiolo, Torino, Italy. FIRC Institute of 
Molecular Oncology (IFOM), Milan, Italy.
(10)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Boston, Massachusetts. 
Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(11)Niguarda Cancer Center, Grande Ospedale Metropolitano Niguarda, Milan, 
Italy. Department of Oncology, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy.
(12)Department of Oncology, University of Torino, Candiolo, Torino, Italy. 
Candiolo Cancer Institute-FPO, IRCCS, Candiolo, Torino, Italy. 
federica.dinicolantonio@unito.it.

Although recent clinical trials of BRAF inhibitor combinations have demonstrated 
improved efficacy in BRAF-mutant colorectal cancer, emergence of acquired 
resistance limits clinical benefit. Here, we undertook a comprehensive effort to 
define mechanisms underlying drug resistance with the goal of guiding 
development of therapeutic strategies to overcome this limitation. We generated 
a broad panel of BRAF-mutant resistant cell line models across seven different 
clinically relevant drug combinations. Combinatorial drug treatments were able 
to abrogate ERK1/2 phosphorylation in parental-sensitive cells, but not in their 
resistant counterparts, indicating that resistant cells escaped drug treatments 
through one or more mechanisms leading to biochemical reactivation of the MAPK 
signaling pathway. Genotyping of resistant cells identified gene amplification 
of EGFR, KRAS, and mutant BRAF, as well as acquired mutations in KRAS, EGFR, and 
MAP2K1 These mechanisms were clinically relevant, as we identified emergence of 
a KRAS G12C mutation and increase of mutant BRAF V600E allele frequency in the 
circulating tumor DNA of a patient at relapse from combined treatment with BRAF 
and MEK inhibitors. To identify therapeutic combinations capable of overcoming 
drug resistance, we performed a systematic assessment of candidate therapies 
across the panel of resistant cell lines. Independent of the molecular 
alteration acquired upon drug pressure, most resistant cells retained 
sensitivity to vertical MAPK pathway suppression when combinations of ERK, BRAF, 
and EGFR inhibitors were applied. These therapeutic combinations represent 
promising strategies for future clinical trials in BRAF-mutant colorectal 
cancer. Cancer Res; 76(15); 4504-15. ©2016 AACR.

©2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-0396
PMCID: PMC4970882
PMID: 27312529 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: The other authors declare no 
conflict of interest. Conflicts of interest: R.B.C. is a consultant/advisory 
board member for Genentech, GlaxoSmithKline, Merrimack Pharmaceuticals, and 
Avidity Nanomedicines. J.A.E. is a consultant for Cell Signaling, Novartis, 
Genentech, Roche, GSK, Amgen, Merck, Astra Zeneca and received research funding 
from Amgen, AstraZeneca, Novartis. J.T. has had a consultant role for Amgen, 
Array Biopharmaceuticals, Boehringer Ingelheim, Celgene, Chugai, Imclone, Lilly, 
Merck, Merck Serono, Millennium, Novartis, Roche, Sanofi and Taiho. SS is a 
member of advisory boards for Amgen, Bayer, Eli Lilly, Roche, Sanofi.