1. Nat Commun. 2016 Jul 11;7:12178. doi: 10.1038/ncomms12178.

Monitoring G protein-coupled receptor and β-arrestin trafficking in live cells 
using enhanced bystander BRET.

Namkung Y(1), Le Gouill C(2), Lukashova V(2), Kobayashi H(2), Hogue M(2), Khoury 
E(1), Song M(1), Bouvier M(2), Laporte SA(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Research Institute of the McGill University Health 
Center (RI-MUHC), McGill University, Montréal, Québec, Canada H4A 3J1.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Institute for Research in Immunology and 
Cancer (IRIC), Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada H3C 1J4.
(3)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, McGill University, Montréal, 
Québec, Canada H3G 1Y6.
(4)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, McGill University, Montréal, Québec, 
Canada H3A 0C7.

Endocytosis and intracellular trafficking of receptors are pivotal to maintain 
physiological functions and drug action; however, robust quantitative approaches 
are lacking to study such processes in live cells. Here we present new 
bioluminescence resonance energy transfer (BRET) sensors to quantitatively 
monitor G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) and β-arrestin trafficking. These 
sensors are based on bystander BRET and use the naturally interacting 
chromophores luciferase (RLuc) and green fluorescent protein (rGFP) from 
Renilla. The versatility and robustness of this approach are exemplified by 
anchoring rGFP at the plasma membrane or in endosomes to generate high dynamic 
spectrometric BRET signals on ligand-promoted recruitment or sequestration of 
RLuc-tagged proteins to, or from, specific cell compartments, as well as 
sensitive subcellular BRET imaging for protein translocation visualization. 
These sensors are scalable to high-throughput formats and allow quantitative 
pharmacological studies of GPCR trafficking in real time, in live cells, 
revealing ligand-dependent biased trafficking of receptor/β-arrestin complexes.

DOI: 10.1038/ncomms12178
PMCID: PMC4942582
PMID: 27397672 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: M.B. is the Chief Executive Officer of a 
not-for-profit company (IRICoR), whose mission is to promote the commercial 
transfer of technologies developed by investigators of the Institute for 
Research in Immunology and Cancer (IRIC) and collaborators. S.A.L and M.B. 
belong to an academic consortium ‘Groupe Biosenseurs' that develops BRET-based 
sensors for studying receptor function. A patent has been filed for the 
biosensors used herein (62/052,738 19 September 2014, inventors: Y.N., M.B., 
C.L., V.L., M.H. and S.A.L.), and the use of the technology has been licensed to 
Domain Therapeutics for commercialization. For academic research, these 
biosensors can be obtained and used without limitations with a standard academic 
materials transfer agreement (MTA). The other authors declare that they have no 
competing interests.