1. Cell Discov. 2016 Apr 26;2:16005. doi: 10.1038/celldisc.2016.5. eCollection 
2016.

Hypertension-associated C825T polymorphism impairs the function of Gβ3 to target 
GRK2 ubiquitination.

Zha Z(1), Han XR(2), Smith MD(3), Lei QY(4), Guan KL(5), Xiong Y(6).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Ministry of Education, and Department 
of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Fudan University Shanghai Medical 
College, Shanghai, China; Molecular and Cell Biology Lab, Institutes of 
Biomedical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, China; School of Life Sciences, 
Fudan University, Shanghai, China; Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, 
Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel 
Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(2)Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Ministry of Education, and Department 
of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Fudan University Shanghai Medical 
College, Shanghai, China; Molecular and Cell Biology Lab, Institutes of 
Biomedical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, China; School of Life Sciences, 
Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill , Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(4)Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Ministry of Education, and Department 
of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Fudan University Shanghai Medical College 
, Shanghai, China.
(5)Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Ministry of Education, and Department 
of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Fudan University Shanghai Medical 
College, Shanghai, China; Molecular and Cell Biology Lab, Institutes of 
Biomedical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, China; Department of 
Pharmacology and Moores Cancer Center, University of California at San Diego, La 
Jolla, CA, USA.
(6)Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Ministry of Education, and Department 
of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Fudan University Shanghai Medical 
College, Shanghai, China; Molecular and Cell Biology Lab, Institutes of 
Biomedical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, China; Department of 
Biochemistry and Biophysics, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University 
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.

Population-based and case-control studies in different ethnicities have linked a 
polymorphism, C825T, in exon 10 of GNB3 gene to hypertension and several 
additional diseases. The 825T allele is associated with alternative splicing and 
results in a shortened Gβ3 protein, referred to as Gβ3s, which loses 41 amino 
acids encompassing one WD40 repeat domain. The mechanism of how Gβ3 C825T 
polymorphism is associated with hypertension has remained unclear, but an 
impairment of its canonical function in G-protein-coupled receptor signaling has 
been ruled out. Here, we report that Gβ3, like other Gβ proteins, binds to DDB1 
and assembles a DDB1-CUL4A-ROC1 E3 ubiquitin ligase (CRL4A(Gβ3)) to target GRK2 
ubiquitination. The loss of the 41 amino-acid residues disrupts the Gβ3-DDB1 
binding and impairs the function of Gβ3s to ubiquitinate GRK2. GRK2 
ubiquitination levels were decreased and protein levels were accumulated in the 
blood samples of Gβ3 825T allele carriers. Deletion of Cul4a in mice resulted in 
systolic pressure increased and weakened heart function in male mice that can be 
partially rescued by the deletion of one Grk2 allele. These results reveal a 
mechanism explaining the link between Gβ3 C825T polymorphism and hypertension.

DOI: 10.1038/celldisc.2016.5
PMCID: PMC4849471
PMID: 27462452