1. IEEE Int Symp Parallel Distrib Process Workshops Phd Forum. 2016 
May;2016:89-100. doi: 10.1109/IPDPSW.2016.130.

Evaluation of Emerging Energy-Efficient Heterogeneous Computing Platforms for 
Biomolecular and Cellular Simulation Workloads.

Stone JE(1), Hallock MJ(2), Phillips JC(1), Peterson JR(2), Luthey-Schulten 
Z(2), Schulten K(3).

Author information:
(1)Beckman Institute, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, 
61801, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, 
IL, 61801, USA.
(3)Department of Physics, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, 
IL, 61801, USA.

Many of the continuing scientific advances achieved through computational 
biology are predicated on the availability of ongoing increases in computational 
power required for detailed simulation and analysis of cellular processes on 
biologically-relevant timescales. A critical challenge facing the development of 
future exascale supercomputer systems is the development of new computing 
hardware and associated scientific applications that dramatically improve upon 
the energy efficiency of existing solutions, while providing increased 
simulation, analysis, and visualization performance. Mobile computing platforms 
have recently become powerful enough to support interactive molecular 
visualization tasks that were previously only possible on laptops and 
workstations, creating future opportunities for their convenient use for 
meetings, remote collaboration, and as head mounted displays for immersive 
stereoscopic viewing. We describe early experiences adapting several 
biomolecular simulation and analysis applications for emerging heterogeneous 
computing platforms that combine power-efficient system-on-chip multi-core CPUs 
with high-performance massively parallel GPUs. We present low-cost power 
monitoring instrumentation that provides sufficient temporal resolution to 
evaluate the power consumption of individual CPU algorithms and GPU kernels. We 
compare the performance and energy efficiency of scientific applications running 
on emerging platforms with results obtained on traditional platforms, identify 
hardware and algorithmic performance bottlenecks that affect the usability of 
these platforms, and describe avenues for improving both the hardware and 
applications in pursuit of the needs of molecular modeling tasks on mobile 
devices and future exascale computers.

DOI: 10.1109/IPDPSW.2016.130
PMCID: PMC4978513
PMID: 27516922