1. Cold Spring Harb Mol Case Stud. 2016 Jul;2(4):a000893. doi:
10.1101/mcs.a000893.

Distinctly perturbed metabolic networks underlie differential tumor tissue 
damages induced by immune modulator β-glucan in a two-case ex vivo 
non-small-cell lung cancer study.

Fan TW(1), Warmoes MO(1), Sun Q(1), Song H(1), Turchan-Cholewo J(1), Martin 
JT(2), Mahan A(2), Higashi RM(1), Lane AN(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Environmental and Systems Biochemistry, Department of Toxicology 
and Cancer Biology and Markey Cancer Center, University of Kentucky, Lexington, 
Kentucky 40536, USA;
(2)Department of Surgery and Markey Cancer Center, University of Kentucky, 
Lexington, Kentucky 40536, USA.

Cancer and stromal cell metabolism is important for understanding tumor 
development, which highly depends on the tumor microenvironment (TME). Cell or 
animal models cannot recapitulate the human TME. We have developed an ex vivo 
paired cancerous (CA) and noncancerous (NC) human lung tissue approach to 
explore cancer and stromal cell metabolism in the native human TME. This 
approach enabled full control of experimental parameters and acquisition of 
individual patient's target tissue response to therapeutic agents while 
eliminating interferences from genetic and physiological variations. In this 
two-case study of non-small-cell lung cancer, we performed stable 
isotope-resolved metabolomic (SIRM) experiments on paired CA and NC lung tissues 
treated with a macrophage activator β-glucan and (13)C6-glucose, followed by ion 
chromatography-Fourier transform mass spectrometry (IC-FTMS) and nuclear 
magnetic resonance (NMR) analyses of (13)C-labeling patterns of metabolites. We 
demonstrated that CA lung tissue slices were metabolically more active than 
their NC counterparts, which recapitulated the metabolic reprogramming in CA 
lung tissues observed in vivo. We showed β-glucan-enhanced glycolysis, Krebs 
cycle, pentose phosphate pathway, antioxidant production, and itaconate buildup 
in patient UK021 with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and an 
abundance of tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) but not in UK049 with no COPD 
and much less macrophage infiltration. This metabolic response of UK021 tissues 
was accompanied by reduced mitotic index, increased necrosis, and enhaced 
inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) expression. We surmise that the 
reprogrammed networks could reflect β-glucan M1 polarization of human 
macrophages. This case study presents a unique opportunity for investigating 
metabolic responses of human macrophages to immune modulators in their native 
microenvironment on an individual patient basis.

DOI: 10.1101/mcs.a000893
PMCID: PMC4990809
PMID: 27551682