1. Onco Targets Ther. 2016 Aug 24;9:5287-95. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S105976.
eCollection  2016.

Noninvasive monitoring of the genetic evolution of EGFR-mutant non-small-cell 
lung cancer by analyzing circulating tumor DNA during combination chemotherapy 
with gefitinib and pemetrexed or S-1.

Nakahara Y(1), Takagi Y(2), Hosomi Y(3), Kagei A(4), Yamamoto T(4), Sawada T(5), 
Yomota M(3), Okuma Y(3), Mikura S(6), Okamura T(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Thoracic Oncology and Respiratory Medicine, Tokyo Metropolitan 
Cancer and Infectious Diseases Center Komagome Hospital, Tokyo; Department of 
Respiratory Medicine, Kitasato University School of Medicine, Sagamihara.
(2)Department of Thoracic Oncology and Respiratory Medicine, Tokyo Metropolitan 
Cancer and Infectious Diseases Center Komagome Hospital, Tokyo; Oncology 
Scientific Affairs, Merck Sharp & Dohme Corp.
(3)Department of Thoracic Oncology and Respiratory Medicine, Tokyo Metropolitan 
Cancer and Infectious Diseases Center Komagome Hospital, Tokyo.
(4)GeneticLab Co., Ltd., Sapporo.
(5)Department of Medical Oncology, Tokyo Metropolitan Cancer and Infectious 
Diseases Center Komagome Hospital, Tokyo.
(6)Department of Thoracic Oncology and Respiratory Medicine, Tokyo Metropolitan 
Cancer and Infectious Diseases Center Komagome Hospital, Tokyo; Department of 
Respiratory Medicine, Fujieda Municipal General Hospital, Fujieda, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Repetitive genotyping is useful to assess the genetic evolution of 
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) during treatment, but the need for sampling 
by biopsy is a major obstacle. Digital polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is a 
promising procedure for the detection of mutant alleles in plasma of cancer 
patients.
METHODS: This prospective study enrolled patients with NSCLC and known epidermal 
growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations and who had experienced disease 
progression during ongoing EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) therapy. 
Eligible patients received daily gefitinib and either pemetrexed or S-1 every 3 
weeks until disease progression or the development of unacceptable toxicity. 
Peripheral blood was collected before and after the combination therapy for 
digital PCR and hepatocyte growth factor measurement.
RESULTS: From May 2012 to January 2014, nine patients with a median age of 67 
(range 52-80) years were enrolled. Patterns of disease progression during 
adjacent EGFR-TKI therapy were acquired resistance, observed in seven patients, 
and primary resistance, observed in two patients. Known EGFR mutations were 
detected in plasma samples of six (67%) patients at study enrollment. Of these, 
T790M mutation was concurrently detected in three (50%) patients. Four patients 
underwent gefitinib plus pemetrexed therapy, and five patients underwent 
gefitinib and S-1 therapy. The median number of cycles delivered was five, and 
the median progression-free survival was 5.7 months. Efficacy outcomes did not 
differ between treatments. After the combination therapy, plasma T790M status 
changed to positive in two patients. Hepatocyte growth factor level did not 
significantly change through the combination therapy.
CONCLUSION: The usefulness of monitoring the genetic evolution of EGFR-driven 
tumors using noninvasive procedures was demonstrated. Since continuation of 
EGFR-TKI therapy with cytotoxic agents has an acceptable tolerability and a 
possibility of inducing T790M mutation, the combination therapy may be useful 
for EGFR-mutant NSCLC resistant to EGFR-TKI therapy without T790M mutation.

DOI: 10.2147/OTT.S105976
PMCID: PMC5004997
PMID: 27601920