1. Open Forum Infect Dis. 2016 Jun 16;3(3):ofw125. doi: 10.1093/ofid/ofw125. 
eCollection 2016 Sep.

Deciphering the Effects of Injectable Pre-exposure Prophylaxis for Combination 
Human Immunodeficiency Virus Prevention.

Glaubius RL(1), Parikh UM(2), Hood G(3), Penrose KJ(2), Bendavid E(4), Mellors 
JW(2), Abbas UL(5).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Infectious Disease and Quantitative Health Sciences , 
Cleveland Clinic , Ohio.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases , School of Medicine, University of 
Pittsburgh.
(3)Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center , Carnegie Mellon University , Pennsylvania.
(4)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine , Stanford University 
, California.
(5)Departments of Infectious Disease and Quantitative Health Sciences, Cleveland 
Clinic, Ohio; Section of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, and 
Department of Molecular Virology and Microbiology, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas.

Background.  A long-acting injectable formulation of rilpivirine (RPV), under 
investigation as antiretroviral pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP), may facilitate 
PrEP adherence. In contrast, cross-resistance between RPV and nonnucleoside 
reverse-transcriptase inhibitors comprising first-line antiretroviral therapy 
(ART) could promote human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) drug resistance and 
reduce PrEP's effectiveness. Methods.  We use novel mathematical modeling of 
different RPV PrEP scale-up strategies in KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa, to 
investigate their effects on HIV prevention and drug resistance, compared with a 
reference scenario without PrEP. Results.  Pre-exposure prophylaxis scale-up 
modestly increases the proportion of prevalent drug-resistant infections, from 
33% to ≤37%. The change in the number of prevalent drug-resistant infections 
depends on the interplay between PrEP factors (coverage, efficacy, delivery 
reliability, and scale-up strategy) and the level of cross-resistance between 
PrEP and ART. An optimistic scenario of 70% effective RPV PrEP (90% efficacious 
and 80% reliable delivery), among women aged 20-29 years, prevents 17% of 
cumulative infections over 10 years while decreasing prevalent resistance; 
however, prevention decreases and resistance increases with more conservative 
assumptions. Uncertainty analysis assuming 40%-70% cross-resistance prevalence 
predicts an increase in prevalent resistance unless PrEP's effectiveness exceeds 
90%. Conclusions.  Prioritized scale-up of injectable PrEP among women in 
KwaZulu-Natal could reduce HIV infections, but suboptimal effectiveness could 
promote the spread of drug resistance.

DOI: 10.1093/ofid/ofw125
PMCID: PMC5047428
PMID: 27703992