1. Front Immunol. 2016 Sep 30;7:391. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2016.00391. eCollection 
2016.

Recent Progress toward Engineering HIV-1-Specific Neutralizing Monoclonal 
Antibodies.

Sun M(1), Li Y(2), Zheng H(1), Shao Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Biology, Peking Union Medical College, Chinese Academy 
of Medical Sciences , Kunming , China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology, College of Life Sciences, 
Nankai University , Tianjin , China.
(3)State Key Laboratory for Infectious Disease Prevention and Control, National 
Center for AIDS/STD Control and Prevention, Chinese Center for Disease Control 
and Prevention, Beijing, China; Collaborative Innovation Center for Diagnosis 
and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, Zhejiang University, China; School of 
Medicine, Nankai University, Tianjin, China.

The recent discoveries of broadly potent neutralizing human monoclonal 
antibodies represent a new generation of antiretrovirals for the treatment and 
prophylaxis. Antibodies are generally considered more effective and safer and 
have been proved to provide passive protection against mucosal challenge in 
humanized mice and macaques. Several neutralizing Abs could protect animals 
against HIV-1 but are not effective when used in an established infected model 
for therapy. In order to overcome the limitation of antiviral activities, 
multiple antibody-engineering technologies have been explored to generate "the 
better" neutralizing antibodies against HIV-1 since bNAbs attack viral entry by 
various mechanisms. Thus, a promising direction of research is to discover and 
exploit rational antibody combination or engineered antibodies (eAbs) as 
potential candidate therapeutics against HIV-1. It has been reported that 
inclusion of fusion-neutralizing antibodies in a set of bNAbs could improve 
their overall activities and neutralizing spectrum. Here, we review several 
routes for engineering bNAbs, such as design and generation of bispecific 
antibodies, specific glycosylation of antibodies to enhance antiviral activity, 
and variable region-specific modification guided by structure and computer, as 
well as reviewing antibody-delivery technologies by non-viral vector, viral 
vector, and human hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells transduced with a 
lentiviral construct. We also discuss the optimized antiviral activities and 
benefits of these strategy and potential mechanisms.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2016.00391
PMCID: PMC5043134
PMID: 27746780