1. mSphere. 2016 Oct 12;1(5):e00208-16. doi: 10.1128/mSphere.00208-16.
eCollection  2016 Sep-Oct.

The Spl Serine Proteases Modulate Staphylococcus aureus Protein Production and 
Virulence in a Rabbit Model of Pneumonia.

Paharik AE(1), Salgado-Pabon W(1), Meyerholz DK(2), White MJ(1), Schlievert 
PM(1), Horswill AR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa, 
Iowa City, Iowa, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa 
City, Iowa, USA.

The Spl proteases are a group of six serine proteases that are encoded on the 
νSaβ pathogenicity island and are unique to Staphylococcus aureus. Despite their 
interesting biochemistry, their biological substrates and functions in virulence 
have been difficult to elucidate. We found that an spl operon mutant of the 
community-associated methicillin-resistant S. aureus USA300 strain LAC induced 
localized lung damage in a rabbit model of pneumonia, characterized by 
bronchopneumonia observed histologically. Disease in the mutant-infected rabbits 
was restricted in distribution compared to that in wild-type USA300-infected 
rabbits. We also found that SplA is able to cleave the mucin 16 glycoprotein 
from the surface of the CalU-3 lung cell line, suggesting a possible mechanism 
for wild-type USA300 spreading pneumonia to both lungs. Investigation of the 
secreted and surface proteomes of wild-type USA300 and the spl mutant revealed 
multiple alterations in metabolic proteins and virulence factors. This study 
demonstrates that the Spls modulate S. aureus physiology and virulence, 
identifies a human target of SplA, and suggests potential S. aureus targets of 
the Spl proteases. IMPORTANCEStaphylococcus aureus is a versatile human pathogen 
that produces an array of virulence factors, including several proteases. Of 
these, six proteases called the Spls are the least characterized. Previous 
evidence suggests that the Spls are expressed during human infection; however, 
their function is unknown. Our study shows that the Spls are required for 
S. aureus to cause disseminated lung damage during pneumonia. Further, we 
present the first example of a human protein cut by an Spl protease. Although 
the Spls were predicted not to cut staphylococcal proteins, we also show that an 
spl mutant has altered abundance of both secreted and surface-associated 
proteins. This work provides novel insight into the function of Spls during 
infection and their potential ability to degrade both staphylococcal and human 
proteins.

DOI: 10.1128/mSphere.00208-16
PMCID: PMC5061998
PMID: 27747296