1. PLoS One. 2016 Nov 8;11(11):e0165655. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0165655. 
eCollection 2016.

3D Finite Element Electrical Model of Larval Zebrafish ECG Signals.

Crowcombe J(1), Dhillon SS(2)(3), Hurst RM(2)(3), Egginton S(4), Müller F(2), 
Sík A(3), Tarte E(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Engineering, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom.
(2)Institute of Cancer and Genomic Sciences, College of Medical and Dental 
Sciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom.
(3)Institute of Clinical Sciences, College of Medical and Dental Sciences, 
University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom.
(4)School of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of 
Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom.

Assessment of heart function in zebrafish larvae using electrocardiography (ECG) 
is a potentially useful tool in developing cardiac treatments and the assessment 
of drug therapies. In order to better understand how a measured ECG waveform is 
related to the structure of the heart, its position within the larva and the 
position of the electrodes, a 3D model of a 3 days post fertilisation (dpf) 
larval zebrafish was developed to simulate cardiac electrical activity and 
investigate the voltage distribution throughout the body. The geometry consisted 
of two main components; the zebrafish body was modelled as a homogeneous volume, 
while the heart was split into five distinct regions (sinoatrial region, atrial 
wall, atrioventricular band, ventricular wall and heart chambers). Similarly, 
the electrical model consisted of two parts with the body described by Laplace's 
equation and the heart using a bidomain ionic model based upon the 
Fitzhugh-Nagumo equations. Each region of the heart was differentiated by action 
potential (AP) parameters and activation wave conduction velocities, which were 
fitted and scaled based on previously published experimental results. ECG 
measurements in vivo at different electrode recording positions were then 
compared to the model results. The model was able to simulate action potentials, 
wave propagation and all the major features (P wave, R wave, T wave) of the ECG, 
as well as polarity of the peaks observed at each position. This model was based 
upon our current understanding of the structure of the normal zebrafish larval 
heart. Further development would enable us to incorporate features associated 
with the diseased heart and hence assist in the interpretation of larval 
zebrafish ECGs in these conditions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0165655
PMCID: PMC5100939
PMID: 27824910 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Ferenc Müller is academic 
editor at PLOS ONE. There are no patents, products in development or marketed 
products to declare. This does not alter the authors' adherence to all the PLOS 
ONE policies on sharing data and materials, as detailed online in the guide for 
authors.