1. Elife. 2016 Nov 22;5:e19662. doi: 10.7554/eLife.19662.

Actin is an evolutionarily-conserved damage-associated molecular pattern that 
signals tissue injury in Drosophila melanogaster.

Srinivasan N(1), Gordon O(1), Ahrens S(1), Franz A(2), Deddouche S(1), 
Chakravarty P(3), Phillips D(4), Yunus AA(5), Rosen MK(5), Valente RS(6), 
Teixeira L(6), Thompson B(7), Dionne MS(8), Wood W(9), Reis e Sousa C(1).

Author information:
(1)Immunobiology Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute, London, United 
Kingdom.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Biomedical Sciences, University Walk, University 
of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom.
(3)Bioinformatics, The Francis Crick Institute, London, United Kingdom.
(4)Genomics-Equipment Park, The Francis Crick Institute, London, United Kingdom.
(5)Department of Biophysics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, United States.
(6)Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal.
(7)Epithelial Biology Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute, London, United 
Kingdom.
(8)Department of Life Sciences and MRC Centre for Molecular Bacteriology and 
Infection, South Kensington Campus, Imperial College London, London, United 
Kingdom.
(9)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Biomedical Sciences, 
University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom.

Damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) are molecules released by dead 
cells that trigger sterile inflammation and, in vertebrates, adaptive immunity. 
Actin is a DAMP detected in mammals by the receptor, DNGR-1, expressed by 
dendritic cells (DCs). DNGR-1 is phosphorylated by Src-family kinases and 
recruits the tyrosine kinase Syk to promote DC cross-presentation of dead 
cell-associated antigens. Here we report that actin is also a DAMP in 
invertebrates that lack DCs and adaptive immunity. Administration of actin to 
Drosophila melanogaster triggers a response characterised by selective induction 
of STAT target genes in the fat body through the cytokine Upd3 and its 
JAK/STAT-coupled receptor, Domeless. Notably, this response requires signalling 
via Shark, the Drosophila orthologue of Syk, and Src42A, a Drosophila Src-family 
kinase, and is dependent on Nox activity. Thus, extracellular actin detection 
via a Src-family kinase-dependent cascade is an ancient means of detecting cell 
injury that precedes the evolution of adaptive immunity.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.19662
PMCID: PMC5138034
PMID: 27871362 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that no competing interests 
exist.