1. Sci Rep. 2016 Nov 29;6:37975. doi: 10.1038/srep37975.

Changes in the Membrane-Associated Proteins of Exosomes Released from Human 
Macrophages after Mycobacterium tuberculosis Infection.

Diaz G(1), Wolfe LM(2), Kruh-Garcia NA(1), Dobos KM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Pathology, Colorado State 
University, Fort Collins, Colorado, United States of America.
(2)Proteomics and Metabolomics Facility, Colorado State University, Fort 
Collins, Colorado, United States of America.

Tuberculosis (TB) is the deadliest infectious disease worldwide. One obstacle 
hindering the elimination of TB is our lack of understanding of host-pathogen 
interactions. Exosomes, naturally loaded with microbial molecules, are 
circulating markers of TB. Changes in the host protein composition of exosomes 
from Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb)-infected cells have not been described, 
can contribute to our understanding of the disease process, and serve as a 
direct source of biomarkers or as capture targets to enrich for exosomes 
containing microbial molecules. Here, the protein composition of exosomes from 
Mtb-infected and uninfected THP-1-derived macrophages was evaluated by 
tandem-mass-spectrometry and differences in protein abundances were assessed. 
Our results show that infection with Mtb leads to significant changes in the 
protein composition of exosomes. Specifically, 41 proteins were significantly 
more abundant in exosomes from Mtb-infected cells; 63% of these were predicted 
to be membrane associated. Thus, we used a novel biotinylation strategy to 
verify protein localization, and confirmed the localization of some of these 
proteins in the exosomal membrane. Our findings reveal another important 
scenario where Mtb could be influencing changes in host cells that unveil new 
features of the host-pathogen interaction and may also be exploited as a source 
of biomarkers for TB.

DOI: 10.1038/srep37975
PMCID: PMC5126699
PMID: 27897233 [Indexed for MEDLINE]