1. Sci Rep. 2016 Dec 1;6:37753. doi: 10.1038/srep37753.

Selection for predation, not female fecundity, explains sexual size dimorphism 
in the orchid mantises.

Svenson GJ(1)(2), Brannoch SK(1)(2), Rodrigues HM(1)(2), O'Hanlon JC(3), Wieland 
F(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Invertebrate Zoology, Cleveland Museum of Natural History, 
Cleveland, Ohio, United States of America.
(2)Department of Biology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio, 
United States of America.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia.
(4)Pfalzmuseum für Naturkunde - POLLICHIA-Museum, Bad Dürkheim, Germany.

Here we reconstruct the evolutionary shift towards floral simulation in orchid 
mantises and suggest female predatory selection as the likely driving force 
behind the development of extreme sexual size dimorphism. Through analysis of 
body size data and phylogenetic modelling of trait evolution, we recovered an 
ancestral shift towards sexual dimorphisms in both size and appearance in a 
lineage of flower-associated praying mantises. Sedentary female flower mantises 
dramatically increased in size prior to a transition from camouflaged, ambush 
predation to a floral simulation strategy, gaining access to, and visually 
attracting, a novel resource: large pollinating insects. Male flower mantises, 
however, remained small and mobile to facilitate mate-finding and reproductive 
success, consistent with ancestral male life strategy. Although moderate sexual 
size dimorphisms are common in many arthropod lineages, the predominant 
explanation is female size increase for increased fecundity. However, 
sex-dependent selective pressures acting outside of female fecundity have been 
suggested as mechanisms behind niche dimorphisms. Our hypothesised role of 
predatory selection acting on females to generate both extreme sexual size 
dimorphism coupled with niche dimorphism is novel among arthropods.

DOI: 10.1038/srep37753
PMCID: PMC5131372
PMID: 27905469 [Indexed for MEDLINE]