1. Lancet. 2017 Apr 29;389(10080):1756-1770. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)32126-2. 
Epub 2016 Dec 1.

Ulcerative colitis.

Ungaro R(1), Mehandru S(2), Allen PB(3), Peyrin-Biroulet L(4), Colombel JF(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, NY, USA.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, NY, USA; Immunology Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, 
New York, NY, USA.
(3)Division of Gastroenterology, Ulster Hospital, Belfast, Northern Ireland, UK.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology, University Hospital of Nancy-Brabois, 
Vandoeuvre-les-Nancy, France.
(5)Division of Gastroenterology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, NY, USA. Electronic address: jean-frederic.colombel@mssm.edu.

Ulcerative colitis is a chronic inflammatory disease affecting the colon, and 
its incidence is rising worldwide. The pathogenesis is multifactorial, involving 
genetic predisposition, epithelial barrier defects, dysregulated immune 
responses, and environmental factors. Patients with ulcerative colitis have 
mucosal inflammation starting in the rectum that can extend continuously to 
proximal segments of the colon. Ulcerative colitis usually presents with bloody 
diarrhoea and is diagnosed by colonoscopy and histological findings. The aim of 
management is to induce and then maintain remission, defined as resolution of 
symptoms and endoscopic healing. Treatments for ulcerative colitis include 
5-aminosalicylic acid drugs, steroids, and immunosuppressants. Some patients can 
require colectomy for medically refractory disease or to treat colonic 
neoplasia. The therapeutic armamentarium for ulcerative colitis is expanding, 
and the number of drugs with new targets will rapidly increase in coming years.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)32126-2
PMCID: PMC6487890
PMID: 27914657 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests RCU has no conflicts of 
interest. SM has served as a consultant for Pfizer Inc and receives research 
funding support from Takeda Pharmaceuticals. PBA has received Speaker fees for 
MSD, AbbVie, Allergen, Ferring, Warner Chilcott, and Napp. LP-B has received 
consulting fees from Merck, AbbVie, Janssen, Genentech, Mitsubishi, Ferring, 
Norgine, Tillots, Vifor, Therakos, Pharmacosmos, Pilège, Bristol-Myers Squibb, 
Union Chimique Belge (UCB) Pharmaceuticals, Hospira, Celltrion, Takeda, 
Biogaran, Boerhinger-Ingelheim, Lilly, Pfizer, HAC Pharma, Index 
Pharmaceuticals, Amgen, Sandoz, Forward Pharma GmbH, Celgene, Biogen, Lycera, 
and Samsung Bioepis, and lecture fees from Merck, AbbVie, Takeda, Janssen, 
Takeda, Ferring, Norgine, Tillots, Vifor, Therakos, Mitsubishi, and HAC Pharma. 
J-FC has served as consultant or advisory board member for AbbVie, Amgen, 
AstraZeneca, ABScience, Boehringer, Bristol-Meyers Squibb, Celgene, Celltrion, 
Danone, Enterome, Evidera, Ferring, Genentech, Giuliani SPA, Given Imaging, 
Janssen & Janssen, Immune Pharmaceuticals, Intestinal Biotech Development, Kyowa 
Kirin Pharma, Lilly, Medimmune, Merck Sharp Dohme, Merck & Co, Millennium 
Pharmaceuticals Inc, Navigant Consulting, Neovacs, Nestle Nutrition Sciences 
Partner, Nutrition Science Partners Ltd, Pfizer, Prometheus Laboratories, 
Protagonist Therapies, Receptos, Sanofi, Schering Plough Corporation, Second 
Genome, Shire, Takeda, Teva Pharmaceuticals, Tigenix, UCB, UEGW AbbVie Advisory 
Board, UEGW AbbVie Symposium, Vertex, and Dr August Wolff GmbH Co.