1. Stem Cell Res. 2016 Nov;17(3):634-636. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2016.11.003. Epub
2016  Nov 9.

Generation of human embryonic stem cells from abnormal blastocyst diagnosed with 
adrenoleukodystrophy.

Ouyang Q(1), Zhou X(2), Chen J(3), Du J(4), Lu G(5), Lin G(6), Sun Y(7).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Reproductive and Stem Cell Engineering, School of Basic Medical 
Science, Central South University, Changsha, China; National Engineering and 
Research Center of Human Stem Cell, Changsha, China; Key Laboratory of Stem 
Cells and Reproductive Engineering, Ministry of Health, Changsha, China.
(2)National Engineering and Research Center of Human Stem Cell, Changsha, China.
(3)Institute of Reproductive and Stem Cell Engineering, School of Basic Medical 
Science, Central South University, Changsha, China.
(4)Institute of Reproductive and Stem Cell Engineering, School of Basic Medical 
Science, Central South University, Changsha, China; Key Laboratory of Stem Cells 
and Reproductive Engineering, Ministry of Health, Changsha, China; Reproductive 
& Genetic Hospital of CITIC-Xiangya, Changsha, China.
(5)National Engineering and Research Center of Human Stem Cell, Changsha, China; 
Key Laboratory of Stem Cells and Reproductive Engineering, Ministry of Health, 
Changsha, China; Reproductive & Genetic Hospital of CITIC-Xiangya, Changsha, 
China.
(6)Institute of Reproductive and Stem Cell Engineering, School of Basic Medical 
Science, Central South University, Changsha, China; National Engineering and 
Research Center of Human Stem Cell, Changsha, China; Key Laboratory of Stem 
Cells and Reproductive Engineering, Ministry of Health, Changsha, China; 
Reproductive & Genetic Hospital of CITIC-Xiangya, Changsha, China.
(7)Institute of Reproductive and Stem Cell Engineering, School of Basic Medical 
Science, Central South University, Changsha, China; National Engineering and 
Research Center of Human Stem Cell, Changsha, China; Key Laboratory of Stem 
Cells and Reproductive Engineering, Ministry of Health, Changsha, China. 
Electronic address: sunyi66@csu.edu.cn.

Human embryonic stem cell (hESC) line chHES-480 was derived from abnormal 
blastocyst diagnosed with adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD) after preimplantation 
genetic diagnosis (PGD) treatment. DNA sequencing analysis confirmed that 
chHES-480 cell line carried a hemizygous missense mutation 
c.1825G>A(p.Glu609Lys) of ABCD1 gene. Characteristic tests proved that the 
chHES-480 cell line presented typical markers of pluripotency and had the 
capability to form the three germ layers both in vitro and in vivo.

Copyright © 2016 Michael Boutros, German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, 
Germany. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scr.2016.11.003
PMID: 27934597 [Indexed for MEDLINE]