1. Mol Syst Biol. 2016 Dec 15;12(12):894. doi: 10.15252/msb.20167137.

Distinct cellular states determine calcium signaling response.

Yao J(1), Pilko A(1), Wollman R(2).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Integrative Biology and 
Physiology, and Institute for Quantitative and Computational Biosciences (QCB), 
UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(2)Departments of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Integrative Biology and 
Physiology, and Institute for Quantitative and Computational Biosciences (QCB), 
UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, USA rwollman@ucsd.edu.

The heterogeneity in mammalian cells signaling response is largely a result of 
pre-existing cell-to-cell variability. It is unknown whether cell-to-cell 
variability rises from biochemical stochastic fluctuations or distinct cellular 
states. Here, we utilize calcium response to adenosine trisphosphate as a model 
for investigating the structure of heterogeneity within a population of cells 
and analyze whether distinct cellular response states coexist. We use a 
functional definition of cellular state that is based on a mechanistic dynamical 
systems model of calcium signaling. Using Bayesian parameter inference, we 
obtain high confidence parameter value distributions for several hundred cells, 
each fitted individually. Clustering the inferred parameter distributions 
revealed three major distinct cellular states within the population. The 
existence of distinct cellular states raises the possibility that the observed 
variability in response is a result of structured heterogeneity between cells. 
The inferred parameter distribution predicts, and experiments confirm that 
variability in IP3R response explains the majority of calcium heterogeneity. Our 
work shows how mechanistic models and single-cell parameter fitting can uncover 
hidden population structure and demonstrate the need for parameter inference at 
the single-cell level.

© 2016 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license.

DOI: 10.15252/msb.20167137
PMCID: PMC5199124
PMID: 27979909 [Indexed for MEDLINE]