1. Sci Rep. 2017 Jan 17;7:40453. doi: 10.1038/srep40453.

Folivory elicits a strong defense reaction in Catharanthus roseus: metabolomic 
and transcriptomic analyses reveal distinct local and systemic responses.

Dugé de Bernonville T(1), Carqueijeiro I(1), Lanoue A(1), Lafontaine F(1), 
Sánchez Bel P(2), Liesecke F(1), Musset K(3), Oudin A(1), Glévarec G(1), Pichon 
O(1), Besseau S(1), Clastre M(1), St-Pierre B(1), Flors V(2), Maury S(4), Huguet 
E(3), O'Connor SE(5), Courdavault V(1).

Author information:
(1)Université François-Rabelais de Tours, EA2106 "Biomolécules et 
Biotechnologies Végétales", Tours, France.
(2)Metabolic Integration and Cell Signaling Group, Plant Physiology Section, 
Department of CAMN, Universitat Jaume I, Spain.
(3)Institut de Recherche sur la Biologie de l'Insecte, UMR 7261, CNRS/Université 
François-Rabelais de Tours, Tours, France.
(4)Université d'Orléans, CoST, Laboratoire de Biologie des Ligneux et des 
Grandes Cultures (LBLGC), EA 1207, USC1328 INRA, Orléans, France.
(5)The John Innes Centre, Department of Biological Chemistry, Norwich NR4 7UH, 
United Kingdom.

Plants deploy distinct secondary metabolisms to cope with environment pressure 
and to face bio-aggressors notably through the production of biologically active 
alkaloids. This metabolism-type is particularly elaborated in Catharanthus 
roseus that synthesizes more than a hundred different monoterpene indole 
alkaloids (MIAs). While the characterization of their biosynthetic pathway now 
reaches completion, still little is known about the role of MIAs during biotic 
attacks. As a consequence, we developed a new plant/herbivore interaction system 
by challenging C. roseus leaves with Manduca sexta larvae. Transcriptomic and 
metabolic analyses demonstrated that C. roseus respond to folivory by both local 
and systemic processes relying on the activation of specific gene sets and 
biosynthesis of distinct MIAs following jasmonate production. While a huge local 
accumulation of strictosidine was monitored in attacked leaves that could repel 
caterpillars through its protein reticulation properties, newly developed leaves 
displayed an increased biosynthesis of the toxic strictosidine-derived MIAs, 
vindoline and catharanthine, produced by up-regulation of MIA biosynthetic 
genes. In this context, leaf consumption resulted in a rapid death of 
caterpillars that could be linked to the MIA dimerization observed in intestinal 
tracts. Furthermore, this study also highlights the overall transcriptomic 
control of the plant defense processes occurring during herbivory.

DOI: 10.1038/srep40453
PMCID: PMC5240345
PMID: 28094274 [Indexed for MEDLINE]