1. Microb Pathog. 2017 Mar;104:202-211. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2017.01.042. Epub 
2017 Jan 25.

Identification and initial characterisation of a protein involved in 
Campylobacter jejuni cell shape.

Esson D(1), Gupta S(1), Bailey D(2), Wigley P(3), Wedley A(3), Mather AE(4), 
Méric G(5), Mastroeni P(1), Sheppard SK(5), Thomson NR(6), Parkhill J(4), 
Maskell DJ(1), Christie G(2), Grant AJ(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Cambridge, Madingley Road, 
Cambridge, UK.
(2)Department of Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology, University of 
Cambridge, New Museums Site, Pembroke Street, Cambridge, UK.
(3)Department of Infection Biology, Institute for Infection and Global Health 
and School of Veterinary Science, University of Liverpool, Leahurst Campus, 
Neston, Cheshire, UK.
(4)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, 
Cambridge, UK.
(5)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Bath, Claverton Down, 
Bath, UK.
(6)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, 
Cambridge, UK; The London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, UK.
(7)Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Cambridge, Madingley Road, 
Cambridge, UK. Electronic address: ajg60@cam.ac.uk.

Campylobacter jejuni is the leading cause of bacterial food borne illness. While 
helical cell shape is considered important for C. jejuni pathogenesis, this 
bacterium is capable of adopting other morphologies. To better understand how 
helical-shaped C. jejuni maintain their shape and thus any associated 
colonisation, pathogenicity or other advantage, it is first important to 
identify the genes and proteins involved. So far, two peptidoglycan modifying 
enzymes Pgp1 and Pgp2 have been shown to be required for C. jejuni helical cell 
shape. We performed a visual screen of ∼2000 transposon mutants of C. jejuni for 
cell shape mutants. Whole genome sequence data of the mutants with altered cell 
shape, directed mutants, wild type stocks and isolated helical and rod-shaped 
'wild type' C. jejuni, identified a number of different mutations in pgp1 and 
pgp2, which result in a change in helical to rod bacterial cell shape. We also 
identified an isolate with a loss of curvature. In this study, we have 
identified the genomic change in this isolate, and found that targeted deletion 
of the gene with the change resulted in bacteria with loss of curvature. Helical 
cell shape was restored by supplying the gene in trans. We examined the effect 
of loss of the gene on bacterial motility, adhesion and invasion of tissue 
culture cells and chicken colonisation, as well as the effect on the muropeptide 
profile of the peptidoglycan sacculus. Our work identifies another factor 
involved in helical cell shape.

Copyright © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2017.01.042
PMCID: PMC5335918
PMID: 28131954 [Indexed for MEDLINE]