1. Cell Discov. 2017 Jan 24;3:16050. doi: 10.1038/celldisc.2016.50. eCollection 
2017.

RNA-binding protein SAMD4 regulates skeleton development through translational 
inhibition of Mig6 expression.

Niu N(1), Xiang JF(2), Yang Q(3), Wang L(1), Wei Z(4), Chen LL(2), Yang L(3), 
Zou W(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cell Biology, CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular 
Cell Sciences, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences , Shanghai, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, CAS Center for Excellence in 
Molecular Cell Sciences, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences , Shanghai, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Computational Biology, CAS-MPG Partner Institute for 
Computational Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences , Shanghai, China.
(4)Metabolic Bone Disease and Genetic Research Unit, Division of Osteoporosis 
and Bone Disease, Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University Affiliated Six People's Hospital , Shanghai, China.

Protein translation regulation has essential roles in inflammatory responses, 
cancer initiation and the pathogenesis of several neurodegenerative disorders. 
However, the role of the regulation of protein translation in mammalian skeleton 
development has been rarely elaborated. Here we report that the lack of the 
RNA-binding protein sterile alpha motif domain containing protein 4 (SAMD4) 
resulted in multiple developmental defects in mice, including delayed bone 
development and decreased osteogenesis. Samd4-deficient mesenchymal progenitors 
exhibit impaired osteoblast differentiation and function. Mechanism study 
demonstrates that SAMD4 binds the Mig6 mRNA and inhibits MIG6 protein synthesis. 
Consistent with this, Samd4-deficient cells have increased MIG6 protein level 
and knockdown of Mig6 rescues the impaired osteogenesis in Samd4-deficient 
cells. Furthermore, Samd4-deficient mice also display chondrocyte defects, which 
is consistent with the regulation of MIG6 protein level by SAMD4. These findings 
define SAMD4 as a previously unreported key regulator of osteoblastogenesis and 
bone development, implying that regulation of protein translation is an 
important mechanism governing skeletogenesis and that control of protein 
translation could have therapeutic potential in metabolic bone diseases, such as 
osteoporosis.

DOI: 10.1038/celldisc.2016.50
PMCID: PMC5259697
PMID: 28163927