1. Epilepsia. 2017 Apr;58(4):576-585. doi: 10.1111/epi.13703. Epub 2017 Feb 15.

Overexpression of pregnane X and glucocorticoid receptors and the regulation of 
cytochrome P450 in human epileptic brain endothelial cells.

Ghosh C(1)(2), Hossain M(1), Solanki J(1), Najm IM(3), Marchi N(4), Janigro 
D(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Cerebrovascular Research, Department of Biomedical Engineering, Lerner 
Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, U.S.A.
(2)Department of Molecular Medicine, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland 
Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, U.S.A.
(3)Epilepsy Center, Neurological Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, 
U.S.A.
(4)Department of Neuroscience, Institute of Functional Genomics, CNRS/INSERM, 
Montpellier, France.
(5)Flocel, Inc., Cleveland, Ohio, U.S.A.
(6)Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio, U.S.A.

OBJECTIVE: Recent evidence suggests a metabolic contribution of cytochrome P450 
enzymes (CYPs) to the drug-resistant phenotype in human epilepsy. However, the 
upstream molecular regulators of CYP in the epileptic brain remain understudied. 
We therefore investigated the expression and function of pregnane xenobiotic 
(PXR) and glucocorticoid (GR) nuclear receptors in endothelial cells established 
from post-epilepsy surgery brain samples.
METHODS: PXR/GR localization was evaluated by immunohistochemistry in specimens 
from subjects who underwent temporal lobe resections to relieve drug-resistant 
seizures. We used primary cultures of endothelial cells obtained from epileptic 
brain tissues (EPI-ECs; n = 8), commercially available human brain microvascular 
endothelial cells (HBMECs; n = 8), and human hepatocytes (n = 3). PXR/GR 
messenger RNA (mRNA) levels in brain ECs was initially determined by 
complementary DNA (cDNA) microarrays. The expression of PXR/GR proteins was 
quantified by Western blot. PXR and GR silencing was performed in EPI-ECs (n = 
4), and the impact on downstream CYP expression was determined.
RESULTS: PXR/GR expression was detected by immunofluorescence in ECs and neurons 
in the human temporal lobe samples analyzed. Elevated mRNA and protein levels of 
PXR and GR were found in EPI-ECs versus control HBMECs. Hepatocytes, used as a 
positive control, displayed the highest levels of PXR/GR expression. We 
confirmed expression of PXR/GR in cytoplasmic-nuclear subcellular fractions, 
with a significant increase of PXR/GR in EPI-ECs versus controls. CYP3A4, 
CYP2C9, and CYP2E1 were overexpressed in EPI-ECs versus control, whereas CYP2D6 
and CYP2C19 were downregulated or absent in EPI-ECs. GR silencing in EPI-ECs led 
to decreased CYP3A4, CYP2C9, and PXR expression. PXR silencing in EPI-ECs 
resulted in the specific downregulation of CYP3A4 expression.
SIGNIFICANCE: Our results indicate increased PXR and GR in primary ECs derived 
from human epileptic brains. PXR or GR may be responsible for a local drug brain 
metabolism sustained by abnormal CYP regulation.

© 2017 The Authors. Epilepsia published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of 
International League Against Epilepsy.

DOI: 10.1111/epi.13703
PMCID: PMC5386820
PMID: 28199000 [Indexed for MEDLINE]