1. Sci Rep. 2017 Feb 22;7:42385. doi: 10.1038/srep42385.

TRPV1 deletion impaired fracture healing and inhibited osteoclast and osteoblast 
differentiation.

He LH(1), Liu M(1), He Y(1), Xiao E(1), Zhao L(1), Zhang T(2), Yang HQ(3), Zhang 
Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Peking University School and 
Hospital of Stomatology; National Engineering Laboratory for Digital and 
Material Technology of Stomatology, Beijing Key Laboratory of digital 
Stomatology, Beijing, China.
(2)Center for Craniofacial Stem Cell Research and Regeneration, Department of 
Orthodontics, Peking University School and Hospital of Stomatology; National 
Engineering Laboratory for Digital and Material Technology of Stomatology, 
Beijing Key Laboratory of digital Stomatology, Beijing, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology, College of 
Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China.

Fracture healing, in which osteoclasts and osteoblasts play important roles, has 
drawn much clinical attention. Osteoclast deficiency or decreased osteoblast 
activity will impair fracture healing. TRPV1 is a member of the Ca2+ permeable 
cation channel subfamily, and pharmacological inhibition of TRPV1 prevents 
ovariectomy-induced bone loss, which makes TRPV1 a potential target for 
osteoporosis. However, whether long term TRPV1 inhibition or TRPV1 deletion will 
affect the fracture healing process is unclear. In this study, we found that the 
wild-type mice showed a well-remodeled fracture callus, whereas TRPV1 knockout 
mice still had an obvious fracture gap with unresorbed soft-callus 4 weeks 
post-fracture. The number of osteoclasts was reduced in the TRPV1 knockout 
fracture callus, and osteoclast formation and resorption activity were also 
impaired in vitro. TRPV1 deletion decreased the calcium oscillation frequency 
and peak cytoplasmic concentration in osteoclast precursors, subsequently 
reducing the expression and nuclear translocation of NFATc1 and downregulating 
DC-stamp, cathepsin K, and ATP6V. In addition, TRPV1 deletion caused reduced 
mRNA and protein expression of Runx2 and ALP in bone marrow stromal cells 
(BMSCs) and reduced calcium deposition in vitro. Our results suggest that TRPV1 
deletion impairs fracture healing, and inhibited osteoclastogenesis and 
osteogenesis.

DOI: 10.1038/srep42385
PMCID: PMC5320507
PMID: 28225019 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.