1. Brain Behav. 2016 Dec 24;7(2):e00596. doi: 10.1002/brb3.596. eCollection 2017 
Feb.

Cortical interactions during the resolution of information processing demands in 
autism spectrum disorders.

Denisova K(1), Zhao G(2), Wang Z(3), Goh S(3), Huo Y(3), Peterson BS(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry Center for Developmental Neuropsychiatry Columbia 
University College of Physicians and Surgeons New York NY USA; Division of 
Developmental Neuroscience New York State Psychiatric Institute New York NY USA; 
Sackler Institute for Developmental Psychobiology Columbia University College of 
Physicians and Surgeons New York NY USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry Center for Developmental Neuropsychiatry Columbia 
University College of Physicians and Surgeons New York NY USA; School of 
Information Science and Engineering Central South University Changsha China.
(3)Department of Psychiatry Center for Developmental Neuropsychiatry Columbia 
University College of Physicians and Surgeons New York NY USA.
(4)Children's Hospital Los Angeles Keck School of Medicine of the University of 
Southern California Los Angeles CA USA.

INTRODUCTION: Our flexible and adaptive interactions with the environment are 
guided by our individual representation of the physical world, estimated through 
sensation and evaluation of available information against prior knowledge. When 
linking sensory evidence with higher-level expectations for action, the central 
nervous system (CNS) in typically developing (TD) individuals relies in part on 
distributed and interacting cortical regions to communicate neuronal signals 
flexibly across the brain. Increasing evidence suggests that the balance between 
levels of signal and noise during information processing may be disrupted in 
individuals with Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD).
METHODS: Participants with and without ASD performed a visuospatial interference 
task while undergoing functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI). We 
empirically estimated parameters characterizing participants' latencies and 
their subtle fluctuations (noise accumulation) over the 16-min scan. We modeled 
hemodynamic activation and used seed-based analyses of neural coupling to study 
dysfunction in interference-specific connectivity in a subset of ASD 
participants who were nonparametrically matched to TD participants on age, 
male-to-female ratio, and magnitude of movement during the scan.
RESULTS: Stochastic patterns of response fluctuations reveal significantly 
higher noise-to-signal levels and a more random and noisy structure in ASD 
versus TD participants, and in particular ASD adults who have the greatest 
clinical autistic deficits. While individuals with ASD show an overall weaker 
modulation of interference-specific functional connectivity relative to TD 
individuals, in particular between the seeds of Anterior Cingulate Cortex (ACC) 
and Inferior Parietal Sulcus (IPS) and the rest of the brain, we found that in 
ASD, higher uncertainty during the task is linked to increased 
interference-specific coupling between bilateral anterior insula and prefrontal 
cortex.
CONCLUSIONS: Subtle and informative differences in the structure of experiencing 
information exist between ASD and TD individuals. Our findings reveal in ASD an 
atypical capacity to apply previously perceived information in a manner optimal 
for adaptive functioning, plausibly revealing suboptimal message-passing across 
the CNS.

DOI: 10.1002/brb3.596
PMCID: PMC5318360
PMID: 28239517 [Indexed for MEDLINE]