1. Leukemia. 2017 Oct;31(10):2057-2064. doi: 10.1038/leu.2017.75. Epub 2017 Mar
6.

APOBEC signature mutation generates an oncogenic enhancer that drives LMO1 
expression in T-ALL.

Li Z(1), Abraham BJ(2), Berezovskaya A(1), Farah N(3), Liu Y(4), Leon T(3), 
Fielding A(3), Tan SH(5)(6), Sanda T(5)(6), Weintraub AS(2), Li B(7)(8), Shen 
S(7)(8), Zhang J(4), Mansour MR(3), Young RA(2)(9), Look AT(1)(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(3)Department of Haematology, UCL Cancer Institute, University College London, 
London, UK.
(4)Department of Computational Biology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, 
Memphis, TN, USA.
(5)Cancer Science Institute of Singapore, National University of Singapore, 
Singapore, Singapore.
(6)Department of Medicine, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, Singapore, 
Singapore.
(7)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Key Laboratory of Pediatric Hematology 
and Oncology Ministry of Health, Shanghai Children's Medical Center, Shanghai 
Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(8)Pediatric Translational Medicine Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 
School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(9)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, 
USA.
(10)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.

Oncogenic driver mutations are those that provide a proliferative or survival 
advantage to neoplastic cells, resulting in clonal selection. Although most 
cancer-causing mutations have been detected in the protein-coding regions of the 
cancer genome; driver mutations have recently also been discovered within 
noncoding genomic sequences. Thus, a current challenge is to gain precise 
understanding of how these unique genomic elements function in cancer 
pathogenesis, while clarifying mechanisms of gene regulation and identifying new 
targets for therapeutic intervention. Here we report a C-to-T single nucleotide 
transition that occurs as a somatic mutation in noncoding sequences 4 kb 
upstream of the transcriptional start site of the LMO1 oncogene in primary 
samples from patients with T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. This single 
nucleotide alteration conforms to an APOBEC-like cytidine deaminase mutational 
signature, and generates a new binding site for the MYB transcription factor, 
leading to the formation of an aberrant transcriptional enhancer complex that 
drives high levels of expression of the LMO1 oncogene. Since APOBEC-signature 
mutations are common in a broad spectrum of human cancers, we suggest that 
noncoding nucleotide transitions such as the one described here may activate 
potent oncogenic enhancers not only in T-lymphoid cells but in other cell 
lineages as well.

DOI: 10.1038/leu.2017.75
PMCID: PMC5629363
PMID: 28260788 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.