1. PLoS One. 2017 Apr 6;12(4):e0175112. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0175112. 
eCollection 2017.

Comprehensive characterization of DNA methylation changes in Fuchs endothelial 
corneal dystrophy.

Khuc E(1), Bainer R(2)(3), Wolf M(1), Clay SM(1), Weisenberger DJ(4), Kemmer 
J(1), Weaver VM(2)(3)(5)(6), Hwang DG(1), Chan MF(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of California, San Francisco, 
California, United States of America.
(2)Department of Surgery and Center for Bioengineering and Tissue Regeneration, 
University of California, San Francisco, California, United States of America.
(3)Bay Area Physical Sciences-Oncology Program, University of California, 
Berkeley, California, United States of America.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, University of Southern 
California, Los Angeles, California, United States of America.
(5)Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California, 
San Francisco, California, United States of America.
(6)Departments of Anatomy and Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences and Eli 
and Edythe Broad Center for Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research, 
University of California, San Francisco, California, United States of America.
(7)Francis I. Proctor Foundation, University of California, San Francisco, 
California, United States of America.

Transparency of the human cornea is necessary for vision. Fuchs Endothelial 
Corneal Dystrophy (FECD) is a bilateral, heritable degeneration of the corneal 
endothelium, and a leading indication for corneal transplantation in developed 
countries. While the early onset, and rarer, form of FECD has been linked to 
COL8A2 mutations, the more common, late onset form of FECD has genetic mutations 
linked to only a minority of cases. Epigenetic modifications that occur in FECD 
are unknown. Here, we report on and compare the DNA methylation landscape of 
normal human corneal endothelial (CE) tissue and CE from FECD patients using the 
Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation450 (HM450) DNA methylation array. We show 
that DNA methylation profiles are distinct between control and FECD samples. 
Differentially methylated probes (10,961) were identified in the FECD samples 
compared with the control samples, with the majority of probes being 
hypermethylated in the FECD samples. Genes containing differentially methylated 
sites were disproportionately annotated to ontological categories involving 
cytoskeletal organization, ion transport, hematopoetic cell differentiation, and 
cellular metabolism. Our results suggest that altered DNA methylation patterns 
may contribute to loss of corneal transparency in FECD through a global 
accumulation of sporadic DNA methylation changes in genes critical to basic CE 
biological processes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0175112
PMCID: PMC5383226
PMID: 28384203 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Daniel J. Weisenberger is a 
consultant for Zymo Research Corporation, which distributes commercially 
available products for DNA methylation-based experiments. Zymo Research did not 
support this work, nor has an interest in the outcome 460 of this research. This 
does not alter our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.