1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2017 Feb 1;58(2):959-973. doi:
10.1167/iovs.16-20413.

Postretinal Structure and Function in Severe Congenital Photoreceptor Blindness 
Caused by Mutations in the GUCY2D Gene.

Aguirre GK(1), Butt OH(1), Datta R(1), Roman AJ(2), Sumaroka A(2), Schwartz 
SB(2), Cideciyan AV(2), Jacobson SG(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States.

PURPOSE: To examine how severe congenital blindness resulting from mutations of 
the GUCY2D gene alters brain structure and function, and to relate these 
findings to the notable preservation of retinal architecture in this form of 
Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA).
METHODS: Six GUCY2D-LCA patients (ages 20-46) were studied with optical 
coherence tomography of the retina and multimodal magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) of the brain. Measurements from this group were compared to those obtained 
from populations of normally sighted controls and people with congenital 
blindness of a variety of causes.
RESULTS: Patients with GUCY2D-LCA had preservation of the photoreceptors, 
ganglion cells, and nerve fiber layer. Despite this, visual function in these 
patients ranged from 20/160 acuity to no light perception, and functional MRI 
responses to light stimulation were attenuated and restricted. This severe 
visual impairment was reflected in substantial thickening of the gray matter 
layer of area V1, accompanied by an alteration of resting-state correlations 
within the occipital lobe, similar to a comparison group of congenitally blind 
people with structural damage to the retina. In contrast to the comparison blind 
population, however, the GUCY2D-LCA group had preservation of the size of the 
optic chiasm, and the fractional anisotropy of the optic radiations as measured 
with diffusion tensor imaging was also normal.
CONCLUSIONS: These results identify dissociable effects of blindness upon the 
visual pathway. Further, the relatively intact postgeniculate white matter 
pathway in GUCY2D-LCA is encouraging for the prospect of recovery of visual 
function with gene augmentation therapy.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.16-20413
PMCID: PMC5308769
PMID: 28403437 [Indexed for MEDLINE]