1. J Neurol Sci. 2017 May 15;376:159-165. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2017.03.020. Epub
2017  Mar 16.

Global brain atrophy and metabolic dysfunction in LGI1 encephalitis: A 
prospective multimodal MRI study.

Szots M(1), Blaabjerg M(2), Orsi G(3), Iversen P(4), Kondziella D(5), Madsen 
CG(6), Garde E(7), Magnusson PO(6), Barsi P(8), Nagy F(1), Siebner HR(9), Illes 
Z(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mor Kaposi Teaching Hospital, Kaposvar, Hungary.
(2)Department of Neurology, Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark; 
Department of Clinical Research, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, 
Denmark.
(3)MTA-PTE Clinical Neuroscience MR Research Group, Pecs, Hungary; Department of 
Neurosurgery, Clinical Centre, University of Pecs, Pecs, Hungary.
(4)Danish Research Centre for Magnetic Resonance, Centre for Functional and 
Diagnostic Imaging and Research, Copenhagen University Hospital Hvidovre, 
Hvidovre, Denmark; CHIP, Department of Infectious Diseases, Rigshospitalet, 
Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(5)Department of Neurology, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University Hospital, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(6)Danish Research Centre for Magnetic Resonance, Centre for Functional and 
Diagnostic Imaging and Research, Copenhagen University Hospital Hvidovre, 
Hvidovre, Denmark.
(7)Danish Research Centre for Magnetic Resonance, Centre for Functional and 
Diagnostic Imaging and Research, Copenhagen University Hospital Hvidovre, 
Hvidovre, Denmark; Department of Public Health, Copenhagen University, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(8)MR Research Center, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.
(9)Danish Research Centre for Magnetic Resonance, Centre for Functional and 
Diagnostic Imaging and Research, Copenhagen University Hospital Hvidovre, 
Hvidovre, Denmark; Department of Neurology, Copenhagen University Hospital 
Bispebjerg, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(10)Department of Neurology, Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark; 
Department of Clinical Research, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, 
Denmark. Electronic address: zsolt.illes@rsyd.dk.

BACKGROUND: Chronic cognitive deficits are frequent in leucin-rich 
glioma-inactivated 1 protein (LGI1) encephalitis. We examined structural and 
metabolic brain abnormalities following LGI1 encephalitis and correlated 
findings with acute and follow-up clinical outcomes.
METHODS: Nine patients underwent prospective multimodal 3 Tesla MRI 
33.1±18months after disease onset, including automated volumetry, diffusion 
tensor imaging (DTI) and magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS). Data were 
compared to 9 age- and sex-matched healthy controls.
RESULTS: Although extratemporal lesions were not present on MRI in the acute 
stage, tract-based spatial statistics analyses of DTI during follow-up showed 
widespread changes in the cerebral and cerebellar white matter (WM), most 
prominent in the anterior parts of the corona radiata, capsula interna and 
corpus callosum. MRS revealed lower glutamine/glutamate WM levels compared to 
controls. Higher cerebellar gray matter volume was associated with better 
function at disease onset (measured by the modified Rankin Scale), and higher 
putaminal volume was associated with better cognition by Addenbrooke's Cognitive 
Examination test at 23.4±7.6months.
CONCLUSIONS: Poor clinical outcome following LGI1 encephalitis is associated 
with global brain atrophy and disintegration of white matter tracts. The 
pathological changes affect not only temporomesial structures but also frontal 
lobes and the cerebellum.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2017.03.020
PMID: 28431605 [Indexed for MEDLINE]