1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2017 Jul 25;61(8):e00391-17. doi: 
10.1128/AAC.00391-17. Print 2017 Aug.

Roles of ramR and tet(A) Mutations in Conferring Tigecycline Resistance in 
Carbapenem-Resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae Clinical Isolates.

Chiu SK(1)(2), Huang LY(3), Chen H(4), Tsai YK(3), Liou CH(3), Lin JC(1), Siu 
LK(1)(3)(5), Chang FY(1), Yeh KM(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases and Tropical Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Tri-Service General Hospital, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, 
Taiwan, Republic of China.
(2)Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, National Defense Medical Center, 
Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China.
(3)Institute of Infectious Diseases and Vaccinology, National Health Research 
Institutes, Miaoli, Taiwan, Republic of China.
(4)Graduate Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, National Defense Medical 
Center, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China.
(5)Graduate Institute of Basic Medical Science, China Medical University, 
Taichung, Taiwan, Republic of China.
(6)Division of Infectious Diseases and Tropical Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Tri-Service General Hospital, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, 
Taiwan, Republic of China kmyeh@ndmctsgh.edu.tw.

Tigecycline is regarded as a last-resort treatment for carbapenem-resistant 
Klebsiella pneumoniae (CRKP) infections, but increasing numbers of 
tigecycline-resistant K. pneumoniae isolates have been reported. The tigecycline 
resistance mechanisms in CRKP are undetermined. This study aimed to elucidate 
the mechanisms underlying tigecycline resistance in 16 tigecycline- and 
carbapenem-resistant K. pneumoniae (TCRKP) isolates. Mutations in tigecycline 
resistance determinant genes [ramR, acrR, oqxR, tet(A), tet(L), tet(X), tet(M), 
rpsJ] were assessed by PCR amplicon sequencing, and mutations in ramR and tet(A) 
exhibited high prevalences individually (81%) and in combination (63%). Eight 
functional ramR mutation profiles reducing tigecycline sensitivity were verified 
by plasmid complementation of wild-type and mutant ramR Using a site-specific 
mutant, the most frequent RamR mutation, A19V (60%), had no significant effect 
on tigecycline susceptibility or the upregulation of ramA and acrA Two tet(A) 
variants with double frameshift mutations, type 1 and type 2, were identified; 
type 2 tet(A) is novel. A parent strain transformed with a plasmid carrying type 
1 or type 2 tet(A) increased the tigecycline MIC by 8-fold or 4-fold, 
respectively. Synergistic effects were observed in strains harboring no ramR 
gene and a mutated tet(A), with an 8-fold increase in the tigecycline MIC 
compared with that in strains harboring only mutated tet(A) being seen. Overall, 
mutations in the ramR and tet(A) efflux genes constituted the major tigecycline 
resistance mechanisms among the studied TCRKP isolates. The identification of 
strains exhibiting the combination of a ramR deficiency and widespread mutated 
tet(A) is concerning due to the possible dissemination of increased tigecycline 
resistance in K. pneumoniae.

Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00391-17
PMCID: PMC5527587
PMID: 28533243 [Indexed for MEDLINE]