1. Bioimpacts. 2017;7(1):59-71. doi: 10.15171/bi.2017.08. Epub 2017 Mar 30.

Pleiotropic cytotoxicity of VacA toxin in host cells and its impact on 
immunotherapy.

Fahimi F(1), Tohidkia MR(1), Fouladi M(1), Aghabeygi R(2), Samadi N(2), Omidi 
Y(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Research Center for Pharmaceutical Nanotechnology, Biomedicine Institute, 
Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran.
(2)School of Advanced Biomedical Sciences, Tabriz University of Medical 
Sciences, Tabriz, Iran.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutics, Faculty of Pharmacy, Tabriz University of 
Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran.

Introduction: In the recent decades, a number of studies have highlighted the 
importance of Helicobacter pylori in the initiation and development of peptic 
ulcer and gastric cancer. Some potential virulence factors (e.g., urease, CagA, 
VacA, BabA) are exploited by this microorganism, facilitating its persistence 
through evading human defense mechanisms. Among these toxins and enzymes, 
vacuolating toxin A (VacA) is of a great importance in the pathogenesis of H. 
pylori. VacA toxin shows different pattern of cytotoxicity through binding to 
different cell surface receptors in various cells. Methods: To highlight 
attempts in treatment for H. pylori infection, here, we discussed the VacA 
potential as a candidate for development of vaccine and targeted immunotherapy. 
Furthermore, we reviewed the related literature to provide key insights on 
association of the genetic variants of VacA with the toxicity of the toxin in 
cells. Results: A number of investigations on the receptor(s) binding of VacA 
toxin confirmed the pleiotropic nature of VacA that uses a unique mechanism for 
internalization through some membrane components such as lipid rafts and 
glycophosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored proteins (GPI-AP). Considering the high 
potency of VacA toxin in the clinical presentations in infection and assisting 
persistence and colonization of H. pylori, it is considered as one of the 
pivotal components in production vaccines and monoclonal antibodies (mAbs). 
Conclusion: It is possible to generate mAbs with a considerable potential to 
convert into secretory immunoglobulins that could penetrate into the niche of H. 
pylori and inhibit its normal functionalities. Further, conjugation of H. pylori 
targeting Ab fragments with the toxic agents or drug delivery systems (DDSs) 
offers new generation of H. pylori treatments.

DOI: 10.15171/bi.2017.08
PMCID: PMC5439391
PMID: 28546954