1. Front Neuroanat. 2017 Jun 7;11:45. doi: 10.3389/fnana.2017.00045. eCollection 
2017.

Sortilin Fragments Deposit at Senile Plaques in Human Cerebrum.

Hu X(1), Hu ZL(1), Li Z(2), Ruan CS(3), Qiu WY(4), Pan A(1), Li CQ(1), Cai Y(1), 
Shen L(5)(6), Chu Y(7), Tang BS(5)(6), Cai H(8), Zhou XF(3), Ma C(4), Yan 
XX(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Central South University School of 
Basic Medical ScienceChangsha, China.
(2)Cancer Research Institute, Central South UniversityChangsha, China.
(3)School of Pharmacy and Medical Sciences, Sansom Institute, Division of Health 
Sciences, University of South AustraliaAdelaide, SA, Australia.
(4)Department of Human Anatomy, Histology and Embryology, Institute of Basic 
Medical Sciences, Neuroscience Center, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, 
School of Basic Medicine, Peking Union Medical CollegeBeijing, China.
(5)Department of Neurology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South UniversityChangsha, 
China.
(6)Key Laboratory of Hunan Province in Neurodegenerative Disorders, Xiangya 
Hospital, Central South UniversityChangsha, China.
(7)Department of Neurological Sciences, Rush University Medical CenterChicago, 
IL, United States.
(8)Laboratory of Neurogenetics, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes 
of HealthBethesda, MD, United States.

Genetic variations in the vacuolar protein sorting 10 protein (Vps10p) family 
have been linked to Alzheimer's disease (AD). Here we demonstrate deposition of 
fragments from the Vps10p member sortilin at senile plaques (SPs) in aged and AD 
human cerebrum. Sortilin changes were characterized in postmortem brains with 
antibodies against the extracellular and intracellular C-terminal domains. The 
two antibodies exhibited identical labeling in normal human cerebrum, occurring 
in the somata and dendrites of cortical and hippocampal neurons. The C-terminal 
antibody also marked extracellular lesions in some aged and all AD cases, 
appearing as isolated fibrils, mini-plaques, dense-packing or circular 
mature-looking plaques. Sortilin and β-amyloid (Aβ) deposition were correlated 
overtly in a region/lamina- and case-dependent manner as analyzed in the 
temporal lobe structures, with co-localized immunofluorescence seen at 
individual SPs. However, sortilin deposition rarely occurred around the pia, at 
vascular wall or in areas with typical diffuse Aβ deposition, with the labeling 
not enhanced by section pretreatment with heating or formic acid. Levels of a 
major sortilin fragment ~15 kDa, predicted to derive from the C-terminal region, 
were dramatically elevated in AD relative to control cortical lysates. Thus, 
sortilin fragments are a prominent constituent of the extracellularly deposited 
protein products at SPs in human cerebrum.

DOI: 10.3389/fnana.2017.00045
PMCID: PMC5461299
PMID: 28638323