1. NMC Case Rep J. 2016 Dec 8;4(1):5-9. doi: 10.2176/nmccrj.cr.2016-0106. 
eCollection 2017 Jan.

Coexistence of Quasi-moyamoya Disease and POEMS Syndrome in a Patient with 
Intracranial Hemorrhage: A Case Report and Literature Review.

Yamaguchi I(1), Satomi J(1), Yamamoto N(2), Yoshioka S(1), Tada Y(1), Yagi K(1), 
Kanematsu Y(1), Nagahiro S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Tokushima 
University Graduate School, Tokushima, Japan.
(2)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, 
Tokushima University Graduate School, Tokushima Japan.

POEMS (polyneuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, monoclonal gammopathy, and 
skin changes) syndrome is a rare paraneoplastic syndrome elicited by plasma cell 
dyscrasia. Its clinical manifestations are multiple and stroke is not a 
recognized feature. A 44-year-old woman with a 3-month history of bilateral 
lower extremity sensorimotor disturbance was admitted to our hospital. 
Examinations revealed polyneuropathy, organomegaly, hypothyroidism, monoclonal 
gammopathy, pelvic plasmacytoma, and elevated serum vascular endothelial growth 
factor (VEGF) levels. A diagnosis of POEMS was made. Her condition was improved 
by radiation therapy of her pelvic plasmacytoma and she continued to be seen on 
an outpatient basis. Five years after her first admission she was re-admitted 
with sudden-onset right hemiparesis. A brain computed tomography (CT) scan 
revealed a left intracranial hemorrhage and magnetic resonance (MR) angiography 
and cerebral angiography showed occlusion of the proximal portion of the 
bilateral middle cerebral artery and narrowing of the bilateral internal carotid 
artery at the terminal portion; moyamoya vessels were seen. This is the first 
report of a patient whose intracranial hemorrhage was attributable to 
quasi-moyamoya disease associated with POEMS syndrome. We suggest that the POEMS 
syndrome be ruled out in the differential diagnosis of patients presenting with 
atypical stroke, multivessel stenotic lesions (moyamoya vessels), and 
polyneuropathy.

DOI: 10.2176/nmccrj.cr.2016-0106
PMCID: PMC5364899
PMID: 28664017

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest Disclosure The authors 
declare no conflicts of interest.