1. BMC Genomics. 2017 Jul 5;18(1):512. doi: 10.1186/s12864-017-3903-3.

Comparative genomics shows that viral integrations are abundant and express 
piRNAs in the arboviral vectors Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus.

Palatini U(1), Miesen P(2), Carballar-Lejarazu R(1), Ometto L(3), Rizzo E(4), Tu 
Z(5), van Rij RP(2), Bonizzoni M(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology and Biotechnology, University of Pavia, via Ferrata 9, 
27100, Pavia, Italy.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology, Radboud University Medical Center, 
Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, P.O. Box 9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(3)Indepenent Researcher, Mezzocorona, Trento, Italy.
(4)Engenome srl, Via Ferrata 5, Pavia, Italy.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Fralin Life Sciences Institute, Virginia Tech, 
Blacksburg, VA, 24061, USA.
(6)Department of Biology and Biotechnology, University of Pavia, via Ferrata 9, 
27100, Pavia, Italy. m.bonizzoni@unipv.it.

BACKGROUND: Arthropod-borne viruses (arboviruses) transmitted by mosquito 
vectors cause many important emerging or resurging infectious diseases in humans 
including dengue, chikungunya and Zika. Understanding the co-evolutionary 
processes among viruses and vectors is essential for the development of novel 
transmission-blocking strategies. Episomal viral DNA fragments are produced from 
arboviral RNA upon infection of mosquito cells and adults. Additionally, 
sequences from insect-specific viruses and arboviruses have been found 
integrated into mosquito genomes.
RESULTS: We used a bioinformatic approach to analyse the presence, abundance, 
distribution, and transcriptional activity of integrations from 425 
non-retroviral viruses, including 133 arboviruses, across the presently 
available 22 mosquito genome sequences. Large differences in abundance and types 
of viral integrations were observed in mosquito species from the same region. 
Viral integrations are unexpectedly abundant in the arboviral vector species 
Aedes aegypti and Ae. albopictus, in which they are approximately ~10-fold more 
abundant than in other mosquito species analysed. Additionally, viral 
integrations are enriched in piRNA clusters of both the Ae. aegypti and Ae. 
albopictus genomes and, accordingly, they express piRNAs, but not siRNAs.
CONCLUSIONS: Differences in the number of viral integrations in the genomes of 
mosquito species from the same geographic area support the conclusion that 
integrations of viral sequences is not dependent on viral exposure, but that 
lineage-specific interactions exist. Viral integrations are abundant in Ae. 
aegypti and Ae. albopictus, and represent a thus far underappreciated component 
of their genomes. Additionally, the genome locations of viral integrations and 
their production of piRNAs indicate a functional link between viral integrations 
and the piRNA pathway. These results greatly expand the breadth and complexity 
of small RNA-mediated regulation and suggest a role for viral integrations in 
antiviral defense in these two mosquito species.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-017-3903-3
PMCID: PMC5497376
PMID: 28676109 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: Not 
applicable. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.