1. PLoS One. 2017 Jul 11;12(7):e0180909. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0180909. 
eCollection 2017.

The effects of ingestion of hormonal host factors on the longevity and 
insecticide resistance phenotype of the major malaria vector Anopheles 
arabiensis (Diptera: Culicidae).

Oliver SV(1)(2), Brooke BD(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Emerging, Zoonotic and Parasitic Diseases, National Institute for 
Communicable Diseases, Johannesburg, South Africa.
(2)Wits Research Institute for Malaria, School of Pathology, Faculty of Health 
Sciences, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa.

Exogenous vertebrate-derived factors circulating in the blood have the capacity 
to modulate the biology of haematophagous insects. These include insulin, 
insulin growth factor 1 (IGF) and transforming growth factor β1 (TGFβ). The 
effects of the consumption of these three proteins were examined on laboratory 
strains of Anopheles arabiensis. SENN, an insecticide susceptible strain and 
SENN DDT, a resistant strain selected from SENN, were fed with host 
factor-supplemented sucrose. Adult longevity was measured and insecticide 
resistance phenotype over time was assessed by WHO bioassay. Detoxification and 
oxidative stress defence enzyme activity was assessed calorimetrically. Insulin 
supplementation augmented insecticide resistance in young adult mosquitoes. This 
effect was due to the hormonal nature of the protein, as heat-denatured insulin 
did not elicit the same response. In contrast, IGF and TGFβ consumption 
generally reduced the expression of insecticide resistance. Insulin ingestion 
significantly reduced longevity in the insecticide susceptible strain. IGF 
elicited the same response in the susceptible strain, while TGF consumption had 
no effect on either strain. Consumption of all factors significantly decreased 
Glutathione S-transferase activity and increased cytochrome P450 and superoxide 
dismutase activity. This suggests that the altered detoxification phenotype is 
mediated primarily by cytochrome P450 activity, which would result in an 
increase in oxidative stress. The increased superoxide dismutase activity 
suggests that this enzyme class alleviates the oxidative stress as opposed to 
glutathione-based redox systems. Oxidative stress responses play a crucial role 
in insecticide resistance and longevity. These data show that ingested hormonal 
factors can affect mosquito longevity and insecticide susceptibility, both of 
which are important characteristics in terms of malaria transmission and 
control.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0180909
PMCID: PMC5507448
PMID: 28700639 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.