1. J Ovarian Res. 2017 Jul 12;10(1):43. doi: 10.1186/s13048-017-0341-4.

Is the oocyte quality affected by endometriosis? A review of the literature.

Sanchez AM(1), Vanni VS(2), Bartiromo L(2), Papaleo E(1), Zilberberg E(3), 
Candiani M(2)(4), Orvieto R(3)(5), Viganò P(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Genetics and Cell Biology, IRCCS Ospedale San Raffaele, Milan, 
Italy.
(2)Obstetrics and Gynaecology Unit, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute, 
Milan, Italy.
(3)Infertility and IVF unit, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Chaim 
Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, affiliated to the Sackler Faculty of 
Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Vita Salute San Raffaele University 
School of Medicine, IRCCS, Ospedale San Raffaele, Milan, Italy.
(5)The Tarnesby-Tarnowsky Chair for Family Planning and Fertility Regulation, at 
the Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(6)Division of Genetics and Cell Biology, IRCCS Ospedale San Raffaele, Milan, 
Italy. vigano.paola@hsr.it.

Endometriosis is an estrogen-dependent chronic inflammatory condition that 
affects women in their reproductive period causing infertility and pelvic pain. 
The disease, especially at the ovarian site has been shown to have a detrimental 
impact on ovarian physiology. Indeed, sonographic and histologic data tend to 
support the idea that ovarian follicles of endometriosis patients are decreased 
in number and more atretic. Moreover, the local intrafollicular environment of 
patients affected is characterized by alterations of the granulosa cell 
compartment including reduced P450 aromatase expression and increased 
intracellular reactive oxygen species generation. However, no comprehensive 
evaluation of the literature addressing the effect of endometriosis on oocyte 
quality from both a clinical and a biological perspective has so far been 
conducted. Based on this systematic review of the literature, oocytes retrieved 
from women affected by endometriosis are more likely to fail in vitro maturation 
and to show altered morphology and lower cytoplasmic mitochondrial content 
compared to women with other causes of infertility. Results from meta-analyses 
addressing IVF outcomes in women affected would indicate that a reduction in the 
number of mature oocytes retrieved is associated with endometriosis while a 
reduction in fertilization rates is more likely to be associated with 
minimal/mild rather than with moderate/severe disease. However, evidence in this 
field is still far to be conclusive, especially with regards to the effects of 
different stages of the disease and to the impact of patients' previous 
medical/surgical treatment(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13048-017-0341-4
PMCID: PMC5508680
PMID: 28701212 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: EP 
reports consultancies with MSD, Merck-Serono, Ferring, and IBSA Institut 
Biochimique SA; grants from MSD, Merck-Serono, Ferring, IBSA Institut 
Biochimique SA and FINOX; honoraria from MSD, Merck-Serono, and Ferring; and 
travel expenses paid by MSD, Merck-Serono, Ferring, and IBSA Institut 
Biochimique SA. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.