1. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2017 Jul 3;12:1923-1932. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S131232. eCollection 2017.

Glycated hemoglobin A1c-based adjusted glycemic variables in patients with 
diabetes presenting with acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease.

Yang CJ(1), Liao WI(1), Tang ZC(2), Wang JC(1), Lee CH(3), Chang WC(4), Hsu 
CW(5)(6), Tang SE(7), Tsai SH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, Tri-Service General Hospital, National 
Defense Medical Center.
(2)Department of Biological Imaging and Radiological Science, National Yang-Ming 
University.
(3)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal Medicine, 
Tri-Service General Hospital, National Defense Medical Center.
(4)Department of Radiology, Tri-Service General Hospital, National Defense 
Medical Center.
(5)Department of Emergency Medicine, School of Medicine, College of Medicine.
(6)Department of Emergency and Critical Medicine, Wan Fang Hospital, Taipei 
Medical University.
(7)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care, Department of Internal Medicine, 
Tri-Service General Hospital, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan.

Acute hyperglycemia is a common finding in patients presenting to emergency 
departments (EDs) with acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (AECOPD). Several studies have argued against the association between 
hyperglycemia at admission and adverse outcomes in patients with diabetes and an 
acute illness. Recent studies have shown that glucose-related variables (eg, 
glycemic gaps and stress hyperglycemia ratios) that are adjusted for glycated 
hemoglobin levels can indicate the severity of a variety of diseases. The 
objective of this study was to assess whether these hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c)-based 
adjusted average glycemic variables were associated with unfavorable outcomes in 
patients admitted to a hospital with AECOPD. We found that 1) pulmonary 
infection is a major risk factor for AECOPD; 2) a higher glycemic gap and 
modified stress hyperglycemia ratio were associated with the development of 
acute respiratory failure (ARF) in patients with diabetes admitted to an ED 
because of AECOPD; and 3) the glycemic gap and modified stress hyperglycemia 
ratio had superior discriminative power over acute hyperglycemia and HbA1c for 
predicting the development of ARF, although the HbA1c-adjusted glycemic 
variables alone were not independent risk factors for ARF.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S131232
PMCID: PMC5505159
PMID: 28740373 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of 
interest in this work.