1. PLoS One. 2017 Aug 28;12(8):e0183349. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0183349. 
eCollection 2017.

Constraint-induced aphasia therapy in post-stroke aphasia rehabilitation: A 
systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.

Zhang J(1), Yu J(2), Bao Y(3), Xie Q(4), Xu Y(2), Zhang J(5), Wang P(4).

Author information:
(1)Master of Science in Neurological Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese 
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(2)School of Rehabilitation Sciences, West China School of Medicine, Sichuan 
University, Sichuan, China.
(3)Ruijin Rehabilitation Hospital of Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 
China.
(4)Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, Ruijin Hospital, School of Medicine, 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(5)Department of Physical Education, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan, 
China.

BACKGROUND: Constraint-induced aphasia therapy (CIAT) has been widely used in 
post-stroke aphasia rehabilitation. An increasing number of clinical controlled 
trials have investigated the efficacy of the CIAT for the post-stroke aphasia.
PURPOSE: To systematically review the randomized controlled trials (RCTs) 
concerning the effect of the CIAT in post-stroke patients with aphasia, and to 
identify the useful components of CIAT in post-stroke aphasia rehabilitation.
METHODS: A computerized database search was performed through five databases 
(Pubmed, EMbase, Medline, ScienceDirect and Cochrane library). Cochrane handbook 
domains were used to evaluate the methodological quality of the included RCTs.
RESULTS: Eight RCTs qualified in the inclusion criteria. Inconsistent results 
were found in comparing the CIAT with conventional therapies without any 
component from the CIAT based on the results of three RCTs. Five RCTs showed 
that the CIAT performed equally well as other intensive aphasia therapies, in 
terms of improving language performance. One RCT showed that therapies embedded 
with social interaction were likely to enhance the efficacy of the CIAT.
CONCLUSION: CIAT may be useful for improving chronic post-stroke aphasia, 
however, limited evidence to support its superiority to other aphasia therapies. 
Massed practice is likely to be a useful component of CIAT, while the role of 
"constraint" is needed to be further explored. CIAT embedded with social 
interaction may gain more benefits.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0183349
PMCID: PMC5573268
PMID: 28846724 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.