1. Virol J. 2017 Aug 31;14(1):167. doi: 10.1186/s12985-017-0837-y.

Prevalence of human pegivirus-1 and sequence variability of its E2 glycoprotein 
estimated from screening donors of fetal stem cell-containing material.

Vitrenko Y(1), Kostenko I(2), Kulebyakina K(2), Sorochynska K(2).

Author information:
(1)Cell Therapy Center Emcell, Kyiv, Ukraine. yavit@yahoo.com.
(2)Cell Therapy Center Emcell, Kyiv, Ukraine.

BACKGROUND: Human pegivirus-1 (HPgV-1) is a member of the Flaviviridae family 
whose genomic organization and mode of cellular entry is similar to that of 
hepatitis C virus (HCV). The E2 glycoprotein of HPgV-1 is the principle mediator 
in the virus-cell interaction and as such harbors most of HPgV-1's antigenic 
determinants. HPgV-1 persists in blood cell precursors which are increasingly 
used for cell therapy.
METHODS: We studied HPgV-1 prevalence in a large cohort of females donating 
fetal tissues for clinical use. PCR was used for screening and estimation of 
viral load in viremic plasma and fetal samples. Sequence analysis was performed 
for portions of the 5'-untranslated and E2 regions of HPgV-1 purified from donor 
plasmas. Sequencing was followed by phylogenetic analysis.
RESULTS: HPgV-1 was revealed in 13.7% of plasmas, 5.0% of fetal tissues, 5.4% of 
chorions, exceeding the prevalence of HCV in these types of samples. 
Transmission of HPgV-1 occurred in 25.8% of traceable mother-chorion-fetal 
tissues triads. For HPgV-1-positive donors, a high viral load in plasma appears 
to be a prerequisite for transmission. However, about one third of fetal samples 
acquired infection from non-viremic individuals. Sequencing of 5'-untranslated 
region placed most HPgV-1 samples to genotype 2a. At the same time, a portion of 
E2 sequence provided a much weaker support for this grouping apparently due to a 
higher variability. Polymorphisms were detected in important structural and 
antigenic motifs of E2.
CONCLUSION: HPgV-1 is efficiently transmitted to fetus at early embryonic 
stages. A high variability in E2 may pose a risk of generation of pathogenic 
subtypes. Although HPgV-1 is considered benign and no longer tested mandatorily 
in blood banks, the virus may have adversary effects at target niches if 
delivered with infected graft upon cell transplantation. This argues for the 
necessity of HPgV-1 testing of cell samples aimed for clinical use.

DOI: 10.1186/s12985-017-0837-y
PMCID: PMC5580293
PMID: 28859680 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Each 
woman donating fetal material gave informed consent and signed an appropriate 
form. The research and clinical practice at our Center are performed according 
to the Law of Ukraine “On transplantation of organs and other anatomical 
materials to the person”, the Law of Ukraine “On licensing types of economic 
activity”, under the License of Health of Ukraine for Medical practice, the 
License for the activities of the bank of umbilical cord blood, other human 
tissues and cells issued by the State Service of Ukraine on prevention of 
HIV-infection/AIDS and other publicly dangerous diseases (No. 222-VIII, 
02.03.2105). According to the licensing conditions, an ethical approval is 
required and has been granted by the Bureau for ethical policy and patient 
rights of Emcell. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: N/A. COMPETING INTERESTS: All the 
authors are Emcell employees. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral 
with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional 
affiliations.