1. PLoS One. 2017 Sep 12;12(9):e0184358. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0184358. 
eCollection 2017.

Genome-wide analysis of parent-of-origin interaction effects with environmental 
exposure (PoOxE): An application to European and Asian cleft palate trios.

Haaland ØA(1), Jugessur A(1)(2)(3), Gjerdevik M(1)(2), Romanowska J(1), Shi 
M(4), Beaty TH(5), Marazita ML(6), Murray JC(7), Wilcox AJ(8), Lie RT(1)(9), 
Gjessing HK(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Global Public Health and Primary Care, University of Bergen, 
Bergen, Norway.
(2)Department of Genetics and Bioinformatics, Norwegian Institute of Public 
Health (NIPH), Oslo, Norway.
(3)Centre for Fertility and Health (CeFH), Norwegian Institute of Public Health, 
Oslo, Norway.
(4)Biostatistics and Computational Biology Branch, National Institute of 
Environmental Health Sciences (NIH/NIEHS), Durham, North Carolina, United States 
of America.
(5)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins 
University, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.
(6)Center for Craniofacial and Dental Genetics, Department of Oral Biology, 
School of Dental Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, 
United States of America.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, United States 
of America.
(8)Epidemiology Branch, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences 
(NIH/NIEHS), Durham, North Carolina, United States of America.
(9)Department of Health Registries, Norwegian Institute of Public Health, Oslo, 
Norway.

Cleft palate only is a common birth defect with high heritability. Only a small 
fraction of this heritability is explained by the genetic variants identified so 
far, underscoring the need to investigate other disease mechanisms, such as 
gene-environment (GxE) interactions and parent-of-origin (PoO) effects. 
Furthermore, PoO effects may vary across exposure levels (PoOxE effects). Such 
variation is the focus of this study. We upgraded the R-package Haplin to enable 
direct tests of PoOxE effects at the genome-wide level. From a previous GWAS, we 
had genotypes for 550 case-parent trios, of mainly European and Asian ancestry, 
and data on three maternal exposures (smoking, alcohol, and vitamins). Data were 
analyzed for Europeans and Asians separately, and also for all ethnicities 
combined. To account for multiple testing, a false discovery rate method was 
used, where q-values were generated from the p-values. In the Europeans-only 
analyses, interactions with maternal smoking yielded the lowest q-values. Two 
SNPs in the 'Interactor of little elongation complex ELL subunit 1' (ICE1) gene 
had a q-value of 0.14, and five of the 20 most significant SNPs were in the 
'N-acetylated alpha-linked acidic dipeptidase-like 2' (NAALADL2) gene. No 
evidence of PoOxE effects was found in the other analyses. The connections to 
ICE1 and NAALADL2 are novel and warrant further investigation. More generally, 
the new methodology presented here is easily applicable to other traits and 
exposures in which a family-based study design has been implemented.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0184358
PMCID: PMC5595425
PMID: 28898263 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.