1. PLoS One. 2017 Sep 18;12(9):e0180905. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0180905. 
eCollection 2017.

Protein folding, misfolding and aggregation: The importance of two-electron 
stabilizing interactions.

Cieplak AS(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Bilkent University, Ankara, Turkey.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut, United 
States of America.
(3)Department of Chemistry, Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts, United 
States of America.

Proteins associated with neurodegenerative diseases are highly pleiomorphic and 
may adopt an all-α-helical fold in one environment, assemble into all-β-sheet or 
collapse into a coil in another, and rapidly polymerize in yet another one via 
divergent aggregation pathways that yield broad diversity of aggregates' 
morphology. A thorough understanding of this behaviour may be necessary to 
develop a treatment for Alzheimer's and related disorders. Unfortunately, our 
present comprehension of folding and misfolding is limited for want of a 
physicochemical theory of protein secondary and tertiary structure. Here we 
demonstrate that electronic configuration and hyperconjugation of the peptide 
amide bonds ought to be taken into account to advance such a theory. To capture 
the effect of polarization of peptide linkages on conformational and H-bonding 
propensity of the polypeptide backbone, we introduce a function of shielding 
tensors of the Cα atoms. Carrying no information about side chain-side chain 
interactions, this function nonetheless identifies basic features of the 
secondary and tertiary structure, establishes sequence correlates of the 
metamorphic and pH-driven equilibria, relates binding affinities and folding 
rate constants to secondary structure preferences, and manifests common patterns 
of backbone density distribution in amyloidogenic regions of Alzheimer's amyloid 
β and tau, Parkinson's α-synuclein and prions. Based on those findings, a 
split-intein like mechanism of molecular recognition is proposed to underlie 
dimerization of Aβ, tau, αS and PrPC, and divergent pathways for subsequent 
association of dimers are outlined; a related mechanism is proposed to underlie 
formation of PrPSc fibrils. The model does account for: (i) structural features 
of paranuclei, off-pathway oligomers, non-fibrillar aggregates and fibrils; (ii) 
effects of incubation conditions, point mutations, isoform lengths, 
small-molecule assembly modulators and chirality of solid-liquid interface on 
the rate and morphology of aggregation; (iii) fibril-surface catalysis of 
secondary nucleation; and (iv) self-propagation of infectious strains of 
mammalian prions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0180905
PMCID: PMC5603215
PMID: 28922400 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The author has declared 
that no competing interests exist.