1. Bioinform Biol Insights. 2017 Sep 27;11:1177932217733422. doi: 
10.1177/1177932217733422. eCollection 2017.

A Metagenomic Analysis of Bacterial Microbiota in the Digestive Tract of 
Triatomines.

Carels N(1), Gumiel M(2), da Mota FF(3), de Carvalho Moreira CJ(4), Azambuja 
P(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Laboratório de Modelagem de Sistemas Biológicos, National Institute for 
Science and Technology on Innovation in Neglected Diseases (INCT-IDN), Centro de 
Desenvolvimento Tecnológico em Saúde (CDTS), Fundação Oswaldo Cruz (FIOCRUZ), 
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(2)Laboratório de Bioquímica e Fisiologia de Insetos, Instituto Oswaldo Cruz, 
Fundação Oswaldo Cruz (IOC/FIOCRUZ), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(3)Laboratório de Biologia Computacional e Sistemas, Instituto Oswaldo Cruz, 
Fundação Oswaldo Cruz (IOC/FIOCRUZ), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(4)Laboratório de Doenças Parasitárias, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz (IOC, FIOCRUZ), 
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(5)Departamento de Entomologia Molecular, Instituto Nacional de Entomologia 
Molecular (INCT-EM), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

The digestive tract of triatomines (DTT) is an ecological niche favored by 
microbiota whose enzymatic profile is adapted to the specific substrate 
availability in this medium. This report describes the molecular enzymatic 
properties that promote bacterial prominence in the DTT. The microbiota 
composition was assessed previously based on 16S ribosomal DNA, and whole 
sequenced genomes of bacteria from the same genera were used to calculate the GC 
level of rare and prominent bacterial species in the DTT. The enzymatic 
reactions encoded by coding sequences of both rare and common bacterial species 
were then compared and revealed key functions explaining why some genera 
outcompete others in the DTT. Representativeness of DTT microbiota was 
investigated by shotgun sequencing of DNA extracted from bacteria grown in 
liquid Luria-Bertani broth (LB) medium. Results showed that GC-rich bacteria 
outcompete GC-poor bacteria and are the dominant components of the DTT 
microbiota. In addition, oxidoreductases are the main enzymatic components of 
these bacteria. In particular, nitrate reductases (anaerobic respiration), 
oxygenases (catabolism of complex substrates), acetate-CoA ligase (tricarboxylic 
acid cycle and energy metabolism), and kinase (signaling pathway) were the major 
enzymatic determinants present together with a large group of minor enzymes 
including hydrogenases involved in energy and amino acid metabolism. In 
conclusion, despite their slower growth in liquid LB medium, bacteria from 
GC-rich genera outcompete the GC-poor bacteria because their specific enzymatic 
abilities impart a selective advantage in the DTT.

DOI: 10.1177/1177932217733422
PMCID: PMC5624349
PMID: 28989277

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interests:The 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.