1. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2019 Feb 1;30(4):635-649. doi: 10.1089/ars.2017.7350. 
Epub 2017 Nov 15.

Proline Metabolism in Cell Regulation and Cancer Biology: Recent Advances and 
Hypotheses.

Phang JM(1).

Author information:
(1)Mouse Cancer Genetics Program, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer 
Institute at Frederick, NIH , Frederick, Maryland.

SIGNIFICANCE: It is increasingly clear that proline metabolism plays an 
important role in metabolic reprogramming, not only in cancer but also in 
related fields such as aging, senescence, and development. Although first 
focused on proline catabolism, recent studies from a number of laboratories have 
emphasized the regulatory effects of proline synthesis and proline cycling. 
Recent Advances: Although proline dehydrogenase/proline oxidase (PRODH/POX) has 
been known as a tumor protein 53 (P53)-activated source of redox signaling for 
initiating apoptosis and autophagy, senescence has been added to the responses. 
On the biosynthetic side, two well-recognized oncogenes, c-MYC and 
phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K), markedly upregulate enzymes of proline 
synthesis; mechanisms affected include augmented redox cycling and maintenance 
of pyridine nucleotides. The reprogramming has been shown to shift in 
clonogenesis and/or metastasis.
CRITICAL ISSUES: Although PRODH/POX generates reactive oxygen species (ROS) for 
signaling, the cellular endpoint is variable and dependent on metabolic context; 
the switches for these responses remain unknown. On the synthetic side, the 
enzymes require more complete characterization in various cancers, and 
demonstration of coupling of proline metabolites to other pathways may require 
studies of protein-protein interactions, membrane transporters, and shuttles.
FUTURE DIRECTIONS: The proline metabolic axis can serve as a scaffold on which a 
variety of regulatory mechanisms are integrated. Once understood as a central 
mechanism in cancer metabolism, proline metabolism may be a good target for 
adjunctive cancer therapy.

DOI: 10.1089/ars.2017.7350
PMCID: PMC6338564
PMID: 28990419 [Indexed for MEDLINE]