1. Expert Rev Precis Med Drug Dev. 2016;1(6):487-495. doi: 
10.1080/23808993.2016.1269600. Epub 2016 Dec 20.

Personalized management of asthma exacerbations: lessons from genetic studies.

Wang AL(1)(2), Tantisira KG(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Channing Division of Network Medicine, Department of Medicine, Brigham and 
Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States.
(2)Division of Rheumatology, Immunology and Allergy, Department of Medicine, 
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, 
United States.
(3)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, 
United States.

INTRODUCTION: The genetics of severe asthma and asthma exacerbations are 
distinct from milder forms of asthma. Gene-environmental interactions contribute 
to the complexity and heterogeneity of severe asthma and asthma exacerbations, 
and pharmacogenomic studies have also identified genes that affect 
susceptibility to asthma exacerbations.
AREAS COVERED: Studies on the genetics, gene-environment interactions, and 
pharmacogenomics of asthma exacerbations are reviewed. Multiple individual 
genetic variants have been identified to be associated with asthma exacerbations 
but each genetic polymorphism explains only a fraction of the disease and by 
itself is not able to translate into clinical practice. Research is shifting 
from candidate gene studies and genome wide association studies towards more 
integrative approaches to translate genetic findings into clinical diagnostic 
and therapeutic tools.
EXPERT COMMENTARY: Integrative approaches combining polygenic or genomic data 
with multi-omics technologies have the potential to discover new biologic 
mechanisms and biomarkers for severe asthma and asthma exacerbations. Greater 
understanding of genomics and underlying biologic pathways will also lead to 
improved prevention and treatment, lowering costs, morbidity, and mortality. The 
utilization of genomic testing and personalized medicine may revolutionize 
asthma management, in particular for patients with severe, refractory asthma.

DOI: 10.1080/23808993.2016.1269600
PMCID: PMC5642928
PMID: 29051920

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interest The authors have no 
relevant affiliations or financial involvement with any organization or entity 
with a financial interest in or financial conflict with the subject matter or 
materials discussed in the manuscript. This includes employment, consultancies, 
honoraria, stock ownership or options, expert testimony, grants or patents 
received or pending, or royalties.