1. PLoS One. 2017 Oct 27;12(10):e0186984. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0186984. 
eCollection 2017.

Use of ferrets for electrophysiologic monitoring of ion transport.

Kaza N(1)(2), Raju SV(1)(2), Cadillac JM(3), Trombley JA(4), Rasmussen L(1)(2), 
Tang L(1)(2), Dohm E(3), Harrod KS(4), Rowe SM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, 
Alabama, United States of America.
(2)Gregory Fleming James Cystic Fibrosis Research Center, University of Alabama 
at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama, United States of America.
(3)Animal Resources Program, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, 
Alabama, United States of America.
(4)Department of Anesthesiology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 
Birmingham, Alabama, United States of America.

Limited success achieved in translating basic science discoveries into clinical 
applications for chronic airway diseases is attributed to differences in 
respiratory anatomy and physiology, poor approximation of pathologic processes, 
and lack of correlative clinical endpoints between humans and laboratory animal 
models. Here, we discuss advantages of using ferrets (Mustela putorus furo) as a 
model for improved understanding of human airway physiology and demonstrate 
assays for quantifying airway epithelial ion transport in vivo and ex vivo, and 
establish air-liquid interface cultures of ferret airway epithelial cells as a 
complementary in vitro model for mechanistic studies. We present data here that 
establishes the feasibility of measuring these human disease endpoints in 
ferrets. Briefly, potential difference across the nasal and the lower airway 
epithelium in ferrets could be consistently assessed, were highly reproducible, 
and responsive to experimental interventions. Additionally, ferret airway 
epithelial cells were amenable to primary cell culture methods for in vitro 
experiments as was the use of ferret tracheal explants as an ex vivo system for 
assessing ion transport. The feasibility of conducting multiple assessments of 
disease outcomes supports the adoption of ferrets as a highly relevant model for 
research in obstructive airway diseases.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0186984
PMCID: PMC5659650
PMID: 29077751 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The laboratory is funded by 
Astra Zeneca, on projects unrelated to the present work. This does not alter our 
adherence to PloS One policies on sharing data and materials.