1. J Microbiol Immunol Infect. 2020 Feb;53(1):42-48. doi: 
10.1016/j.jmii.2017.09.006. Epub 2017 Nov 13.

Streptococcus pyogenes nuclease A (SpnA) mediated virulence does not exclusively 
depend on nuclease activity.

Chalmers C(1), Khemlani AHJ(1), Sohn CR(1), Loh JMS(2), Tsai CJ(2), Proft T(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine & Pathology, School of Medical Sciences, 
University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
(2)Department of Molecular Medicine & Pathology, School of Medical Sciences, 
University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand; Maurice Wilkins Centre for 
Molecular Biodiscovery, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
(3)Department of Molecular Medicine & Pathology, School of Medical Sciences, 
University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand; Maurice Wilkins Centre for 
Molecular Biodiscovery, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand. 
Electronic address: t.proft@auckland.ac.nz.

BACKGROUND: Streptococcus pyogenes, or Group A Streptococcus (GAS), is a human 
pathogen that causes a wide range of diseases, including pharyngitis, 
necrotizing fasciitis and toxic shock syndrome. The bacterium produces a large 
arsenal of virulence factors, including the cell wall-anchored Streptococcus 
pyogenes nuclease A (SpnA), which facilitates immune evasion by degrading the 
DNA backbone of neutrophil extracellular traps. SpnA consists of a C-terminal 
endo/exonuclease domain and a N-terminal domain of unknown function.
METHODS: Recombinant SpnA mutants were generated by alanine conversion of 
selected residues that were predicted to play a role in the enzymatic activity 
and tested for their ability to degrade DNA. A GAS spnA deletion mutant was 
complemented with a plasmid-borne catalytic site mutant and analyzed for 
virulence in a Galleria mellonella (wax moth) infection model.
RESULTS: Several predicted residues were experimentally confirmed to play a role 
in SpnA enzymatic activity. These include Glu592, Arg696, His716, Asp767, 
Asn769, Asp810 and Asp842. Complementation of a GAS spnA deletion mutant with a 
spnA H716A mutant gene partially restored virulence in wax moth larvae, whereas 
complementation with the spnA wt gene completely restored activity. Furthermore, 
complementation with a secreted form of SpnA showed reduced virulence.
CONCLUSION: Our results show that abolishing the enzymatic activity of SpnA only 
partially reduces virulence suggesting that SpnA has an additional virulence 
function, which might be located on the N-terminal domain. Furthermore, cell 
wall-anchoring of SpnA results in higher virulence compared to secreted SpnA, 
probably due to a higher local density of the enzyme.

Copyright © 2017. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmii.2017.09.006
PMID: 29158081 [Indexed for MEDLINE]