1. J Clin Microbiol. 2018 Jan 24;56(2):e01100-17. doi: 10.1128/JCM.01100-17.
Print  2018 Feb.

A Predominant Variable-Number Tandem-Repeat Cluster of Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis Isolates among Asylum Seekers in the Netherlands and Denmark, 
Deciphered by Whole-Genome Sequencing.

Jajou R(1), de Neeling A(2), Rasmussen EM(3), Norman A(3), Mulder A(2), van 
Hunen R(2)(4), de Vries G(2)(4), Haddad W(5), Anthony R(2), Lillebaek T(3), van 
der Hoek W(2), van Soolingen D(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)National Institute for Public Health and the Environment, Bilthoven, The 
Netherlands rana.jajou@rivm.nl.
(2)National Institute for Public Health and the Environment, Bilthoven, The 
Netherlands.
(3)International Reference Laboratory of Mycobacteriology, Statens Serum 
Institut, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(4)KNCV Tuberculosis Foundation, The Hague, The Netherlands.
(5)Municipal Health Service, GGD Hart voor Brabant, 's-Hertogenbosch, The 
Netherlands.
(6)Radboud University Medical Center, Department of Medical Microbiology, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

In many countries, Mycobacterium tuberculosis isolates are routinely subjected 
to variable-number tandem-repeat (VNTR) typing to investigate M. tuberculosis 
transmission. Unexpectedly, cross-border clusters were identified among African 
refugees in the Netherlands and Denmark, although transmission in those 
countries was unlikely. Whole-genome sequencing (WGS) was applied to analyze 
transmission in depth and to assess the precision of VNTR typing. WGS was 
applied to 40 M. tuberculosis isolates from refugees in the Netherlands and 
Denmark (most of whom were from the Horn of Africa) that shared the exact same 
VNTR profile. Cluster investigations were undertaken to identify in-country 
epidemiological links. Combining WGS results for the isolates (all members of 
the central Asian strain [CAS]/Delhi genotype), from both European countries, an 
average genetic distance of 80 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) (maximum, 
153 SNPs) was observed. The few pairs of isolates with confirmed epidemiological 
links, except for one pair, had a maximum distance of 12 SNPs. WGS divided this 
refugee cluster into several subclusters of patients from the same country of 
origin. Although the M. tuberculosis cases, mainly originating from African 
countries, shared the exact same VNTR profile, most were clearly distinguished 
by WGS. The average genetic distance in this specific VNTR cluster was 2 times 
greater than that in other VNTR clusters. Thus, identical VNTR profiles did not 
represent recent direct M. tuberculosis transmission for this group of patients. 
It appears that either these strains from Africa are extremely conserved 
genetically or there is ongoing transmission of this genotype among refugees on 
their long migration routes from Africa to Europe.

Copyright © 2018 Jajou et al.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.01100-17
PMCID: PMC5786717
PMID: 29167288 [Indexed for MEDLINE]