1. Sci Rep. 2017 Nov 23;7(1):16102. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-16487-y.

Kidney Androgen-Regulated Protein (KAP) Transgenic Mice Are Protected Against 
High-Fat Diet Induced Metabolic Syndrome.

de Quixano BB(1), Villena JA(2), Aranda M(1), Brils G(1), Cuevas A(1), Hespel 
T(1), Lekuona H(1), Súarez C(1), Tornavaca O(1), Meseguer A(3)(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Fisiopatologia Renal. Centre d'Investigacions en Bioquímica i Biologia 
Molecular (CIBBIM). Institut de Recerca Vall d'Hebron (VHIR), Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Laboratory of Metabolism and Obesity. Vall d'Hebron Institut de Recerca 
(VHIR), Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Fisiopatologia Renal. Centre d'Investigacions en Bioquímica i Biologia 
Molecular (CIBBIM). Institut de Recerca Vall d'Hebron (VHIR), Barcelona, Spain. 
ana.meseguer@vhir.org.
(4)Departament de Bioquímica i Biologia Molecular. Unitat de Bioquímica de 
Medicina. Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra (Barcelona), Spain. 
ana.meseguer@vhir.org.
(5)Instituto Reina Sofía de Investigación Nefrológica. Fundación Renal Íñigo 
Álvarez de Toledo, Álvarez de Toledo, Spain. ana.meseguer@vhir.org.
(6)Red de Investigación Renal (REDINREN), Instituto Carlos III-FEDER, Madrid, 
Spain. ana.meseguer@vhir.org.

Metabolic Syndrome (MS) is reaching epidemic proportions with significant social 
and economical burden worldwide. Since the molecular basis of MS remains poorly 
defined, we investigated the impact of KAP, a kidney specific androgen-regulated 
gene, in the development of high fat-diet (hfd)-induced MS. Tg mice 
overexpressing KAP specifically in proximal tubule cells of the kidney exhibited 
reduced body weight and lower liver and adipose tissue weight compared to 
control littermates when fed a hfd. KAP Tg mice showed diminished adipocyte 
hypertrophy and reduced hepatic steatosis, significantly correlating with 
expression of relevant molecular markers and lower lipid content in liver. KAP 
transgenic were protected from hfd-induced insulin resistance, increased blood 
pressure and exhibited lower IL-6 serum levels and diminished expression of 
inflammatory markers in the adipose. Moreover, KAP was localized in the 
secretory pathway of proximal tubule cells and it is released to the 
extracellular media, preventing IL-6 induction and STAT-3 activation upon TNFα 
stimulation. We conclude that KAP, which might act as a hormone-like product in 
extra-renal tissues, protects Tg mice against hfd-induced MS by preventing 
inflammatory related events that are mediated, in part, through the IL-6 
pathway.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-16487-y
PMCID: PMC5701062
PMID: 29170528 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.