1. BMC Med Res Methodol. 2017 Dec 4;17(1):160. doi: 10.1186/s12874-017-0434-1.

Performance of the marginal structural cox model for estimating individual and 
joined effects of treatments given in combination.

Lusivika-Nzinga C(1), Selinger-Leneman H(1), Grabar S(1)(2), Costagliola D(1), 
Carrat F(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Sorbonne Universités, INSERM, UPMC Université Paris 06, Institut Pierre Louis 
d'épidémiologie et de Santé Publique (IPLESP UMRS 1136), Paris, France.
(2)Unité de Biostatistique et d'épidémiologie Groupe hospitalier Cochin Broca 
Hôtel-Dieu, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), and Université Paris 
Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France.
(3)Sorbonne Universités, INSERM, UPMC Université Paris 06, Institut Pierre Louis 
d'épidémiologie et de Santé Publique (IPLESP UMRS 1136), Paris, France. 
fabrice.carrat@iplesp.upmc.fr.
(4)Unité de Santé Publique, Hôpital Saint-Antoine, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux 
de Paris, Paris, France. fabrice.carrat@iplesp.upmc.fr.

BACKGROUND: The Marginal Structural Cox Model (Cox-MSM), an alternative approach 
to handle time-dependent confounder, was introduced for survival analysis and 
applied to estimate the joint causal effect of two time-dependent nonrandomized 
treatments on survival among HIV-positive subjects. Nevertheless, Cox-MSM 
performance in the case of multiple treatments has not been fully explored under 
different degree of time-dependent confounding for treatments or in case of 
interaction between treatments. We aimed to evaluate and compare the performance 
of the marginal structural Cox model (Cox-MSM) to the standard Cox model in 
estimating the treatment effect in the case of multiple treatments under 
different scenarios of time-dependent confounding and when an interaction 
between treatment effects is present.
METHODS: We specified a Cox-MSM with two treatments including an interaction 
term for situations where an adverse event might be caused by two treatments 
taken simultaneously but not by each treatment taken alone. We simulated 
longitudinal data with two treatments and a time-dependent confounder affected 
by one or the two treatments. To fit the Cox-MSM, we used the inverse 
probability weighting method. We illustrated the method to evaluate the specific 
effect of protease inhibitors combined (or not) to other antiretroviral 
medications on the anal cancer risk in HIV-infected individuals, with CD4 cell 
count as time-dependent confounder.
RESULTS: Overall, Cox-MSM performed better than the standard Cox model. 
Furthermore, we showed that estimates were unbiased when an interaction term was 
included in the model.
CONCLUSION: Cox-MSM may be used for accurately estimating causal individual and 
joined treatment effects from a combination therapy in presence of 
time-dependent confounding provided that an interaction term is estimated.

DOI: 10.1186/s12874-017-0434-1
PMCID: PMC5715511
PMID: 29202691 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: The 
authors declare that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: 
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.