1. PLoS One. 2017 Dec 7;12(12):e0189179. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0189179. 
eCollection 2017.

Compensatory role of Neuroglobin in nervous and non-nervous cancer cells in 
response to the nutrient deprivation.

Fiocchetti M(1), Cipolletti M(1), Marino M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Science, University of Roma Tre, Viale Guglielmo Marconi, Roma, 
Italy.

Environmental factors or adverse growth conditions that may reduce cell function 
or viability are considered stress. The cell ability to sense and respond to 
environmental stresses determine its function and survival destiny. We recently 
defined Neuroglobin (NGB), a heme-protein, as a compensatory protein in the 
17β-Estradiol (E2) anti-apoptotic activity and as a sensor of oxidative stress 
in both neurons and breast cancer cells. Here, the possibility that NGB levels 
could represent a pivotal regulator of integrated response of cancer cells to 
stress has been evaluated. Data obtained in neuroblastoma and in breast cancer 
cell lines evidence that nutrient deprivation significantly up-regulated NGB 
levels at different time points. However, the analysis of autophagy activation 
led to exclude any possible role of stress- or E2-induced NGB in the upstream 
regulation of general autophagy. However, the over-expression of Flag-NGB in ERα 
stable transfected HEK-293 cells completely affects nutrient deprivation-induced 
decrease in cell number. In addition, reported results indicate that modulation 
of the anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 level may play a key role in the protective NGB 
function against energetic stress. Overall, these data define a role of NGB as 
compensatory protein in the cell machinery activated in response to stress and 
as general stress adaptation marker of cancer cells susceptible to oxidative 
stress, oxygen and, as demonstrated here for the first time, even to nutrient 
willingness. Despite the lacking of any direct NGB role on autophagic flux 
activated by energetic stress, NGB upregulation appears functional in delaying 
stress-related cell death allowing an appropriate cell response and adaptation 
to the changing extracellular conditions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0189179
PMCID: PMC5720711
PMID: 29216269 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: These authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.