1. PLoS One. 2017 Dec 15;12(12):e0189151. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0189151. 
eCollection 2017.

Treatment with albumin-hydroxyoleic acid complex restores sensorimotor function 
in rats with spinal cord injury: Efficacy and gene expression regulation.

Avila-Martin G(1), Mata-Roig M(2), Galán-Arriero I(1), Taylor JS(1)(3)(4), 
Busquets X(5), Escribá PV(5).

Author information:
(1)Hospital Nacional de Parapléjicos, Toledo, Spain.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Valencia, Valencia, Spain.
(3)Stoke Mandeville Spinal Research, National Spinal Injuries Centre, 
Buckinghamshire Healthcare Trust, NHS, Aylesbury, United Kingdom.
(4)Harris Manchester College, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(5)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biomedicine, University of the Balearic Islands, 
Palma de Mallorca, Spain.

Sensorimotor dysfunction following incomplete spinal cord injury (SCI) is often 
characterized by paralysis, spasticity and pain. Previously, we showed that 
intrathecal (i.t.) administration of the albumin-oleic acid (A-OA) complex in 
rats with SCI produced partial improvement of these symptoms and that oral 
2-hydroxyoleic acid (HOA, a non-hydrolyzable OA analogue), was efficacious in 
the modulation and treatment of nociception and pain-related anxiety, 
respectively. Here we observed that intrathecal treatment with the complex 
albumin-HOA (A-HOA) every 3 days following T9 spinal contusion injury improved 
locomotor function assessed with the Rotarod and inhibited TA noxious reflex 
activity in Wistar rats. To investigate the mechanism of action of A-HOA, 
microarray analysis was carried out in the spinal cord lesion area. 
Representative genes involved in pain and neuroregeneration were selected to 
validate the changes observed in the microarray analysis by quantitative 
real-time RT-PCR. Comparison of the expression between healthy rats, SCI rats, 
and SCI treated with A-HOA rats revealed relevant changes in the expression of 
genes associated with neuronal morphogenesis and growth, neuronal survival, pain 
and inflammation. Thus, treatment with A-HOA not only induced a significant 
overexpression of growth and differentiation factor 10 (GDF10), tenascin C 
(TNC), aspirin (ASPN) and sushi-repeat-containing X-linked 2 (SRPX2), but also a 
significant reduction in the expression of prostaglandin E synthase (PTGES) and 
phospholipases A1 and A2 (PLA1/2). Currently, SCI has very important unmet 
clinical needs. A-HOA downregulated genes involved with inflammation and 
upregulated genes involved in neuronal growth, and may serve to promote recovery 
of function after experimental SCI.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0189151
PMCID: PMC5731767
PMID: 29244816 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.