1. Appl Clin Genet. 2017 Dec 19;11:1-8. doi: 10.2147/TACG.S144383. eCollection 
2018.

Evaluation of amplification refractory mutation system (ARMS) technique for 
quick and accurate prenatal gene diagnosis of CHM variant in choroideremia.

Yang L(1), Ijaz I(1), Cheng J(1)(2), Wei C(1)(3), Tan X(4), Khan MA(1), Fu X(5), 
Fu J(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Epigenetics and Oncology, the Research Center for Precision 
Medicine, Southwest Medical University, Luzhou.
(2)Department of Pathology, Hunan Normal University College of Medicine, 
Changsha.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Quality Research in Chinese Medicine, Macau 
University of Science and Technology, Macau (SAR).
(4)Reproductive and Genetic Center, the Central Hospital of Xiangtan City, 
Xiangtan.
(5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, First Affiliated Hospital of 
Southwest Medical University, Luzhou, People's Republic of China.

Choroideremia is a rare X-linked recessive inherited disorder that causes 
chorioretinal dystrophy leading to visual impairment in its early stages which 
finally causes total blindness in the affected person. It is caused due to 
mutations in the CHM gene. In this study, we have recruited a pedigree with 
choroideremia and detected a nonsense variant (c.C799T:p.R267X) in CHM of the 
proband (I:1). Different primer sets for amplification refractory mutation 
system (ARMS) were designed and PCR conditions were optimized. Then, we 
evaluated the sequence variant in the patient, carrier, and a fetus by using 
ARMS technique to identify if they inherited the pathogenic gene from parental 
generation; we used amniotic fluid DNA for the diagnosis of the gene in the 
fetus. The primer pairs, WT2+C and MT+C, amplified high specific products in 
different DNAs which were verified by Sanger sequencing. Based on our results, 
ARMS technique is fast, accurate, and reliable prenatal gene diagnostic tool to 
assess CHM variants. Taken together, our study indicates that ARMS technique can 
be used as a potential molecular tool in the diagnosis of prenatal mutation for 
choroideremia as well as other genetic diseases in undeveloped and developing 
countries, where there might be shortage of medical resources and supplies.

DOI: 10.2147/TACG.S144383
PMCID: PMC5741072
PMID: 29296092

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of 
interest in this work.