1. Iran J Public Health. 2018 Jan;47(1):40-48.

Expression of Multidrug Resistance Genes in Peripheral Blood of Patients with 
Refractory Epilepsy and the Reverse Effect of Oxcarbazepine on Its Expression.

Ji J(1), Li G(2), Ma Y(2), Pan S(2), Yuan R(2).

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Neurology, Binzhou People's Hospital, Binzhou, Shandong, China.
(2)Dept. of Neurology, Binzhou City Center Hospital, Binzhou, Shandong, China.

BACKGROUND: We aimed to investigate the expression levels of multidrug 
resistance gene 1 (MDR1), multidrug resistance-associated protein 1 (MRP1) and 
multidrug resistance P-glycoprotein (P-gp) in peripheral blood of patients with 
refractory epilepsy.
METHODS: Patients with epilepsy (n=24) and those with refractory epilepsy (n=24) 
were selected, and 30 normal volunteers were enrolled as control. The expression 
level of MDR1 genes was detected using semi-quantitative reverse 
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). The expression levels of P-gp 
and MRP1 were detected via Western blotting. The above-mentioned patients with 
refractory epilepsy were randomly divided into the oxcarbazepine group (OB 
group) and placebo group (OZ group). After consecutive 8-week oral 
administration of drugs, the curative effect and adverse reactions of patients 
with refractory epilepsy were observed, and the life quality of patients was 
evaluated.
RESULTS: The expression levels of MDR1 genes, P-gp and MRP1 in peripheral blood 
of patients with refractory epilepsy were significantly increased compared with 
those of patients with epilepsy, (P<0.05). At 8 weeks after the drug therapy, 
the effective rate and life quality of patients in OB group were significantly 
higher than those of patients in OZ group (P<0.01). There was no significant 
difference in the incidence rate of adverse reactions during the treatment 
between the two groups. After treatment, the expression levels of MDR1, P-gp and 
MRP1 in peripheral blood of patients in OB group were significantly lower than 
those of patients in OZ group (P<0.01).
CONCLUSION: Oxacillipine could effectively improve the effective treatment rate 
of patients with refractory epilepsy. The mechanism may be related to MDR1, MRP1 
and Pgp expression.

PMCID: PMC5756599
PMID: 29318116

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interests The authors declare that 
there is no conflict of interests.