1. Vopr Virusol. 2016;61(5):200-4.

Buffalopox.

Borisevich SV, Marennikova SS, Stovba LF, Petrov AA, Krotvov VT, Makhlai AA.

Buffalopox is a contagious viral disease affecting milch buffaloes (Bubalus 
Bubalis) and, rarely, cows. The disease has zoonotic implications, as outbreaks 
are frequently associated with human infections, particularly in the milkers. 
Buffalopox is associated with high morbidity (80%). The clinical symptoms of the 
disease are characterized by wartline lesions on the udder, teats, inguinal 
region, base of the ears, and over the parotid. In the severe form, generalized 
rash is observed. Although the disease does not lead to high mortality, it has 
an adverse effect on the productivity and working capacity of the animals 
resulting in large economic losses. The outbreaks of buffalopox occurred 
frequently in India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Nepal, Iran, Egypt, and Indonesia, 
where buffaloes are reared as milch animals. The buffalopox is closely related 
with other Orthopoxviruses. In particular, it is close to the vaccinia virus. 
There is a view that the buffalopox virus might be derived from the vaccinia 
virus. It is possible that it became pathogenic to humans and animals through 
adaptive evolution of the genome by obtaining the virulence genes. PCR is 
performed for the C18L gene for the purpose of specific detection and 
differentiation of the buffalopox virus from other orthopoxviruses. The C18L 
gene encodes the ankyrin repeat protein, which determines the virus host range. 
The open reading frame of this gene is only 150-nucleotide long as against 453 
nucleotide in the vaccinia virus, 756 - in the camelpox virus, and 759 - in the 
cowpox virus. It can be concluded that a systematic study based on the 
epidemiology of the virus, existence of reservoirs, biological transmission, and 
the molecular organization of the buffalopox virus from buffalo, cow, and humans 
may pave the way to a better understanding of the circulating virus and 
contribute to the control of the disease using the suitable diagnostic and 
prophylactic measures.

PMID: 29323851 [Indexed for MEDLINE]