1. J Arthropod Borne Dis. 2017 Sep 8;11(3):344-353. eCollection 2017 Sep.

Genetic Variation of the β-tubulin Gene of Babesia caballi Strains.

Montes-Cortés MG(1), Fernández-García JL(2), Martínez-Estéllez MÁH(1).

Author information:
(1)Parasitology and Parasitological Diseases, Veterinary Faculty, Universidad de 
Extremadura, Cáceres, Spain.
(2)Genetics and Animal Breeding, Veterinary Faculty, Universidad de Extremadura, 
Cáceres, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Equine piroplasmosis is caused by two haemoprotozoan parasites: 
Babesia caballi and Theileria equi. Negative economic impact on international 
trade has been associated to endemic sites. This is the reason why carrier 
detection requires reliable diagnostic methods. Various diagnostic modalities 
can be used alone or in combination including PCR. However, genetic variation of 
commonly used genes is still of debate. The aim of this research was to sequence 
the β-tubulin gene of a B. caballi strain from Spain and to compare it with 
known β-tubulin sequences.
METHODS: DNA was isolated from a cryopreserved strain from Spain and acute and 
chronic carrier horses. Firstly, degenerated primer pairs were designed based on 
GenBank sequences of different Babesia and Theileria species for sequencing. The 
primers were redesigned to amplify both parasites, simultaneously. Finally, a 
species-specific primer pair for B. caballi was designed and a Restriction 
Fragment Length Polymorphism-PCR (PCR-RFLP) assay performed to know the 
difference of known B. caballi strains.
RESULTS: We provided new insights of the β-tubulin gene and a good molecular 
coverage of this gene, contributing with a number of useful primers to amplify 
T. equi and B. caballi. Moreover, PCR-RFLP assays based on the exon II of this 
gene confirmed the causative B. caballi strain in Spanish horses.
CONCLUSION: We reported useful primer pairs for diagnostic and a new sequence of 
the β-tubulin gene of B. caballi, which will facilitate the development of 
future assays and the detection of infected horses, preventing thus the spread 
of this disease worldwide.

PMCID: PMC5758630
PMID: 29322051