1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2018 Jan 4;4:239. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2017.00239. 
eCollection 2017.

Immunological Tolerance, Pregnancy, and Preeclampsia: The Roles of Semen 
Microbes and the Father.

Kenny LC(1)(2)(3), Kell DB(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)The Irish Centre for Fetal and Neonatal Translational Research (INFANT), 
University College Cork, Cork, Ireland.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University College Cork, Cork, 
Ireland.
(3)Faculty of Health and Life Sciences, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, 
United Kingdom.
(4)School of Chemistry, The University of Manchester, Manchester, United 
Kingdom.
(5)The Manchester Institute of Biotechnology, The University of Manchester, 
Manchester, United Kingdom.

Although it is widely considered, in many cases, to involve two separable stages 
(poor placentation followed by oxidative stress/inflammation), the precise 
originating causes of preeclampsia (PE) remain elusive. We have previously 
brought together some of the considerable evidence that a (dormant) microbial 
component is commonly a significant part of its etiology. However, apart from 
recognizing, consistent with this view, that the many inflammatory markers of PE 
are also increased in infection, we had little to say about immunity, whether 
innate or adaptive. In addition, we focused on the gut, oral and female urinary 
tract microbiomes as the main sources of the infection. We here marshall further 
evidence for an infectious component in PE, focusing on the immunological 
tolerance characteristic of pregnancy, and the well-established fact that 
increased exposure to the father's semen assists this immunological tolerance. 
As well as these benefits, however, semen is not sterile, microbial tolerance 
mechanisms may exist, and we also review the evidence that semen may be 
responsible for inoculating the developing conceptus (and maybe the placenta) 
with microbes, not all of which are benign. It is suggested that when they are 
not, this may be a significant cause of PE. A variety of epidemiological and 
other evidence is entirely consistent with this, not least correlations between 
semen infection, infertility and PE. Our view also leads to a series of other, 
testable predictions. Overall, we argue for a significant paternal role in the 
development of PE through microbial infection of the mother via insemination.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2017.00239
PMCID: PMC5758600
PMID: 29354635