1. Nat Chem Biol. 2018 Mar;14(3):317-324. doi: 10.1038/nchembio.2565. Epub 2018
Jan  29.

Rewiring T-cell responses to soluble factors with chimeric antigen receptors.

Chang ZL(1)(2), Lorenzini MH(3), Chen X(1), Tran U(4), Bangayan NJ(5), Chen 
YY(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(2)Molecular Biology Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, Los 
Angeles, California, USA.
(3)Department of Bioengineering, University of California, Los Angeles, Los 
Angeles, California, USA.
(4)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, Los 
Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(5)Department of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology, University of California, 
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA.

Chimeric antigen receptor (CAR)-expressing T cells targeting surface-bound tumor 
antigens have yielded promising clinical outcomes, with two CD19 CAR-T cell 
therapies recently receiving FDA approval for the treatment of B-cell 
malignancies. The adoption of CARs for the recognition of soluble ligands, a 
distinct class of biomarkers in physiology and disease, could considerably 
broaden the utility of CARs in disease treatment. In this study, we demonstrate 
that CAR-T cells can be engineered to respond robustly to diverse soluble 
ligands, including the CD19 ectodomain, GFP variants, and transforming growth 
factor beta (TGF-β). We additionally show that CAR signaling in response to 
soluble ligands relies on ligand-mediated CAR dimerization and that CAR 
responsiveness to soluble ligands can be fine-tuned by adjusting the mechanical 
coupling between the CAR's ligand-binding and signaling domains. Our results 
support a role for mechanotransduction in CAR signaling and demonstrate an 
approach for systematically engineering immune-cell responses to soluble, 
extracellular ligands.

DOI: 10.1038/nchembio.2565
PMCID: PMC6035732
PMID: 29377003 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Financial Interests Statement We 
declare competing financial interests in the form of a pending patent 
application whose value may be affected by the publication of this manuscript.