1. mBio. 2018 Feb 6;9(1):e02394-17. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02394-17.

Exploring the Antimicrobial Action of Quaternary Amines against Acinetobacter 
baumannii.

Knauf GA(1), Cunningham AL(1), Kazi MI(1), Riddington IM(2), Crofts AA(1)(3), 
Cattoir V(4)(5)(6), Trent MS(3), Davies BW(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, 
Texas, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas, USA.
(3)Department of Infectious Diseases, University of Georgia, College of 
Veterinary Medicine, Athens, Georgia, USA.
(4)University of Rennes 1, Inserm Unit U1230, Rennes, France.
(5)Department of Clinical Microbiology, University Hospital of Rennes, Rennes, 
France.
(6)National Reference Center for Antimicrobial Resistance (lab 'Enterococci'), 
Rennes, France.
(7)Department of Molecular Biosciences, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, 
Texas, USA bwdavies@utexas.edu.
(8)Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology, John Ring LaMontagne Center for 
Infectious Diseases, Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of 
Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas, USA.

Quaternary amine compounds (QAC) are potent antimicrobials used to prevent the 
spread of pathogenic bacteria. While they are known for their membrane-damaging 
properties, QAC action has been suggested to extend beyond the surface to 
intracellular targets. Here we characterize the range of action of the QAC 
biocide benzalkonium chloride (BZK) against the bacterial pathogen Acinetobacter 
baumannii At high concentrations, BZK acts through membrane disruption, but at 
low concentrations we show that wide-spread protein aggregation is associated 
with BZK-induced cell death. Resistance to BZK is found to develop through 
ribosomal protein mutations that protect A. baumannii against BZK-induced 
protein aggregation. The multifunctional impact of BZK led us to discover that 
alternative QAC structures, with low human toxicity, retain potent action 
against multidrug-resistant A. baumannii, Staphylococcus aureus, and Clostridium 
difficile and present opportunities for their development as 
antibiotics.IMPORTANCE Quaternary amine compounds (QACs) are widely used to 
prevent the spread of bacterial pathogens, but our understanding of their mode 
of action is incomplete. Here we describe disruption of bacterial proteostasis 
as an unrecognized action of QAC antimicrobial action and uncover the potential 
of diverse QAC structures to act as multitarget antibiotics.

Copyright © 2018 Knauf et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02394-17
PMCID: PMC5801471
PMID: 29437928 [Indexed for MEDLINE]