1. Trials. 2018 Feb 20;19(1):117. doi: 10.1186/s13063-018-2487-9.

Catheter Ablation versus Thoracoscopic Surgical Ablation in Long Standing 
Persistent Atrial Fibrillation (CASA-AF): study protocol for a randomised 
controlled trial.

Khan HR(1)(2)(3), Kralj-Hans I(1), Haldar S(1)(3), Bahrami T(1), Clague J(1), De 
Souza A(1), Francis D(2), Hussain W(1), Jarman J(1), Jones DG(1)(2), Mediratta 
N(4), Mohiaddin R(1), Salukhe T(1), Jones S(5), Lord J(6), Murphy C(7), Kelly 
J(7), Markides V(1), Gupta D(2)(3)(4), Wong T(8)(9)(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Royal Brompton and Harefield NHS Trust, London, UK.
(2)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London, UK.
(3)Institute of Cardiovascular Medicine and Science, London, UK.
(4)Liverpool Heart and Chest Hospital NHS Trust, Liverpool, UK.
(5)New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
(6)Southampton Health Technology Assessments Centre (SHTAC), University of 
Southampton, Southampton, UK.
(7)King's Clinical Trials Unit, Institute of Psychiatry, King's College London, 
London, UK.
(8)Royal Brompton and Harefield NHS Trust, London, UK. tom.wong@imperial.ac.uk.
(9)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London, UK. 
tom.wong@imperial.ac.uk.
(10)Institute of Cardiovascular Medicine and Science, London, UK. 
tom.wong@imperial.ac.uk.
(11)Royal Brompton Hospital, Sydney Street, London, UK. tom.wong@imperial.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Atrial fibrillation is the commonest arrhythmia which raises the 
risk of heart failure, thromboembolic stroke, morbidity and death. 
Pharmacological treatments of this condition are focused on heart rate control, 
rhythm control and reduction in risk of stroke. Selective ablation of cardiac 
tissues resulting in isolation of areas causing atrial fibrillation is another 
treatment strategy which can be delivered by two minimally invasive 
interventions: percutaneous catheter ablation and thoracoscopic surgical 
ablation. The main purpose of this trial is to compare the effectiveness and 
safety of these two interventions.
METHODS/DESIGN: Catheter Ablation versus Thoracoscopic Surgical Ablation in Long 
Standing Persistent Atrial Fibrillation (CASA-AF) is a prospective, 
multi-centre, randomised controlled trial within three NHS tertiary 
cardiovascular centres specialising in treatment of atrial fibrillation. 
Eligible adults (n = 120) with symptomatic, long-standing, persistent atrial 
fibrillation will be randomly allocated to either catheter ablation or 
thoracoscopic ablation in a 1:1 ratio. Pre-determined lesion sets will be 
delivered in each treatment arm with confirmation of appropriate conduction 
block. All patients will have an implantable loop recorder (ILR) inserted 
subcutaneously immediately following ablation to enable continuous heart rhythm 
monitoring for at least 12 months. The devices will be programmed to detect 
episodes of atrial fibrillation and atrial tachycardia ≥ 30 s in duration. The 
patients will be followed for 12 months, completing appropriate clinical 
assessments and questionnaires every 3 months. The ILR data will be wirelessly 
transmitted daily and evaluated every month for the duration of the follow-up. 
The primary endpoint in the study is freedom from atrial fibrillation and atrial 
tachycardia at the end of the follow-up period.
DISCUSSION: The CASA-AF Trial is a National Institute for Health Research-funded 
study that will provide first-class evidence on the comparative efficacy, safety 
and cost-effectiveness of thoracoscopic surgical ablation and conventional 
percutaneous catheter ablation for long-standing persistent atrial fibrillation. 
In addition, the results of the trial will provide information on the effects on 
patients' quality of life.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ISRCTN Registry, ISRCTN18250790 . Registered on 24 April 
2015.

DOI: 10.1186/s13063-018-2487-9
PMCID: PMC5819216
PMID: 29458408 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: The 
study received ethical approval from the Bristol Research Ethics Committee 
Centre (NRES Committee South Central - Oxford A) on 5 March 2015 (REC reference 
[15]/SC/0023). All study participants are asked to sign a written informed 
consent form before taking part in the study. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not 
applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: HRK’s salary was funded by the CASA-AF Trial. 
HRK has a non-financial competing interest for using data for a higher 
post-graduate degree. VM is a consultant for Biosense Webster. The other authors 
declare that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature 
remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.