1. Cell Mol Immunol. 2018 May;15(5):428-437. doi: 10.1038/cmi.2018.4. Epub 2018
Mar  19.

TLR-mediated metabolic reprogramming in the tumor microenvironment: potential 
novel strategies for cancer immunotherapy.

Huang L(1)(2), Xu H(2), Peng G(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Allergy and Immunology, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Saint Louis University School of Medicine, 63104, Saint 
Louis, MO, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Jiangsu University School of 
Medicine, 212013, Zhenjiang, China.
(3)Division of Infectious Diseases, Allergy and Immunology, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Saint Louis University School of Medicine, 63104, Saint 
Louis, MO, USA. guangyong.peng@health.slu.edu.

Cellular energy metabolism not only promotes tumor cell growth and metastasis 
but also directs immune cell survival, proliferation and the ability to perform 
specific and functional immune responses within the tumor microenvironment. A 
better understanding of the molecular regulation of metabolism in different cell 
components in the tumor-suppressive microenvironment is critical for the 
development of effective strategies for human cancer treatments. Toll-like 
receptors (TLRs) have recently been recognized as critical factors involved in 
tumor pathogenesis, regulating both tumor cells and tumor-infiltrating innate 
and adaptive immune cells. However, little is known about the molecular 
crosstalk between TLR signaling and tumor or/and immune cell metabolism, 
although there is abundant expression of TLRs in these cells. In this review, we 
explore the functional role of TLR signaling in reprogramming cell metabolism in 
the tumor microenvironment. In particular, we discuss how malignant tumors 
regulate metabolism to support their growth and survival, summarize more 
recently identified metabolic profiles of different immune cell subsets and 
TLR-mediated regulation of cellular metabolism in both tumor and immune cells, 
and further explore potential strategies targeting cell metabolism for TLR-based 
cancer therapy. An improved understanding of these issues should open new 
avenues for the development of novel strategies via TLR-mediated metabolic 
reprogramming of the tumor microenvironment for cancer immunotherapy.

DOI: 10.1038/cmi.2018.4
PMCID: PMC6068099
PMID: 29553135 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.