1. Alzheimers Dement (Amst). 2018 Feb 6;10:172-181. doi: 
10.1016/j.dadm.2018.01.002. eCollection 2018.

Cerebrospinal fluid and serum MHPG improve Alzheimer's disease versus dementia 
with Lewy bodies differential diagnosis.

Janssens J(1)(2), Vermeiren Y(1)(2), Fransen E(3), Aerts T(1), Van Dam D(1)(2), 
Engelborghs S(1)(4), De Deyn PP(1)(2)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neurochemistry and Behavior, Institute Born-Bunge, University 
of Antwerp, Wilrijk (Antwerp), Belgium.
(2)Department of Neurology, Alzheimer Research Center, University Medical Center 
Groningen (UMCG), University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(3)StatUa Center for Statistics, University of Antwerp, Edegem, Belgium.
(4)Department of Neurology, Memory Clinic of Hospital Network Antwerp (ZNA) 
Middelheim and Hoge Beuken, Antwerp, Belgium.
(5)Biobank, Institute Born-Bunge, University of Antwerp, Wilrijk (Antwerp), 
Belgium.

INTRODUCTION: Given the challenges concerning the differential diagnosis of 
dementia, we investigated the possible added value of monoaminergic compounds to 
the standard cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) Alzheimer's disease (AD) biomarkers. 
Particularly, regarding the AD versus dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) 
comparison, monoamines or their metabolites might have added discriminative 
value as there is a more severe neuropathological burden in the locus coeruleus 
of DLB patients, the principal site of noradrenaline synthesis.
METHODS: We applied enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) to analyze CSF 
amyloid β peptide of 42 amino acids, total tau, and tau phosphorylated at 
threonine 181, in patients with AD, frontotemporal dementia, DLB/Parkinson's 
disease dementia, and controls. Reversed-phase high-performance liquid 
chromatography with electrochemical detection was implemented to study monoamine 
and metabolite levels in CSF and serum. Stepwise forward conditional logistic 
regression and receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analyses were 
performed to assess the diagnostic accuracy of these newly fitted models 
containing the most discriminative indicators of disease status.
RESULTS: Most significant differences in CSF and serum were confined to the 
noradrenergic system. More specifically, CSF 3-methoxy-4-hydroxyphenylglycol 
(MHPG) levels were higher, whereas serum MHPG levels were lower, in DLB patients 
compared with all other groups. Addition of CSF and serum MHPG levels to the CSF 
AD biomarker panel significantly increased diagnostic accuracy between 
DLB/Parkinson's disease dementia and AD. Interestingly, a model only including 
CSF and serum MHPG without the classic AD biomarker panel reached similar area 
under the curve values.
DISCUSSION: We hypothesize that varying degrees of neuronal loss in the locus 
coeruleus of DLB/Parkinson's disease dementia versus AD patients result in 
differentially altered MHPG levels, making this metabolite a valuable biomarker.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dadm.2018.01.002
PMCID: PMC5852321
PMID: 29552632