1. Wellcome Open Res. 2017 Sep 27;2:93. doi: 10.12688/wellcomeopenres.12280.3. 
eCollection 2017.

Feature determination from powered wheelchair user joystick input 
characteristics for adapting driving assistance.

Gillham M(1), Pepper M(1), Kelly S(1), Howells G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Engineering and Digital Arts, Jennison Building, University of 
Kent, Canterbury, Kent, UK.

Background: Many powered wheelchair users find their medical condition and their 
ability to drive the wheelchair will change over time. In order to maintain 
their independent mobility, the powered chair will require adjustment over time 
to suit the user's needs, thus regular input from healthcare professionals is 
required. These limited resources can result in the user having to wait weeks 
for appointments, resulting in the user losing independent mobility, 
consequently affecting their quality of life and that of their family and 
carers. In order to provide an adaptive assistive driving system, a range of 
features need to be identified which are suitable for initial system setup and 
can automatically provide data for re-calibration over the long term. Methods: A 
questionnaire was designed to collect information from powered wheelchair users 
with regard to their symptoms and how they changed over time. Another group of 
volunteer participants were asked to drive a test platform and complete a course 
which represented manoeuvring in a very confined space as quickly as possible. 
Two of those participants were also monitored over a longer period in their 
normal home daily environment. Features, thought to be suitable, were examined 
using pattern recognition classifiers to determine their suitability for 
identifying the changing user input over time. Results: The results are not 
designed to provide absolute insight into the individual user behaviour, as no 
ground truth of their ability has been determined, they do nevertheless 
demonstrate the utility of the measured features to provide evidence of the 
users' changing ability over time whilst driving a powered wheelchair. 
Conclusions: Determining the driving features and adjustable elements provides 
the initial step towards developing an adaptable assistive technology for the 
user when the ground truths of the individual and their machine have been 
learned by a smart pattern recognition system.

DOI: 10.12688/wellcomeopenres.12280.3
PMCID: PMC5829523
PMID: 29552641

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: No competing interests were 
disclosed.