1. Front Neurosci. 2018 Mar 9;12:144. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2018.00144. eCollection 
2018.

"Till Death Do Us Part": A Potential Irreversible Link Between Aberrant Cell 
Cycle Control and Neurodegeneration in the Adult Olfactory Bulb.

Omais S(1), Jaafar C(1), Ghanem N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, American University of Beirut, Beirut, Lebanon.

Adult neurogenesis (AN) is an ongoing developmental process that generates 
newborn neurons in the olfactory bulb (OB) and the hippocampus (Hi) throughout 
life and significantly contributes to brain plasticity. Adult neural stem and 
progenitor cells (aNSPCs) are relatively limited in number and fate and are 
spatially restricted to the subventricular zone (SVZ) and the subgranular zone 
(SGZ). During AN, the distinct roles played by cell cycle proteins extend beyond 
cell cycle control and constitute key regulatory mechanisms involved in neuronal 
maturation and survival. Importantly, aberrant cell cycle re-entry (CCE) in 
post-mitotic neurons has been strongly linked to the abnormal pathophysiology in 
rodent models of neurodegenerative diseases with potential implications on the 
etiology and progression of such diseases in humans. Here, we present an 
overview of AN in the SVZ-OB and olfactory epithelium (OE) in mice and humans 
followed by a comprehensive update of the distinct roles played by cell cycle 
proteins including major tumors suppressor genes in various steps during 
neurogenesis. We also discuss accumulating evidence underlining a strong link 
between abnormal cell cycle control, olfactory dysfunction and neurodegeneration 
in the adult and aging brain. We emphasize that: (1) CCE in post-mitotic neurons 
due to loss of cell cycle suppression and/or age-related insults as well as DNA 
damage can anticipate the development of neurodegenerative lesions and protein 
aggregates, (2) the age-related decline in SVZ and OE neurogenesis is associated 
with compensatory pro-survival mechanisms in the aging OB which are 
interestingly similar to those detected in Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's 
disease in humans, and (3) the OB represents a well suitable model to study the 
early manifestation of age-related defects that may eventually progress into the 
formation of neurodegenerative lesions and, possibly, spread to the rest of the 
brain. Such findings may provide a novel approach to the modeling of 
neurodegenerative diseases in humans from early detection to progression and 
treatment as well.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2018.00144
PMCID: PMC5854681
PMID: 29593485