1. J Cachexia Sarcopenia Muscle. 2018 Aug;9(4):771-785. doi: 10.1002/jcsm.12299. 
Epub 2018 Apr 2.

Muscle-restricted nuclear receptor interaction protein knockout causes motor 
neuron degeneration through down-regulation of myogenin at the neuromuscular 
junction.

Chen HH(1), Tsai LK(2), Liao KY(1), Wu TC(1), Huang YH(1), Huang YC(1), Chang 
SW(1), Wang PY(3), Tsao YP(4), Chen SL(1).

Author information:
(1)Graduate Institute of Microbiology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan 
University, 7F, No. 1, Sec. 1, Jen-Ai Rd., Taipei, 100, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Neurology, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Graduate Institute of Brain and Mind Sciences, College of Medicine, National 
Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Nuclear receptor interaction protein (NRIP) is a calcium/calmodulin 
(CaM) binding protein. Nuclear receptor interaction protein interacts with CaM 
to activate calcineurin and CaMKII signalling. The conventional NRIP knockout 
mice (global knockout) showed muscular abnormality with reduction of muscle 
oxidative functions and motor function defects.
METHODS: To investigate the role of NRIP on neuromuscular system, we generated 
muscle-restricted NRIP knockout mice [conditional knockout (cKO)]. The muscle 
functions (including oxidative muscle markers and muscle strength) and lumbar 
motor neuron functions [motor neuron number, axon denervation, neuromuscular 
junction (NMJ)] were tested. The laser-captured microdissection at NMJ of 
skeletal muscles and adenovirus gene therapy for rescued effects were performed.
RESULTS: The cKO mice showed muscular abnormality with reduction of muscle 
oxidative functions and impaired motor performances as global knockout mice. To 
our surprise, cKO mice also displayed motor neuron degeneration with abnormal 
architecture of NMJ. Specifically, the cKO mice revealed reduced motor neuron 
number with small neuronal size in lumbar spinal cord as well as denervating 
change, small motor endplates, and decreased myonuclei number at NMJ in skeletal 
muscles. To explore the mechanisms, we screened various muscle-derived factors 
and found that myogenin is a potential candidate that myogenin expression was 
lower in skeletal muscles of cKO mice than wild-type mice. Because NRIP and 
myogenin were colocalized around acetylcholine receptors at NMJ, we extracted 
RNA from synaptic and extrasynaptic regions of muscles using laser capture 
microdissection and showed that myogenin expression was especially lower at 
synaptic region in cKO than wild-type mice. Notably, overexpression of myogenin 
using intramuscular adenovirus encoding myogenin treatment rescued abnormal NMJ 
architecture and preserved motor neuron death in cKO mice.
CONCLUSIONS: In summary, we demonstrated that deprivation of NRIP decreases 
myogenin expression at NMJ, possibly leading to abnormal NMJ formation, 
denervation of acetylcholine receptor, and subsequent loss of spinal motor 
neuron. Overexpression of myogenin in cKO mice can partially rescue abnormal NMJ 
architecture and motor neuron death. Therefore, muscular NRIP is a novel trophic 
factor supporting spinal motor neuron via stabilization of NMJ by myogenin 
expression.

© 2018 The Authors. Journal of Cachexia, Sarcopenia and Muscle published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of the Society on Sarcopenia, Cachexia and Wasting 
Disorders.

DOI: 10.1002/jcsm.12299
PMCID: PMC6104115
PMID: 29608040 [Indexed for MEDLINE]