1. BMC Genomics. 2018 Apr 2;19(1):228. doi: 10.1186/s12864-018-4607-z.

iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomic analysis reveals the lateral meristem 
developmental mechanism for branched spike development in tetraploid wheat 
(Triticum turgidum L.).

Chen S(1), Chen J(2), Hou F(2), Feng Y(2), Zhang R(3).

Author information:
(1)College of Agronomy, Henan Agricultural University/Collaborative Innovation 
Center of Henan Grain Crops, Zhengzhou, 450002, China.
(2)College of Agronomy, National Key Laboratory of Crop Genetics and Germplasm 
Enhancement/JCIC-MCP, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, 210095, China.
(3)College of Agronomy, National Key Laboratory of Crop Genetics and Germplasm 
Enhancement/JCIC-MCP, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, 210095, China. 
ygfeng@njau.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Spike architecture mutants in tetraploid wheat (Triticum turgidum 
L., 2n = 28, AABB) have a distinct morphology, with parts of the rachis node 
producing lateral meristems that develop into ramified spikelete (RSs) or 
four-rowed spikelete (FRSs). The genetic basis of RSs and FRSs has been 
analyzed, but little is known about the underlying developmental mechanisms of 
the lateral meristem. We used isobaric tags for relative and absolute 
quantitation (iTRAQ) to perform a quantitative proteomic analysis of immature 
spikes harvested from tetraploid near-isogenic lines of wheat with normal 
spikelete (NSs), FRSs, and RSs and investigated the molecular mechanisms of 
lateral meristem differentiation and development. This work provides valuable 
insight into the underlying functions of the lateral meristem and how it can 
produce differences in the branching of tetraploid wheat spikes.
RESULTS: Using an iTRAQ-based shotgun quantitation approach, 104 differential 
abundance proteins (DAPs) with < 1% false discovery rate (FDR) and a 1.5-fold 
change (> 1.50 or < 0.67) were identified by comparing FRS with NS and RS with 
NS genotypes. To determine the functions of the proteins, 38 co-expressed DAPs 
from the two groups were annotated using the Gene Ontology and Kyoto 
Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes analytical tools. We discovered that proteins 
involved in "post-embryonic development" and "metabolic pathways" such as 
carbohydrate and nitrogen metabolism could be used to construct a 
developmentally associated network. Additionally, 6 out of 38 DAPs in the 
network were analyzed using quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction, 
and the correlation coefficient between proteomics and qRT-PCR was 0.7005. These 
key genes and proteins were closely scrutinized and discussed.
CONCLUSIONS: Here, we predicted that DAPs involved in "post-embryonic 
development" and "metabolic pathways" may be responsible for the spikelete 
architecture changes in FRS and RS. Furthermore, we discussed the potential 
function of several vital DAPs from GO and KEGG analyses that were closely 
related to histone modification, ubiquitin-mediated protein degradation, 
transcription factors, carbohydrate and nitrogen metabolism and heat shock 
proteins (HSPs). This work provides valuable insight into the underlying 
functions of the lateral meristem in the branching of tetraploid wheat spikes.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-018-4607-z
PMCID: PMC5879928
PMID: 29606089 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: The 
sources of all plant materials (including seeds) in this research were all 
belonged to our lab, and no field permissions were necessary to collect the 
plant samples in this study. We stated that field studies was conducted in 
accordance with local legislation and complied with the Convention on the Trade 
in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not 
applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.