1. J Alzheimers Dis. 2018;64(s1):S507-S516. doi: 10.3233/JAD-179906.

Our Tau Tales from Normal to Pathological Behavior.

Alonso AD(1)(2), Cohen LS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology and Center for Developmental Neuroscience, College of 
Staten Island, The City University of New York, Staten Island, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, The Graduate Center, The City University of New 
York, New York, NY, USA.

The microtubule associated protein tau in a hyperphosphorylated form was 
identified as the building block of the filamentous aggregates found in the 
neurons of Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients. In the abnormal state, 
hyperphosphorylated tau from AD brains (AD P-tau) was unable to promote 
microtubule assembly and more importantly, it could inhibit the normal activity 
of tau and other MAPs. AD P-tau was able to disrupt preformed microtubules and, 
by binding to normal tau, turn the latter into an AD P-tau like molecule. AD 
P-tau toxic behavior was prevalent in the soluble form and it was lost upon 
dephosphorylation. Mutations on tau associated with disease, e.g., R406W in 
frontotemporal dementia with Parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17, altered its 
conformation to make it a better substrate for kinases. Using phospho-mimetics, 
it was found that the minimum phospho-sites necessary to acquire such a toxic 
behavior of tau were at 199, 212, 231 and 262, and tau pseudophosphorylated at 
those sites in combination with R406W was named Pathological Human Tau (PH-Tau). 
PH-Tau expressed in cells had similar behavior to AD P-tau: disruption of the 
microtubule system, change in the normal subcellular localization, and gain of 
toxic function for cells. In animal models expressing PH-Tau, it was found that 
two putative mechanisms of neurodegeneration exist depending on the 
concentration of the toxic protein, both involving cognitive decline, due to 
synaptic dysfunction at lower concentration and neuronal death at higher. 
Studies investigating the mechanism of tau pathology and its transmission from 
neuron to neuron are currently ongoing.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-179906
PMID: 29614672 [Indexed for MEDLINE]