1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2018 Mar 22;8:83. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2018.00083. 
eCollection 2018.

A CTP Synthase Undergoing Stage-Specific Spatial Expression Is Essential for the 
Survival of the Intracellular Parasite Toxoplasma gondii.

Narvaez-Ortiz HY(1), Lopez AJ(1), Gupta N(2), Zimmermann BH(1).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Ciencias Biologicas, Universidad de los Andes, Bogota, 
Colombia.
(2)Department of Molecular Parasitology, Faculty of Life Sciences, Humboldt 
University, Berlin, Germany.

Cytidine triphosphate synthase catalyzes the synthesis of cytidine 
5'-triphosphate (CTP) from uridine 5'-triphosphate (UTP), the final step in the 
production of cytidine nucleotides. CTP synthases also form filamentous 
structures of different morphologies known as cytoophidia, whose functions in 
most organisms are unknown. Here, we identified and characterized a novel CTP 
synthase (TgCTPS) from Toxoplasma gondii. We show that TgCTPS is capable of 
substituting for its counterparts in the otherwise lethal double mutant (ura7Δ 
ura8Δ) of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Equally, recombinant TgCTPS purified from 
Escherichia coli encodes for a functional protein in enzyme assays. The 
epitope-tagged TgCTPS under the control of its endogenous promoter displays a 
punctate cytosolic distribution, which undergoes spatial reorganization to form 
foci or filament-like structures when the parasite switches from a 
nutrient-replete (intracellular) to a nutrient-scarce (extracellular) condition. 
An analogous phenotype is observed upon nutrient stress or after treatment with 
a glutamine analog, 6-diazo-5-oxo-L-norleucine (DON). The exposure of parasites 
to DON disrupts the lytic cycle, and the TgCTPS is refractory to a genetic 
deletion, suggesting an essential requirement of this enzyme for T. gondii. Not 
least, this study, together with previous studies, supports that CTP synthase 
can serve as a potent drug target, because the parasite, unlike human host 
cells, cannot compensate for the lack of CTP synthase activity.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2018.00083
PMCID: PMC5874296
PMID: 29623259 [Indexed for MEDLINE]