1. Drug Des Devel Ther. 2018 Apr 5;12:743-756. doi: 10.2147/DDDT.S161821. 
eCollection 2018.

Cell-penetrating peptide conjugates of gambogic acid enhance the antitumor 
effect on human bladder cancer EJ cells through ROS-mediated apoptosis.

Lyu L(#)(1), Huang LQ(#)(2), Huang T(1), Xiang W(1), Yuan JD(1), Zhang CH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Wuhan No 1 Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Neurology, Wuhan No 1 Hospital, Tongji Medical College, 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, People's Republic of 
China.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Gambogic acid (GA) is the main active ingredient of resin gamboges 
and possesses anti-cancer activity toward various human cancer cells. However, 
clinical application of GA has been limited by its poor aqueous solubility and 
dose-limiting toxicities. Cell-penetrating peptides (CPPs) are widely used to 
deliver anti-cancer drugs into cancer cells and to enhance the water solubility 
of drugs.
PURPOSE: The object of this study was to synthesize peptide-drug conjugates in 
which the cell-penetrating peptide TAT (trans-activator of transcription) was 
conjugated to GA and evaluated the anti-cancer activity of this GA-CPP conjugate 
(GA-TAT) in EJ bladder cancer cells.
METHODS: GA is built onto the TAT, and the GA-TAT conjugates are cleaved from 
the solid support and purified via HPLC. The equilibrium solubility of GA-TAT 
was measured using the shake-flask method. The effects of GA-TAT on EJ cell 
viability and proliferation were determined by MTT assay, Edu assay and colony 
formation assay, respectively. After treated with 1.0 μM GA-TAT for 24 h, the 
apoptosis rate of EJ cells were detected by Acridine orange/ethidium bromide 
(AO/EB) assay and flow cytometry assay. The proteins of caspase-3 (processing), 
caspase-9 (processing), Bcl-2 and Bax were analyzed by Western blotting, and the 
intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) production was evaluated by a 
reactive oxygen species assay.
RESULTS: In contrast to free GA, the solubility of GA-TAT in water was 
significantly improved. Meanwhile, GA-TAT significantly increased EJ cellular 
uptake, toxicity and apoptosis. Mechanistic analysis revealed that GA-TAT 
enhanced the anti-cancer effect of GA against EJ cells through ROS-mediated 
apoptosis. The results were demonstrated that GA-TAT increased the ROS level in 
EJ cells, and N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC; a well-known ROS scavenger) inhibited 
GA-TAT-induced ROS generation and apoptosis. Additionally, GA-TAT activated 
caspase-3 and caspase-9 and down-regulated the Bcl-2/Bax ratio, but these 
effects were largely rescued by NAC.
CONCLUSION: GA-TAT has outstanding potential for promoting tumor apoptosis and 
exhibits promise for use in bladder cancer therapy.

DOI: 10.2147/DDDT.S161821
PMCID: PMC5896666
PMID: 29670331 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of 
interest in this work.