1. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2018 Sep-Oct;6(5):1518-1527.e5. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaip.2018.04.033. Epub 2018 May 8.

Long-Term Clinical Outcomes of High-Dose Mepolizumab Treatment for 
Hypereosinophilic Syndrome.

Kuang FL(1), Fay MP(2), Ware J(3), Wetzler L(3), Holland-Thomas N(4), Brown 
T(3), Ortega H(5), Steinfeld J(6), Khoury P(3), Klion AD(3).

Author information:
(1)Human Eosinophil Section, LPD, NIAID, NIH, Bethesda, Md. Electronic address: 
feili.kuang@nih.gov.
(2)Biostatistics Research Branch, DCR, NIAID, NIH, Bethesda, Md.
(3)Human Eosinophil Section, LPD, NIAID, NIH, Bethesda, Md.
(4)Clinical Research Directorate/Clinical Monitoring Research Program, Frederick 
National Laboratory for Cancer Research sponsored by the National Cancer 
Institute, Frederick, Md.
(5)Respiratory, US Medical Affairs, GlaxoSmithKline, La Jolla, Calif.
(6)Respiratory Therapy Area Unit and Flexible Discovery Unit, GlaxoSmithKline, 
Philadelphia, Pa.

BACKGROUND: Conventional therapies for hypereosinophilic syndromes (HES) have 
variable efficacy and carry significant long-term toxicities. Anti-IL-5 
(mepolizumab) therapy has a glucocorticoid (GC)-sparing effect in GC-sensitive 
HES, but the efficacy of mepolizumab in treatment-refractory HES patients with 
severe disease has not been examined to date.
OBJECTIVE: To identify predictors of response to mepolizumab in subjects with 
severe treatment-refractory HES and compare long-term outcomes in these subjects 
with HES subjects treated with conventional therapies.
METHODS: Retrospective analysis of clinical and laboratory data from 35 HES 
subjects treated with mepolizumab and 55 HES subjects on conventional therapy, 
all followed at a single center, was performed.
RESULTS: Peak eosinophilia, GC sensitivity, pulmonary involvement, HES clinical 
subtype, and pretreatment serum IL-5 were correlated with mepolizumab response. 
Despite evidence of more severe disease at baseline, mepolizumab-treated 
subjects had comparable long-term clinical outcomes to HES subjects treated with 
conventional therapies and reported improvements in therapy-related 
comorbidities. Subjects managed with mepolizumab monotherapy had fewer disease 
flares than HES subjects on conventional therapies or mepolizumab-treated HES 
subjects requiring additional HES therapies.
CONCLUSIONS: This study confirms that mepolizumab is an effective and 
well-tolerated therapy for HES, but suggests that response is more likely in 
GC-responsive subjects with idiopathic or overlap forms of HES. A primary 
benefit of treatment is the reduction of comorbidity due to discontinuation or 
the reduction of conventional HES therapies. Although subjects who completely 
discontinued GC had the most benefit, high-dose mepolizumab was a safe and 
effective salvage therapy for severe, treatment-refractory HES.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaip.2018.04.033
PMCID: PMC6173586
PMID: 29751154 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: H. Ortega and J. 
Steinfeld are GlaxoSmithKline employees and shareholders. The rest of the 
authors declare that they have no relevant conflicts of interest