1. Epilepsia Open. 2017 Jan 24;2(1):8-19. doi: 10.1002/epi4.12035. eCollection
2017  Mar.

Prevalence, causes, and behavioral and emotional comorbidities of acute 
symptomatic seizures in Africa: A critical review.

Kariuki SM(1), Abubakar A(1)(2)(3), Stein A(3), Marsh K(1)(4)(5), Newton 
CRJC(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)KEMRI-Wellcome Trust Research Programme Kilifi Kenya.
(2)Department of Public Health Pwani University Kilifi Kenya.
(3)Department of Psychiatry University of Oxford Oxford United Kingdom.
(4)Nuffield Department of Medicine University of Oxford Oxford United Kingdom.
(5)Alliance for Accelerating Excellence in Science in Africa African Academy of 
Sciences Nairobi Kenya.

Seizures with fever includes both febrile seizures (due to nonneurological 
febrile infections) and acute symptomatic seizures (due to neurological febrile 
infections). The cumulative incidence (lifetime prevalence) of febrile seizures 
in children aged ≤6 years is 2-5% in American and European studies, but there 
are no community-based data on acute symptomatic seizures in Africa. The 
incidence of acute symptomatic seizures in sub-Saharan Africa is more than twice 
that in high-income countries. However, most studies of acute symptomatic 
seizures from Africa are based on hospital samples or do not conduct surveys in 
demographic surveillance systems, which underestimates the burden. It is 
difficult to differentiate between febrile seizures and acute symptomatic 
seizures in Africa, especially in malaria-endemic areas where malaria parasites 
can sequester in the brain microvasculature; but this challenge can be addressed 
by robust identification of underlying causes. The proportion of complex acute 
symptomatic seizures (i.e., seizures that are focal, repetitive, or prolonged) 
in Africa are twice that reported in other parts of the world (>60% vs. ∼30%), 
which is often attributed to falciparum malaria. These complex phenotypes of 
acute symptomatic seizures can be associated with behavioral and emotional 
problems in high-income countries, and outcomes may be even worse in Africa. One 
Kenyan study reported behavioral and emotional problems in approximately 10% of 
children admitted with acute symptomatic seizures, but it is not clear whether 
the behavioral and emotional problems were due to the seizures, shared genetic 
susceptibility, etiology, or underlying neurological damage. The underlying 
neurological damage in acute symptomatic seizures can lead not only to 
behavioral and emotional problems but also to neurocognitive impairment and 
epilepsy. Electroencephalography may have a prognostic role in African children 
with acute symptomatic seizures. There are significant knowledge gaps regarding 
acute symptomatic seizures in Africa, which results in lack of reliable 
estimates for planning interventions. Future epidemiological studies of acute 
symptomatic seizures should be set up in Africa.

DOI: 10.1002/epi4.12035
PMCID: PMC5939456
PMID: 29750209