1. OMICS. 2018 May;22(5):301-321. doi: 10.1089/omi.2018.0033.

Genomics and Epigenomics of Congenital Heart Defects: Expert Review and Lessons 
Learned in Africa.

Thomford NE(1)(2), Dzobo K(3)(4), Yao NA(5)(6), Chimusa E(1), Evans J(1), Okai 
E(2)(7), Kruszka P(8), Muenke M(8), Awandare G(9), Wonkam A(1), Dandara C(1).

Author information:
(1)1 Division of Human Genetics, Department of Pathology, Faculty of Health 
Sciences, Institute for Infectious Disease and Molecular Medicine, University of 
Cape Town , Cape Town, South Africa .
(2)2 School of Medical Sciences, University of Cape Coast , Cape Coast, Ghana .
(3)3 ICGEB, Cape Town Component, University of Cape Town , Cape Town, South 
Africa .
(4)4 Division of Medical Biochemistry, IIDMM, Department of IBM, Faculty of 
Health Sciences, University of Cape Town , Cape Town, South Africa .
(5)5 National Cardiothoracic Centre, Korle Bu Teaching Hospital , Accra, Ghana .
(6)6 University of Ghana Medical School, University of Ghana , Accra, Ghana .
(7)7 Cape Coast Teaching Hospital , Cape Coast, Ghana .
(8)8 National Human Genome Research Institute, Medical Genetics Branch, National 
Institutes of Health , Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(9)9 Department of Biochemistry, WACCBIP, University of Ghana , Legon, Accra, 
Ghana .

Congenital heart defects (CHD) are structural malformations found at birth with 
a prevalence of 1%. The clinical trajectory of CHD is highly variable and thus 
in need of robust diagnostics and therapeutics. Major surgical interventions are 
often required for most CHDs. In Africa, despite advances in life sciences 
infrastructure and improving education of medical scholars, the limited clinical 
data suggest that CHD detection and correction are still not at par with the 
rest of the world. But the toll and genetics of CHDs in Africa has seldom been 
systematically investigated. We present an expert review on CHD with lessons 
learned on Africa. We found variable CHD phenotype prevalence in Africa across 
countries and populations. There are important gaps and paucity in genomic 
studies of CHD in African populations. Among the available genomic studies, the 
key findings in Africa were variants in GATA4 (P193H), MTHFR 677TT, and MTHFR 
1298CC that were associated with atrial septal defect, ventricular septal defect 
(VSD), Tetralogy of Fallot (TOF), and patent ductus arteriosus phenotypes and 
22q.11 deletion, which is associated with TOF. There were no data on epigenomic 
association of CHD in Africa, however, other studies have shown an altered 
expression of miR-421 and miR-1233-3p to be associated with TOF and 
hypermethylation of CpG islands in the promoter of SCO2 gene also been 
associated with TOF and VSD in children with non-syndromic CHD. These findings 
signal the urgent need to develop and implement genetic and genomic research on 
CHD to identify the hereditary and genome-environment interactions contributing 
to CHD. These projected studies would also offer comparisons on CHD 
pathophysiology between African and other populations worldwide. Genomic 
research on CHD in Africa should be developed in parallel with next generation 
technology policy research and responsible innovation frameworks that examine 
the social and political factors that shape the emergence and societal embedding 
of new technologies.

DOI: 10.1089/omi.2018.0033
PMCID: PMC6016577
PMID: 29762087 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare there are no conflicts of 
interest.