1. Lancet Haematol. 2018 Jun;5(6):e241-e251. doi: 10.1016/S2352-3026(18)30053-X. 
Epub 2018 May 17.

Automated typing of red blood cell and platelet antigens: a whole-genome 
sequencing study.

Lane WJ(1), Westhoff CM(2), Gleadall NS(3), Aguad M(4), Smeland-Wagman R(4), 
Vege S(2), Simmons DP(4), Mah HH(4), Lebo MS(5), Walter K(6), Soranzo N(7), Di 
Angelantonio E(8), Danesh J(9), Roberts DJ(10), Watkins NA(11), Ouwehand WH(12), 
Butterworth AS(8), Kaufman RM(4), Rehm HL(13), Silberstein LE(14), Green RC(15); 
MedSeq Project.

Collaborators: Bates DW, Blout C, Christensen KD, Cirino AL, Ho CY, Krier JB, 
Lehmann LS, MacRae CA, Morton CC, Perry DL, Seidman CE, Sunyaev SR, Vassy JL, 
Schonman E, Nguyen T, Steffens E, Betting WN, Aronson SJ, Ceyhan-Birsoy O, 
Machini K, McLaughlin HM, Azzariti DR, Tsai EA, Blumenthal-Barby J, Feuerman LZ, 
McGuire AL, Lee K, Robinson JO, Slashinski MJ, Diamond PM, Davis K, Ubel PA, 
Kraft P, Roberts JS, Garber JE, Hambuch T, Murray MF, Kohane I, Kong SW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA; 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. Electronic address: 
wlane@bwh.harvard.edu.
(2)New York Blood Center, New York, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Haematology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK; National 
Health Service (NHS) Blood and Transplant, Cambridge, UK.
(4)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA; 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA; Laboratory for Molecular Medicine, 
Boston, MA, USA; Partners Personalized Medicine, Boston, MA, USA.
(6)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, UK.
(7)Department of Haematology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK; Wellcome 
Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, UK; Cambridge Substantive Site, Health Data 
Research UK, Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton, UK.
(8)Medical Research Council and British Heart Foundation Cardiovascular 
Epidemiology Unit, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK; National Institute 
for Health Research Blood and Transplant Research Unit in Donor Health and 
Genomics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK; Cambridge Substantive Site, 
Health Data Research UK, Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton, UK.
(9)Medical Research Council and British Heart Foundation Cardiovascular 
Epidemiology Unit, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK; National Institute 
for Health Research Blood and Transplant Research Unit in Donor Health and 
Genomics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK; Department of Public Health 
and Primary Care, and British Heart Foundation Cambridge Centre of Excellence, 
Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK; Wellcome Trust 
Sanger Institute, Hinxton, UK; Cambridge Substantive Site, Health Data Research 
UK, Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton, UK.
(10)National Institute for Health Research Blood and Transplant Research Unit in 
Donor Health and Genomics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK; NHS Blood and 
Transplant-Oxford Centre, Oxford, UK; Biomedical Research Centre Haematology 
Theme and Radcliffe Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(11)National Health Service (NHS) Blood and Transplant, Cambridge, UK.
(12)Department of Haematology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK; 
Department of Public Health and Primary Care, and British Heart Foundation 
Cambridge Centre of Excellence, Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, 
Cambridge, UK; National Health Service (NHS) Blood and Transplant, Cambridge, 
UK; NHS Blood and Transplant-Oxford Centre, Oxford, UK.
(13)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA; Laboratory for Molecular Medicine, 
Boston, MA, USA; Partners Personalized Medicine, Boston, MA, USA; Department of 
Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA; Broad Institute of 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard, Boston, MA, USA.
(14)Division of Transfusion Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, 
USA; Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(15)Division of Genetics, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
Boston, MA, USA; Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA; Partners Personalized 
Medicine, Boston, MA, USA; Broad Institute of Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology and Harvard, Boston, MA, USA.

BACKGROUND: There are more than 300 known red blood cell (RBC) antigens and 33 
platelet antigens that differ between individuals. Sensitisation to antigens is 
a serious complication that can occur in prenatal medicine and after blood 
transfusion, particularly for patients who require multiple transfusions. 
Although pre-transfusion compatibility testing largely relies on serological 
methods, reagents are not available for many antigens. Methods based on 
single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) arrays have been used, but typing for ABO 
and Rh-the most important blood groups-cannot be done with SNP typing alone. We 
aimed to develop a novel method based on whole-genome sequencing to identify RBC 
and platelet antigens.
METHODS: This whole-genome sequencing study is a subanalysis of data from 
patients in the whole-genome sequencing arm of the MedSeq Project randomised 
controlled trial (NCT01736566) with no measured patient outcomes. We created a 
database of molecular changes in RBC and platelet antigens and developed an 
automated antigen-typing algorithm based on whole-genome sequencing 
(bloodTyper). This algorithm was iteratively improved to address cis-trans 
haplotype ambiguities and homologous gene alignments. Whole-genome sequencing 
data from 110 MedSeq participants (30 × depth) were used to initially validate 
bloodTyper through comparison with conventional serology and SNP methods for 
typing of 38 RBC antigens in 12 blood-group systems and 22 human platelet 
antigens. bloodTyper was further validated with whole-genome sequencing data 
from 200 INTERVAL trial participants (15 × depth) with serological comparisons.
FINDINGS: We iteratively improved bloodTyper by comparing its typing results 
with conventional serological and SNP typing in three rounds of testing. The 
initial whole-genome sequencing typing algorithm was 99·5% concordant across the 
first 20 MedSeq genomes. Addressing discordances led to development of an 
improved algorithm that was 99·8% concordant for the remaining 90 MedSeq 
genomes. Additional modifications led to the final algorithm, which was 99·2% 
concordant across 200 INTERVAL genomes (or 99·9% after adjustment for the lower 
depth of coverage).
INTERPRETATION: By enabling more precise antigen-matching of patients with blood 
donors, antigen typing based on whole-genome sequencing provides a novel 
approach to improve transfusion outcomes with the potential to transform the 
practice of transfusion medicine.
FUNDING: National Human Genome Research Institute, Doris Duke Charitable 
Foundation, National Health Service Blood and Transplant, National Institute for 
Health Research, and Wellcome Trust.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2352-3026(18)30053-X
PMCID: PMC6438177
PMID: 29780001 [Indexed for MEDLINE]