1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2018 Jun;97(22):e10953. doi:
10.1097/MD.0000000000010953.

When dysphoria is not a primary mental state: A case report of the role of the 
aromatic L-aminoacid decarboxylase.

Portaro S(1), Gugliandolo A, Scionti D, Cammaroto S, Morabito R, Leonardi S, 
Fraggetta F, Bramanti P, Mazzon E.

Author information:
(1)IRCCS Centro Neurolesi "Bonino-Pulejo," Via Provinciale Palermo, Contrada 
Casazza, Messina, Italy. Azienda Ospedaliera per l'Emergenza Cannizzaro, 
Catania, Italy.

RATIONALE: The aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase (AADC) deficiency (AADCD) is 
a rare, autosomal recessive neurometabolic disorder caused by a deficit of the 
AADC that is involved in serotonin and dopamine biosynthesis, causing as a 
consequence, their deficits, but also a lack of norepinephrine and epinephrine, 
given that dopamine is their precursor.
PATIENT CONCERNS: We report the case of a Caucasian 43-year-old woman 
heterozygous for p.Ser250Phe in DDC, encoding for AADC with a positive family 
history for behavioral problems.
DIAGNOSES: Since adolescence, she manifested behavioral abnormalities. Three 
months before the admission to our hospital, she presented with a permanent 
dystonic posture at the 4 limbs with numbness and tingling, diplopia, and low 
potassium levels. She was treated with muscle relaxants and potassium, but with 
no results. Olanzapine was administrated, worsening mood problems. Later, after 
fever, low potassium levels, and increased difficulty to move, she was admitted 
to the neurology unit where, after bradycardia alternating with atrial and 
ventricular fibrillation, she had loss of consciousness. She started to complain 
involuntary parossistic eye and head movements, bilateral ptosis, oculogyric 
crises with dystonia of the head, muscle hypotrophy, and absent deep tendon 
reflexes. During the hospital stay, she continued having episodes of untreatable 
bradycardia and fever.
INTERVENTIONS: Hemocultures were performed, resulting positive for Enterococcus 
faecalis and Acinetobacter baumanii. Whole exome sequencing was performed 
evidencing that the patient harbored the heterozygous p.Ser250Phe variant in the 
gene DDC.
OUTCOMES: A treatment with Pyridoxine and Pramipexole was prescribed, but never 
started because she died.
LESSONS: The heterozygosity for p.Ser250Phe may have influenced the clinical 
manifestations, given that the patient presented some overlapping symptoms with 
those in AADCD, but while AADCD normally is diagnosed during childhood, the fact 
that the patient carried the mutation in heterozygosity may have alleviated and 
delayed the clinical manifestations.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000010953
PMCID: PMC6392947
PMID: 29851841 [Indexed for MEDLINE]