1. Expert Rev Precis Med Drug Dev. 2018;3(1):33-47. doi: 
10.1080/23808993.2018.1420419. Epub 2018 Jan 3.

Pharmacogenomic studies of hypertension: paving the way for personalized 
antihypertensive treatment.

Eadon MT(1), Kanuri SH(1), Chapman AB(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, 
IN, USA.
(2)Division of Nephrology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Increasing clinical evidence supports the implementation of 
genotyping for anti-hypertensive drug dosing and selection. Despite robust 
evidence gleaned from clinical trials, the translation of genotype guided 
therapy into clinical practice faces significant challenges. Challenges to 
implementation include the small effect size of individual variants and the 
polygenetic nature of antihypertensive drug response, a lack of expert consensus 
on dosing guidelines even without genetic information, and proper definition of 
major antihypertensive drug toxicities. Balancing clinical benefit with cost, 
while overcoming these challenges, remains crucial.
AREAS COVERED: This review presents the most impactful clinical trials and 
cohorts which continue to inform and guide future investigation. Variants were 
selected from among those identified in the Pharmacogenomic Evaluation of 
Antihypertensive Responses (PEAR), the Genetic Epidemiology of Responses to 
Antihypertensives study (GERA), the Genetics of Drug Responsiveness in Essential 
Hypertension (GENRES) study, the SOPHIA study, the Milan Hypertension 
Pharmacogenomics of hydro-chlorothiazide (MIHYPHCTZ), the Campania Salute 
Network, the International Verapamil SR Trandolapril Study (INVEST), the Nordic 
Diltiazem (NORDIL) Study, GenHAT, and others.
EXPERT COMMENTARY: The polygenic nature of antihypertensive drug response is a 
major barrier to clinical implementation. Further studies examining clinical 
effectiveness are required to support broad-based implementation of 
genotype-based prescribing in medical practice.

DOI: 10.1080/23808993.2018.1420419
PMCID: PMC5990020
PMID: 29888336

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interest The authors have no 
relevant affiliations or financial involvement with any organization or entity 
with a financial interest in or financial conflict with the subject matter or 
materials discussed in the manuscript. This includes employment, consultancies, 
honoraria, stock ownership or options, expert testimony, grants or patents 
received or pending, or royalties. Peer reviewers on this manuscript have no 
relevant financial or other relationships to disclose.