1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2018 Jun;97(24):e11119. doi:
10.1097/MD.0000000000011119.

Rapamycin treatment for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: Protocol for a phase II 
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicenter, clinical trial 
(RAP-ALS trial).

Mandrioli J(1), D'Amico R, Zucchi E, Gessani A, Fini N, Fasano A, Caponnetto C, 
Chiò A, Dalla Bella E, Lunetta C, Mazzini L, Marinou K, Sorarù G, de Biasi S, Lo 
Tartaro D, Pinti M, Cossarizza A; RAP-ALS investigators group.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, St. Agostino-Estense Hospital, Azienda 
Ospedaliero Universitaria di Modena, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, 
Modena Unit of Statistics, Department of Diagnostic, Clinical and Public Health 
Medicine, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Azienda Ospedaliero 
Universitaria di Modena, Modena Department of Neurosciences, Rehabilitation 
Ophthalmology, Genetics, Mother and Child Disease, Ospedale Policlinico San 
Martino, Genova "Rita Levi Montalcini"-Department of Neurosciences, ALS Centre, 
University of Turin and Azienda Ospedaliero Universitaria Città della Salute e 
della Scienza, Turin 3rd Neurology Unit and ALS Centre, IRCCS "Carlo Besta" 
Neurological Institute, Milan NEuroMuscular Omnicenter, Serena Onlus Foundation, 
Milan ALS Centre, Neurologic Clinic, Maggiore della Carità University Hospital, 
Novara ALS Center, "Salvatore Maugeri" Clinical-Scientific Institutes, Milan 
Department of Neurosciences, University of Padua, Padua, Department of Life 
Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena Department of Medical 
and Surgical Sciences for Children and Adults, University of Modena and Reggio 
Emilia School of Medicine, Modena, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Misfolded aggregated proteins and neuroinflammation significantly 
contribute to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) pathogenesis, hence 
representing therapeutic targets to modify disease expression. Rapamycin 
inhibits mechanistic target of Rapamycin (mTOR) pathway and enhances autophagy 
with demonstrated beneficial effects in neurodegeneration in cell line and 
animal models, improving phenotype in SQSTM1 zebrafish, in Drosophila model of 
ALS-TDP, and in the TDP43 mouse model, in which it reduced neuronal loss and 
TDP43 inclusions. Rapamycin also expands regulatory T lymphocytes (Treg) and 
increased Treg levels are associated with slow progression in ALS 
patients.Therefore, we planned a randomized clinical trial testing Rapamycin 
treatment in ALS patients.
METHODS: RAP-ALS is a phase II randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, 
multicenter (8 ALS centers in Italy), clinical trial. The primary aim is to 
assess whether Rapamycin administration increases Tregs number in treated 
patients compared with control arm. Secondary aims include the assessment of 
safety and tolerability of Rapamycin in patients with ALS; the minimum dosage to 
have Rapamycin in cerebrospinal fluid; changes in immunological (activation and 
homing of T, B, NK cell subpopulations) and inflammatory markers, and on mTOR 
downstream pathway (S6RP phosphorylation); clinical activity (ALS Functional 
Rating Scale-Revised, survival, forced vital capacity); and quality of life 
(ALSAQ40 scale).
DISCUSSION: Rapamycin potentially targets mechanisms at play in ALS (i.e., 
autophagy and neuroinflammation), with promising preclinical studies. It is an 
already approved drug, with known pharmacokinetics, already available and 
therefore with significant possibility of rapid translation to daily clinics. 
Findings will provide reliable data for further potential trials.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: The study protocol was approved by the Ethics 
Committee of Azienda Ospedaliero Universitaria of Modena and by the Ethics 
Committees of participating centers (Eudract n. 2016-002399-28) based on the 
Helsinki declaration.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000011119
PMCID: PMC6024184
PMID: 29901635 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.