1. Ecol Evol. 2018 May 2;8(11):5427-5440. doi: 10.1002/ece3.4065. eCollection
2018  Jun.

Genetic diversity and colony structure of Tapinoma melanocephalum on the islands 
and mainland of South China.

Zheng C(1), Yang F(1), Zeng L(1), Vargo EL(2), Xu Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Entomology South China Agricultural University Guangzhou China.
(2)Department of Entomology Texas A&M University College Station Texas.

AIM: Tapinoma melanocephalum is listed as one of the most important invasive 
pest species in China. Information regarding the patterns of invasion and 
effects of geographic isolation on the population genetics of this species is 
largely lacking.
LOCATION: South China.
METHODS: To address this problem, we genotyped 39 colonies (two colonies were 
collapsed due to genetic similarity) using microsatellite markers and 
mitochondrial DNA sequencing to compare colony genetic structure of 
T. melanocephalum on the mainland and islands of South China.
RESULTS: An analysis of the colony genotypes showed that the genetic diversity 
of the mainland population was slightly higher than that of the island 
populations but not significantly so. However, the observed heterozygosity on 
Shangchuan Island (SCD) was significantly lower than that of the other colonies. 
We also found six haplotypes in 111 mitochondrial DNA COI sequences. The 
relatedness (r) value between colonies of SCD was 0.410, higher than that of the 
other populations. The genetic clusters among colonies were not related to 
geographic locations and exhibited admixture likely due to frequent 
human-mediated dispersal associated with trade between the mainland population 
and the islands. Pairwise FSTs between populations showed differentiation among 
mainland populations, while SCD displayed high levels of divergence (FST > 0.15) 
from most mainland populations. There was no significant isolation by distance 
among colonies. Most populations showed signs of a bottleneck effect.
MAIN CONCLUSIONS: Our study suggests that there was no significant difference in 
the genetic diversity among the islands and the mainland; however, the lower 
genetic diversity, the higher degree of genetic divergence from other colonies, 
and the higher relatedness among nestmates made the SCD population stand out 
from all the others.

DOI: 10.1002/ece3.4065
PMCID: PMC6010919
PMID: 29938063