1. PLoS One. 2018 Jun 25;13(6):e0199250. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0199250. 
eCollection 2018.

The culprit insect but not severity of allergic reactions to bee and wasp venom 
can be determined by molecular diagnosis.

Gattinger P(1), Lupinek C(1), Kalogiros L(2), Silar M(3), Zidarn M(3), Korosec 
P(3), Koessler C(4), Novak N(4), Valenta R(1), Mittermann I(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathophysiology and Allergy Research, Division of 
Immunopathology, Center for Pathophysiology, Infectiology and Immunology, 
Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(2)Department of Allergology and Clinical Immunology, 401 General Military 
Hospital, Athens, Greece.
(3)University Clinic of Respiratory and Allergic Diseases, Golnik, Slovenia.
(4)Department of Dermatology and Allergy, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Allergy to bee and wasp venom can lead to life-threatening systemic 
reactions. The identification of the culprit species is important for 
allergen-specific immunotherapy.
OBJECTIVES: To determine a panel of recombinant bee and wasp allergens which is 
suitable for the identification of bee or wasp as culprit allergen sources and 
to search for molecular surrogates of clinical severity of sting reactions.
METHODS: Sera from eighty-seven patients with a detailed documentation of their 
severity of sting reaction (Mueller grade) and who had been subjected to 
titrated skin testing with bee and wasp venom were analyzed for bee and 
wasp-specific IgE levels by ImmunoCAPTM. IgE-reactivity testing was performed 
using a comprehensive panel of recombinant bee and wasp venom allergens (rApi m 
1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 10; rVes v 1 and 5) by ISAC chip technology, ImmunoCAP and 
ELISA. IgG4 antibodies to rApi m 1 and rVes v 5 were determined by ELISA and 
IgE/IgG4 ratios were calculated. Results from skin testing, IgE serology and 
IgE/IgG4 ratios were compared with severity of sting reactions.
RESULTS: The panel of rApi m 1, rApi m 10, rVes v 1 and rVes v 5 allowed 
identification of the culprit venom in all but two of the 87 patients with good 
agreement to skin testing. Severities of sting reactions were not associated 
with results obtained by skin testing, venom-specific IgE levels or molecular 
diagnosis. Severe sting reactions were observed in patients showing < 1 ISU and 
< 2kUA/L of IgE to Api m 1 and/or Ves v 5.
CONCLUSION: We identified a minimal panel of recombinant bee and wasp allergens 
for molecular diagnosis which may permit identification of bee and/or wasp as 
culprit insect in venom-sensitized subjects. The severity of sting reactions was 
not associated with parameters obtained by molecular diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0199250
PMCID: PMC6016944
PMID: 29940036 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Rudolf Valenta has received research grants from 
Biomay AG, Vienna, Austria, and Viravaxx, Vienna, Austria. He is a consultant 
for Biomay AG, and Viravax. Natalija Novak has received grants from the German 
Research Council, from GIF, CK Care and ALK Abello, served as a consultant for 
ALK Abello, HAL Allergy, Leti Pharma and Stallergenes and received lecture fees 
from ALK, HAL, Sanofi and Leti Pharma. The other authors have no conflict of 
interest to declare. Thermo Fisher Scientific provided the Api m 3 and Api m 5 
ImmunoCAP tests. There are no patents, products in development or marketed 
products to declare. This does not alter our adherence to all the PLOS ONE 
policies on sharing data and materials, as detailed online in the guide for 
authors.