1. F1000Res. 2018 Jun 21;7:F1000 Faculty Rev-872. doi: 
10.12688/f1000research.14143.1. eCollection 2018.

A threshold model for receptor tyrosine kinase signaling specificity and cell 
fate determination.

Zinkle A(1), Mohammadi M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Pharmacology, New York University 
School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.

Upon ligand engagement, the single-pass transmembrane receptor tyrosine kinases 
(RTKs) dimerize to transmit qualitatively and quantitatively different 
intracellular signals that alter the transcriptional landscape and thereby 
determine the cellular response. The molecular mechanisms underlying these 
fundamental events are not well understood. Considering recent insights into the 
structural biology of fibroblast growth factor signaling, we propose a threshold 
model for RTK signaling specificity in which quantitative differences in the 
strength/longevity of ligand-induced receptor dimers on the cell surface lead to 
quantitative differences in the phosphorylation of activation loop (A-loop) 
tyrosines as well as qualitative differences in the phosphorylation of tyrosines 
mediating substrate recruitment. In this model, quantitative differences on 
A-loop tyrosine phosphorylation result in gradations in kinase activation, 
leading to the generation of intracellular signals of varying 
amplitude/duration. In contrast, qualitative differences in the pattern of 
tyrosine phosphorylation on the receptor result in the recruitment/activation of 
distinct substrates/intracellular pathways. Commensurate with both the dynamics 
of the intracellular signal and the types of intracellular pathways activated, 
unique transcriptional signatures are established. Our model provides a 
framework for engineering clinically useful ligands that can tune receptor 
dimerization stability so as to bias the cellular transcriptome to achieve a 
desired cellular output.

DOI: 10.12688/f1000research.14143.1
PMCID: PMC6013765
PMID: 29983915

Conflict of interest statement: No competing interests were disclosed.No 
competing interests were disclosed.No competing interests were disclosed.No 
competing interests were disclosed.No competing interests were disclosed.