1. PLoS Med. 2018 Jul 17;15(7):e1002613. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1002613. 
eCollection 2018 Jul.

Nonlinear and delayed impacts of climate on dengue risk in Barbados: A modelling 
study.

Lowe R(1)(2)(3), Gasparrini A(4)(5), Van Meerbeeck CJ(6), Lippi CA(7), Mahon 
R(6), Trotman AR(6), Rollock L(8), Hinds AQJ(9), Ryan SJ(7)(10), Stewart-Ibarra 
AM(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, London School of Hygiene & 
Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Centre for the Mathematical Modelling of Infectious Diseases, London School 
of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Barcelona Institute for Global Health (ISGLOBAL), Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Department of Public Health, Environments and Society, London School of 
Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
(5)Centre for Statistical Methodology, London School of Hygiene & Tropical 
Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
(6)Caribbean Institute for Meteorology and Hydrology, St. James, Barbados.
(7)Quantitative Disease Ecology and Conservation Lab Group, Department of 
Geography and Emerging Pathogens Institute, University of Florida, Gainesville, 
Florida, United States of America.
(8)Ministry of Health, St. Michael, Barbados.
(9)Caribbean Public Health Agency, Port of Spain, Trinidad and Tobago.
(10)School of Life Sciences, University of KwaZulu-Natal, Durban, South Africa.
(11)Institute for Global Health and Translational Science, SUNY Upstate Medical 
University, Syracuse, New York, United States of America.
(12)Department of Medicine and Department of Public Health and Preventative 
Medicine, SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, New York, United States of 
America.

BACKGROUND: Over the last 5 years (2013-2017), the Caribbean region has faced an 
unprecedented crisis of co-occurring epidemics of febrile illness due to 
arboviruses transmitted by the Aedes sp. mosquito (dengue, chikungunya, and 
Zika). Since 2013, the Caribbean island of Barbados has experienced 3 dengue 
outbreaks, 1 chikungunya outbreak, and 1 Zika fever outbreak. Prior studies have 
demonstrated that climate variability influences arbovirus transmission and 
vector population dynamics in the region, indicating the potential to develop 
public health interventions using climate information. The aim of this study is 
to quantify the nonlinear and delayed effects of climate indicators, such as 
drought and extreme rainfall, on dengue risk in Barbados from 1999 to 2016.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: Distributed lag nonlinear models (DLNMs) coupled with a 
hierarchal mixed-model framework were used to understand the 
exposure-lag-response association between dengue relative risk and key climate 
indicators, including the standardised precipitation index (SPI) and minimum 
temperature (Tmin). The model parameters were estimated in a Bayesian framework 
to produce probabilistic predictions of exceeding an island-specific outbreak 
threshold. The ability of the model to successfully detect outbreaks was 
assessed and compared to a baseline model, representative of standard dengue 
surveillance practice. Drought conditions were found to positively influence 
dengue relative risk at long lead times of up to 5 months, while excess rainfall 
increased the risk at shorter lead times between 1 and 2 months. The SPI 
averaged over a 6-month period (SPI-6), designed to monitor drought and extreme 
rainfall, better explained variations in dengue risk than monthly precipitation 
data measured in millimetres. Tmin was found to be a better predictor than mean 
and maximum temperature. Furthermore, including bidimensional 
exposure-lag-response functions of these indicators-rather than linear effects 
for individual lags-more appropriately described the climate-disease 
associations than traditional modelling approaches. In prediction mode, the 
model was successfully able to distinguish outbreaks from nonoutbreaks for most 
years, with an overall proportion of correct predictions (hits and correct 
rejections) of 86% (81%:91%) compared with 64% (58%:71%) for the baseline model. 
The ability of the model to predict dengue outbreaks in recent years was 
complicated by the lack of data on the emergence of new arboviruses, including 
chikungunya and Zika.
CONCLUSION: We present a modelling approach to infer the risk of dengue 
outbreaks given the cumulative effect of climate variations in the months 
leading up to an outbreak. By combining the dengue prediction model with climate 
indicators, which are routinely monitored and forecasted by the Regional Climate 
Centre (RCC) at the Caribbean Institute for Meteorology and Hydrology (CIMH), 
probabilistic dengue outlooks could be included in the Caribbean Health-Climatic 
Bulletin, issued on a quarterly basis to provide climate-smart decision-making 
guidance for Caribbean health practitioners. This flexible modelling approach 
could be extended to model the risk of dengue and other arboviruses in the 
Caribbean region.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1002613
PMCID: PMC6049902
PMID: 30016319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.