1. J Alzheimers Dis. 2018;65(1):107-115. doi: 10.3233/JAD-180078.

A Three-Factor Structure of Cognitive Functioning Among Unimpaired Carriers and 
Non-Carriers of Autosomal-Dominant Alzheimer's Disease.

Guzmán-Vélez E(1), Jaimes S(1), Aguirre-Acevedo DC(2)(3), Norton DJ(1), Papp 
KV(4)(5), Amariglio R(4)(5), Rentz D(4)(5), Baena A(3), Henao E(3), Tirado V(3), 
Muñoz C(3), Giraldo M(3), Sperling RA(4)(5), Lopera F(3), Quiroz YT(1)(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Grupo Académico de Epidemiología Clínica, School of Medicine, University of 
Antioquia, Medellín, Colombia.
(3)Grupo de Neurociencias de Antioquia, School of Medicine, University of 
Antioquia, Medellín, Colombia.
(4)Department of Neurology, Center for Alzheimer Research and Treatment, Brigham 
and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA.

BACKGROUND: There is a need to find cognitive markers that can help identify 
individuals at risk for Alzheimer's disease (AD), and that can be used to 
reliably measure cognitive decline.
OBJECTIVE: We tested whether a theoretically driven three-factor structure would 
characterize cognitive functioning in individuals who are genetically-determined 
to develop AD due to a mutation in Presenilin-1 (PSEN1) gene. We also examined 
whether these factors could distinguish cognitively unimpaired PSEN1 mutation 
carriers from age-matched non-carrier family members.
METHODS: 1,395 cognitively unimpaired members of a Colombian kindred with the 
PSEN1 E280A mutation were included in the study. A confirmatory factor analysis 
examined the fit of the three-factor model comprising episodic memory (MMSE 
memory recall, CERAD-COL Word list recall, and Constructional praxis recall), 
executive function (Phonemic fluency and WCST perseverative errors), and 
psychomotor processing speed (TMT-A and WAIS-III Digit Symbol).
RESULTS: The three-factor model provided an excellent fit for all participants 
(p = 0.24; RMSEA = 0.01). Further, the episodic memory (p = 0.0004, d = 0.25) 
and executive functioning (p = 0.001, d = 0.18) factors distinguished 
cognitively unimpaired carriers from non-carriers. The episodic memory factor 
provided the earliest indication of preclinical cognitive decline at 35 years of 
age, nine years before individuals' estimated age of clinical onset.
CONCLUSIONS: The three theoretically derived cognitive factors provide a 
reliable measure of cognition and may be useful for the early detection of AD, 
as well as for measuring disease progression. However, longitudinal studies are 
needed to confirm that these factors can be used to track the progression of 
cognitive decline in preclinical AD.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-180078
PMCID: PMC6942670
PMID: 30040714 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The following authors have no conflict of 
interest to report: EGV, SJ, DCA, DJN, RA, AB, EH, VT, CM, MG, FL, and YTQ. KP 
has served as a consultant for Biogen Idec. DR has served as a consultant for 
Eli Lilly, Biogen Idec, and Lundbeck Pharmaceuticals and serves as a member of 
the Scientific Advisory Board for Neurotrack. RAS is a site principal 
investigator or coinvestigator for Avid, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Pfizer, and 
Janssen Alzheimer Immunotherapy clinical trials.