1. Infect Immun. 2018 Sep 21;86(10):e00555-18. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00555-18. Print 
2018 Oct.

Relative Roles of Listeriolysin O, InlA, and InlB in Listeria monocytogenes 
Uptake by Host Cells.

Phelps CC(1)(2), Vadia S(1)(2), Arnett E(1)(2), Tan Y(3), Zhang X(3), 
Pathak-Sharma S(1), Gavrilin MA(4), Seveau S(5)(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbial Infection and Immunity, The Ohio State University, 
Columbus, Ohio, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA.
(3)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Center for Biostatistics, The Ohio 
State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA.
(4)Pulmonary, Allergy, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Davis Heart and Lung 
Research Institute, Department of Internal Medicine, The Ohio State University, 
Columbus, Ohio, USA.
(5)Department of Microbial Infection and Immunity, The Ohio State University, 
Columbus, Ohio, USA Seveau.1@osu.edu.
(6)Infectious Disease Institute, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA.

Listeria monocytogenes is a facultative intracellular pathogen that infects a 
wide variety of cells, causing the life-threatening disease listeriosis. L. 
monocytogenes virulence factors include two surface invasins, InlA and InlB, 
known to promote bacterial uptake by host cells, and the secreted pore-forming 
toxin listeriolysin O (LLO), which disrupts the phagosome to allow bacterial 
proliferation in the cytosol. In addition, plasma membrane perforation by LLO 
has been shown to facilitate L. monocytogenes internalization into epithelial 
cells. In this work, we tested the host cell range and importance of 
LLO-mediated L. monocytogenes internalization relative to the canonical 
invasins, InlA and InlB. We measured the efficiencies of L. monocytogenes 
association with and internalization into several human cell types (hepatocytes, 
cytotrophoblasts, and endothelial cells) using wild-type bacteria and isogenic 
single, double, and triple deletion mutants for the genes encoding InlA, InlB 
and LLO. No role for InlB was detected in any tested cells unless the InlB 
expression level was substantially enhanced, which was achieved by introducing a 
mutation (prfA*) in the gene encoding the transcription factor PrfA. In 
contrast, InlA and LLO were the most critical invasion factors, although they 
act in a different manner and in a cell-type-dependent fashion. As expected, 
InlA facilitates both bacterial attachment and internalization in cells that 
express its receptor, E-cadherin. LLO promotes L. monocytogenes internalization 
into hepatocytes, but not into cytotrophoblasts and endothelial cells. Finally, 
LLO and InlA cooperate to increase the efficiency of host cell invasion by L. 
monocytogenes.

Copyright © 2018 Phelps et al.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00555-18
PMCID: PMC6204736
PMID: 30061379 [Indexed for MEDLINE]