1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2018 Jul 31;5:215. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2018.00215. 
eCollection 2018.

"Opening Our Time Capsule"-Creating an Individualized Music and Other Memory 
Cues Database to Promote Communication Between Spouses and People With Dementia 
During Visits to a Nursing Home.

Dassa A(1).

Author information:
(1)Music Department, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat Gan, Israel.

Background: Family members play a critical role in caring for people with 
dementia, and their involvement in care continues even after their loved ones 
are placed in long-term care facilities. The dynamics of family involvement 
following institutionalization are complex and challenging. The strain on 
caregivers does not cease and communication difficulties are a major barrier due 
to deteriorating language abilities as a result of dementia. Also, caregivers' 
involvement has implications on the quality of life of both the older adult and 
his family members. Objective: To help alleviate caregivers' burden during 
visiting hours, by promoting communication opportunities. The program included 
the creation of an individualized database using personal music and photos that 
present life episodes. Methods: A qualitative research was used to explore 
spouses' experience during visits and the process of creating and using the 
individualized database. Participants included three women who regularly visited 
their partners who had dementia and resided in a nursing home. The first phase 
included creating an individualized database for each couple. In the second 
phase, four meetings were conducted, each woman with her partner, utilizing the 
database on a tablet. A case study research design was used and various types of 
data were collected and analyzed. The data included interview reports (pre-post 
intervention), preparation meetings reports, spouses' recorded reactions at the 
end of each of the four visits, and the music therapist's written log during the 
program. Results: All documented data revealed the difficulties, mostly the 
communication barrier, encountered by the three women during their visits to the 
nursing home. All reported that using the individualized database helped them to 
find ways to communicate with their partners, relive shared past experiences, 
and alleviate the stress and feelings of disconnection during visits. 
Conclusions: Forming a bridge between past and present via individualized music 
and photos databases can be helpful in bridging the gap between people with 
dementia in nursing homes and their family members.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2018.00215
PMCID: PMC6090148
PMID: 30131960