1. Acc Chem Res. 2018 Oct 16;51(10):2546-2555. doi: 10.1021/acs.accounts.8b00321.
 Epub 2018 Sep 11.

Toward Understanding the Chemistry and Biology of 1-Deoxy-d-xylulose 5-Phosphate 
(DXP) Synthase: A Unique Antimicrobial Target at the Heart of Bacterial 
Metabolism.

Bartee D(1), Freel Meyers CL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Sciences , The Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine , Baltimore , Maryland 21205 , United States.

Antibiotics are the cornerstone of modern healthcare. The 20th century discovery 
of sulfonamides and β-lactam antibiotics altered human society immensely. Simple 
bacterial infections were no longer a leading cause of morbidity and mortality, 
and antibiotic prophylaxis greatly reduced the risk of infection from surgery. 
The current healthcare system requires effective antibiotics to function. 
However, antibiotic-resistant infections are becoming increasingly prevalent, 
threatening the emergence of a postantibiotic era. To prevent this public health 
crisis, antibiotics with novel modes of action are needed. Currently available 
antibiotics target just a few cellular processes to exert their activity: DNA, 
RNA, protein, and cell wall biosynthesis. Bacterial central metabolism is 
underexploited, offering a wealth of potential new targets that can be pursued 
toward expanding the armamentarium against microbial infections. Discovered in 
1997 as the first enzyme in the methylerythritol phosphate (MEP) pathway, 
1-deoxy-d-xylulose 5-phosphate (DXP) synthase is a thiamine diphosphate 
(ThDP)-dependent enzyme that catalyzes the decarboxylative condensation of 
pyruvate and d-glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate (d-GAP) to form DXP. This five-carbon 
metabolite feeds into three separate essential pathways for bacterial central 
metabolism: ThDP synthesis, pyridoxal phosphate (PLP) synthesis, and the MEP 
pathway for isoprenoid synthesis. While it has long been identified as a target 
for the development of antimicrobial agents, limited progress has been made 
toward developing selective inhibitors of the enzyme. This Account highlights 
advances from our lab over the past decade to understand this important and 
unique enzyme. Unlike all other known ThDP-dependent enzymes, DXP synthase uses 
a random-sequential mechanism that requires the formation of a ternary complex 
prior to decarboxylation of the lactyl-ThDP intermediate. Its large active site 
accommodates a variety of acceptor substrates, lending itself to a number of 
alternative activities, such as the production of α-hydroxy ketones, 
hydroxamates, amides, acetolactate, and peracetate. Knowledge gained from 
mechanistic and substrate-specificity studies has guided the development of 
selective inhibitors with antibacterial activity and provides a biochemical 
foundation toward understanding DXP synthase function in bacterial cells. 
Although it is a promising drug target, the centrality of DXP synthase in 
bacterial metabolism imparts specific challenges to assessing antibacterial 
activity of DXP synthase inhibitors, and the susceptibility of most bacteria to 
current DXP synthase inhibitors is remarkably culture-medium-dependent. Despite 
these challenges, the study of DXP synthase is poised to reveal the role of DXP 
synthase in bacterial metabolic adaptability during infection, ultimately 
providing a more complete picture of how inhibiting this crucial enzyme can be 
used to develop novel antibiotics.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.accounts.8b00321
PMCID: PMC6309272
PMID: 30203647 [Indexed for MEDLINE]