1. J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2019 Jan;77(1):71-86. doi: 10.1016/j.joms.2018.08.010.
 Epub 2018 Aug 22.

Development of Medication-Related Osteonecrosis of the Jaw After Extraction of 
Teeth With Experimental Periapical Disease.

Hadaya D(1), Soundia A(1), Gkouveris I(2), Dry SM(3), Aghaloo TL(4), Tetradis 
S(5).

Author information:
(1)Graduate Student, Division of Diagnostic and Surgical Sciences, UCLA School 
of Dentistry, Los Angeles, CA.
(2)Post-doctoral Fellow, Division of Diagnostic and Surgical Sciences, UCLA 
School of Dentistry, Los Angeles, CA.
(3)Professor, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, David Geffen 
School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA.
(4)Professor, Division of Diagnostic and Surgical Sciences, UCLA School of 
Dentistry, Los Angeles, CA. Electronic address: taghaloo@dentistry.ucla.edu.
(5)Professor, Division of Diagnostic and Surgical Sciences, UCLA School of 
Dentistry, Los Angeles, CA. Electronic address: stetradis@dentistry.ucla.edu.

PURPOSE: Medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaw (MRONJ) is a rare but 
severe side effect of antiresorptive medications. Most animal models use tooth 
extraction as an instigating local factor to induce MRONJ, with varied results. 
However, these teeth are healthy and absent of dental disease, a rare finding 
that does not reflect clinical practices. The authors hypothesized that 
extraction of teeth with periapical inflammation would lead to MRONJ in rats 
treated with high-dose bisphosphonates.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Rats were pretreated with zoledronic acid (ZA) for 
1 week. Pulp exposure (PE) was established by exposing the pulpal chamber of the 
first and second molars. Experimental periapical disease (EPD) was induced by PE 
and bacterial inoculation into pulp chambers of the first and second mandibular 
molars. The mandibular molars were extracted 4 weeks after PE or EPD, and 
animals were euthanized 4 weeks after tooth extraction. Extraction sockets were 
assessed clinically, radiographically, and histologically.
RESULTS: Clinically, radiographically, and histologically, socket healing was 
observed in all vehicle-treated animals and in ZA-treated animals after 
extraction of healthy teeth or teeth with PE. In contrast, bone exposure, lack 
of socket healing, and osteonecrosis were present in most ZA-treated animals 
after extraction of teeth with EPD. Bacterial presence was noted in areas of 
osteonecrotic alveolar bone.
CONCLUSION: These data support a synergistic contribution of severe dental 
disease and tooth extraction to MRONJ pathogenesis. Importantly, this model is 
amenable to manipulation of methodologic conditions for the dissection of 
parameters involved in MRONJ pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2018 American Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons. 
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.joms.2018.08.010
PMCID: PMC6312738
PMID: 30218655 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All other authors state no conflict.