1. Acta Biomater. 2018 Oct 15;80:66-84. doi: 10.1016/j.actbio.2018.09.020. Epub 
2018 Sep 16.

Biodegradation of ECM hydrogel promotes endogenous brain tissue restoration in a 
rat model of stroke.

Ghuman H(1), Mauney C(2), Donnelly J(3), Massensini AR(4), Badylak SF(5), Modo 
M(6).

Author information:
(1)University of Pittsburgh, McGowan Institute for Regenerative Medicine, 
Pittsburgh, PA, USA; Department of Bioengineering, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(4)University of Pittsburgh, McGowan Institute for Regenerative Medicine, 
Pittsburgh, PA, USA; Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Department of 
Physiology and Biophysics, Belo Horizonte, Brazil.
(5)University of Pittsburgh, McGowan Institute for Regenerative Medicine, 
Pittsburgh, PA, USA; Department of Bioengineering, Pittsburgh, PA, USA; 
Department of Surgery, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(6)University of Pittsburgh, McGowan Institute for Regenerative Medicine, 
Pittsburgh, PA, USA; Department of Bioengineering, Pittsburgh, PA, USA; 
Department of Radiology, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. Electronic address: 
mmm154@pitt.edu.

The brain is considered to have a limited capacity to repair damaged tissue and 
no regenerative capacity following injury. Tissue lost after a stroke is 
therefore not spontaneously replaced. Extracellular matrix (ECM)-based hydrogels 
implanted into the stroke cavity can attract endogenous cells. These hydrogels 
can be formulated at different protein concentrations that govern their 
rheological and inductive properties. We evaluated histologically 0, 3, 4 and 
8 mg/mL of porcine-derived urinary bladder matrix (UBM)-ECM hydrogel 
concentrations implanted in a 14-day old stroke cavity. Less concentrated 
hydrogels (3 and 4 mg/mL) were efficiently degraded with a 95% decrease in 
volume by 90 days, whereas only 32% of the more concentrated and stiffer 
hydrogel (8 mg/mL) was resorbed. Macrophage infiltration and density within the 
bioscaffold progressively increased in the less concentrated hydrogels and 
decreased in the 8 mg/mL hydrogels. The less concentrated hydrogels showed a 
robust invasion of endothelial cells with neovascularization. No 
neovascularization occurred with the stiffer hydrogel. Invasion of neural cells 
increased with time in all hydrogel concentrations. Differentiation of neural 
progenitors into mature neurons with axonal projections was evident, as well as 
a robust invasion of oligodendrocytes. However, relatively few astrocytes were 
present in the ECM hydrogel, although some were present in the newly forming 
tissue between degrading scaffold patches. Implantation of an ECM hydrogel 
partially induced neural tissue restoration, but a more complete understanding 
is required to evaluate its potential therapeutic application. STATEMENT OF 
SIGNIFICANCE: Extracellular matrix hydrogel promotes tissue regeneration in many 
peripheral soft tissues. However, the brain has generally been considered to 
lack the potential for tissue regeneration. We here demonstrate that tissue 
regeneration in the brain can be achieved using implantation of ECM hydrogel 
into a tissue cavity. A structure-function relationship is key to promote tissue 
regeneration in the brain. Specifically, weaker hydrogels that were retained in 
the cavity underwent an efficient biodegradation within 14 days 
post-implantation to promote a tissue restoration within the lesion cavity. In 
contrast, stiffer ECM hydrogel only underwent minor biodegradation and did not 
lead to a tissue restoration. Inductive hydrogels weaker than brain tissue 
provide the appropriate condition to promote an endogenous regenerative response 
that restores tissue in a cavity. This approach offers new avenues for the 
future treatment of chronic tissue damage caused by stroke and other acute brain 
injuries.

Copyright © 2018 Acta Materialia Inc. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actbio.2018.09.020
PMCID: PMC6217851
PMID: 30232030 [Indexed for MEDLINE]