1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2018 Oct 4;12(10):e0006497. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pntd.0006497. eCollection 2018 Oct.

Development of standard clinical endpoints for use in dengue interventional 
trials.

Tomashek KM(1), Wills B(2), See Lum LC(3), Thomas L(4), Durbin A(5), Leo YS(6), 
de Bosch N(7), Rojas E(8), Hendrickx K(9), Erpicum M(10), Agulto L(1), Jaenisch 
T(11), Tissera H(12), Suntarattiwong P(13), Collers BA(14), Wallace D(15), 
Schmidt AC(16), Precioso A(17)(18), Narvaez F(19), Thomas SJ(20), Edelman R(21), 
Siqueira JB(22), Cassetti MC(1), Dempsey W(1), Gubler DJ(23).

Author information:
(1)Division of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, National Institute of 
Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, 
Maryland, United States of America (USA).
(2)Oxford University Clinical Research Unit, Hospital for Tropical Diseases, Ho 
Chi Minh City, Viet Nam.
(3)Department of Paediatrics, University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(4)Emergency Department, University Hospital of Martinique, Fort-de-France, 
Martinique.
(5)Department of International Health, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public 
Health, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.
(6)Institute of Infectious Diseases and Epidemiology, Tan Tock Seng Hospital, 
Singapore.
(7)Universidad Central de Venezuela, Caracas, Venezuela.
(8)Escuela de Medicina, Universidad Industrial de Santander, Bucaramanga, 
Colombia.
(9)FWO Postdoctoral Fellow of the Life Sciences & Society Lab, Center for 
Sociological Research, KU Leuven and Research Associate of SPIRAL Research 
Center, University of Liège, Belgium.
(10)SPIRAL Research Center, University of Liège, Belgium.
(11)Department of Infectious Diseases, Heidelberg University Hospital, 
Heidelberg, Germany.
(12)National Dengue Control Unit, Ministry of Health, Elvitigala Mawatha, 
Colombo, Sri Lanka.
(13)Department of Pediatrics, Queen Sirikit National Institute of Child Health, 
Bangkok, Thailand.
(14)Merck & Co. Inc., Kenilworth, New Jersey, United States of America.
(15)Takeda Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd., Zurich, Switzerland.
(16)GlaxoSmithKline plc (GSK) Vaccines, Rockville, Maryland, United States of 
America.
(17)Division of Clinical Trials and Pharmacovigilance, Butantan Institute, São 
Paulo, Brazil.
(18)Pediatrics Department of the Medical School of University of São Paulo, São 
Paulo, Brazil.
(19)Infectious Diseases Unit, National Pediatric Reference Hospital, Hospital 
Infantil Manuel de Jesús Rivera, Managua, Nicaragua.
(20)Division of Infectious Diseases, State University of New York, Upstate 
Medical University, Syracuse, New York, United States of America.
(21)Center for Vaccine Development, University of Maryland School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.
(22)Federal University of Goias, Brasilia, Brazil.
(23)Emerging Infectious Diseases Programme, Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore.

Comment in
    Dengue illness index—A tool to characterize the subjective dengue illness 
experience.

Dengue is a major public health problem worldwide. Although several drug 
candidates have been evaluated in randomized controlled trials, none has been 
effective and at present, early recognition of severe dengue and timely 
supportive care are used to reduce mortality. While the first dengue vaccine was 
recently licensed, and several other candidates are in late stage clinical 
trials, future decisions regarding widespread deployment of vaccines and/or 
therapeutics will require evidence of product safety, efficacy and 
effectiveness. Standard, quantifiable clinical endpoints are needed to ensure 
reproducibility and comparability of research findings. To address this need, we 
established a working group of dengue researchers and public health specialists 
to develop standardized endpoints and work towards consensus opinion on those 
endpoints. After discussion at two working group meetings and presentations at 
international conferences, a Delphi methodology-based query was used to finalize 
and operationalize the clinical endpoints. Participants were asked to select the 
best endpoints from proposed definitions or offer revised/new definitions, and 
to indicate whether contributing items should be designated as optional or 
required. After the third round of inquiry, 70% or greater agreement was reached 
on moderate and severe plasma leakage, moderate and severe bleeding, acute 
hepatitis and acute liver failure, and moderate and severe neurologic disease. 
There was less agreement regarding moderate and severe thrombocytopenia and 
moderate and severe myocarditis. Notably, 68% of participants agreed that a 
50,000 to 20,000 mm3 platelet range be used to define moderate thrombocytopenia; 
however, they remained divided on whether a rapid decreasing trend or one 
platelet count should be case defining. While at least 70% agreement was reached 
on most endpoints, the process identified areas for further evaluation and 
standardization within the context of ongoing clinical studies. These endpoints 
can be used to harmonize data collection and improve comparability between 
dengue clinical trials.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0006497
PMCID: PMC6171842
PMID: 30286085 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Beth-Ann G. Coller is an employee, shareholder 
and patent inventor of Merck & Co., Inc., Kenilworth, New Jersey, United States 
of America. Robert Edelman is a paid consultant to Takeda Pharmaceutical Company 
vaccine trials for service as Chairman of the Data and Safety Monitoring Board 
(DSMB) of Takeda's Tetravalent Dengue Vaccine Program. Alexander C. Schmidt is 
an employee and shareholder of the GlaxoSmithKline plc (GSK), Brentford, London, 
United Kingdom. Stephen J. Thomas has performed both paid and unpaid 
consultations and safety reviews for GSK Vaccines, Merck, Takeda, Sanofi 
Pasteur, Chugai Pharma, Themisbio, and Primevax. Derek Wallace is an employee of 
Takeda Pharmaceuticals International AG, Zurich, Switzerland. Bridget Wills is a 
paid consultant on the DSMB for the Takeda vaccine trials. No other authors have 
declared that a competing interest exists.