1. PLoS One. 2018 Oct 9;13(10):e0204648. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0204648. 
eCollection 2018.

An integrative approach using real-world data to identify alternative 
therapeutic uses of existing drugs.

Hosomi K(1), Fujimoto M(1), Ushio K(2), Mao L(2), Kato J(2), Takada M(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical Drug Informatics, School of Pharmacy, Kindai University, 
Kowakae, Higashi-osaka, Osaka, Japan.
(2)Innovation and Entrepreneurship, Research, Takeda Pharmaceutical Company 
Limited, Muraoka-Higashi, 2- Chome, Fujisawa, Kanagawa, Japan.

Different computational approaches are employed to efficiently identify novel 
repositioning possibilities utilizing different sources of information and 
algorithms. It is critical to propose high-valued candidate-repositioning 
possibilities before conducting lengthy in vivo validation studies that consume 
significant resources. Here we report a novel multi-methodological approach to 
identify opportunities for drug repositioning. We performed analyses of 
real-world data (RWD) acquired from the United States Food and Drug 
Administration's Adverse Event Reporting System (FAERS) and the claims database 
maintained by the Japan Medical Data Center (JMDC). These analyses were followed 
by cross-validation through bioinformatics analyses of gene expression data. 
Inverse associations revealed using disproportionality analysis (DPA) and 
sequence symmetry analysis (SSA) were used to detect potential 
drug-repositioning signals. To evaluate the validity of the approach, we 
conducted a feasibility study to identify marketed drugs with the potential for 
treating inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Primary analyses of the FAERS and 
JMDC claims databases identified psycholeptics such as haloperidol, diazepam, 
and hydroxyzine as candidates that may improve the treatment of IBD. To further 
investigate the mechanistic relevance between hit compounds and disease 
pathology, we conducted bioinformatics analyses of the associations of the gene 
expression profiles of these compounds with disease. We identified common 
biological features among genes differentially expressed with or without 
compound treatment as well as disease-perturbation data available from open 
sources, which strengthened the mechanistic rationale of our initial findings. 
We further identified pathways such as cytokine signaling that are influenced by 
these drugs. These pathways are relevant to pathologies and can serve as 
alternative targets of therapy. Integrative analysis of RWD such as those 
available from adverse-event databases, claims databases, and transcriptome 
analyses represent an effective approach that adds value to efficiently 
identifying potential novel therapeutic opportunities.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0204648
PMCID: PMC6177143
PMID: 30300381 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: This work was supported by Takeda Pharmaceutical 
Company Limited in the form of salaries to KU, LM, JK. Additional support came 
from Chugai Pharmaceutical Company Limited in the form of salaries to KU. The 
specific roles of these authors are articulated in the ‘author contributions’. 
The affiliation to Takeda Pharmaceutical Company Limited and Chugai 
Pharmaceutical Company Limited does not alter our adherence to PLOS ONE policies 
on sharing data and materials.