1. Gastroenterology. 2019 Feb;156(3):662-675.e7. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2018.10.030.  Epub 2018 Oct 17.

Inhibition of AURKA Reduces Proliferation and Survival of Gastrointestinal 
Cancer Cells With Activated KRAS by Preventing Activation of RPS6KB1.

Wang-Bishop L(1), Chen Z(2), Gomaa A(2), Lockhart AC(3), Salaria S(4), Wang 
J(4), Lewis KB(4), Ecsedy J(5), Washington K(4), Beauchamp RD(6), El-Rifai W(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Vanderbilt University, 
Nashville, Tennessee.
(2)Department of Surgery, Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, 
Florida.
(3)Division of Medical Oncology, Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, 
Miami, Florida; Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, Miller School of 
Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, Florida.
(4)Section of Surgical Sciences, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 
Nashville, Tennessee.
(5)Translational Medicine, Millennium Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Cambridge, 
Massachusetts.
(6)Section of Surgical Sciences, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 
Nashville, Tennessee; Department of Pathology, Vanderbilt University Medical 
Center, Nashville, Tennessee.
(7)Department of Surgery, Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, 
Florida; Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, Miller School of Medicine, 
University of Miami, Miami, Florida; Department of Veterans Affairs, Miami VA 
Healthcare system, Miami, Florida. Electronic address: welrifai@med.miami.edu.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Activation of KRAS signaling and overexpression of the aurora 
kinase A (AURKA) are often detected in luminal gastrointestinal cancers. We 
investigated regulation of ribosomal protein S6 kinase B1 (RPS6KB1) by AURKA and 
the effects of alisertib, an AURKA inhibitor, in mice xenograft tumors grown 
from human gastrointestinal cancer cells with mutant, activated forms of KRAS.
METHODS: We tested the effects of alisertib or AURKA overexpression or knockdown 
in 10 upper gastrointestinal or colon cancer cell lines with KRAS mutations or 
amplifications using the CellTiter-Glo luminescence and clonogenic cell survival 
assays. We used the proximity ligation in situ assay to evaluate protein 
co-localization and immunoprecipitation to study protein interactions. Nude mice 
with xenograft tumors grown from HCT116, SNU-601, SW480, or SNU-1 cells were 
given oral alisertib (40 mg/kg, 5 times/wk) for 4 weeks. Tumor samples were 
collected and analyzed by immunoblots and immunohistochemistry. Tissue 
microarrays from 151 paraffin-embedded human colon tumors, with adjacent normal 
and adenoma tissues, were analyzed by immunohistochemistry for levels of AURKA.
RESULTS: Alisertib reduced proliferation and survival of the cell lines tested. 
AURKA knockdown or inhibition with alisertib reduced levels of phosphorylated 
RPS6KB1 (at T389) and increased levels of proteins that induce apoptosis, 
including BIM, cleaved PARP, and cleaved caspase 3. AURKA co-localized and 
interacted with RPS6KB1, mediating RPS6KB1 phosphorylation at T389. We detected 
AURKA-dependent phosphorylation of RPS6KB1 in cell lines with mutations in KRAS 
but not in cells with wild-type KRAS. Administration of alisertib to mice with 
xenograft tumors significantly reduced tumor volumes (P < .001). Alisertib 
reduced phosphorylation of RPS6KB1 and Ki-67 and increased levels of cleaved 
caspase 3 in tumor tissues. In analyses of tissue microarrays, we found 
significant overexpression of AURKA in gastrointestinal tumor tissues compared 
with non-tumor tissues (P = .0003).
CONCLUSION: In studies of gastrointestinal cancer cell lines with activated 
KRAS, we found AURKA to phosphorylate RPS6KB1, promoting cell proliferation and 
survival and growth of xenograft tumors in mice. Agents that inhibit AURKA might 
slow the growth of gastrointestinal tumors with activation of KRAS.

Copyright © 2019 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2018.10.030
PMCID: PMC6368861
PMID: 30342037 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest: 
The authors have declared no conflict of interest.