1. Plant Biotechnol J. 2019 May;17(5):932-944. doi: 10.1111/pbi.13029. Epub 2018 
Dec 6.

Hybridisation-based target enrichment of phenology genes to dissect the genetic 
basis of yield and adaptation in barley.

Hill CB(1), Angessa TT(1), McFawn LA(2), Wong D(3), Tibbits J(3), Zhang XQ(1), 
Forrest K(3), Moody D(4), Telfer P(5), Westcott S(2), Diepeveen D(2), Xu Y(6), 
Tan C(1), Hayden M(3)(7), Li C(1)(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Western Barley Genetics Alliance, Western Australian State Agricultural 
Biotechnology Centre, School of Veterinary and Life Sciences, Murdoch 
University, Murdoch, WA, Australia.
(2)Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development, Agriculture and 
Food, South Perth, WA, Australia.
(3)Agriculture Victoria Research, AgriBio, Centre for AgriBioscience, Bundoora, 
Vic., Australia.
(4)InterGrain Pty Ltd, Roseworthy, WA, Australia.
(5)Australian Grain Technologies Pty Ltd (AGT), Roseworthy, SA, Australia.
(6)Hubei Collaborative Innovation Centre for Grain Industry, Yangtze University, 
Jingzhou, Hubei, China.
(7)School of Applied Systems Biology, La Trobe University, Bundoora, Vic., 
Australia.

Barley (Hordeum vulgare L.) is a major cereal grain widely used for livestock 
feed, brewing malts and human food. Grain yield is the most important breeding 
target for genetic improvement and largely depends on optimal timing of 
flowering. Little is known about the allelic diversity of genes that underlie 
flowering time in domesticated barley, the genetic changes that have occurred 
during breeding, and their impact on yield and adaptation. Here, we report a 
comprehensive genomic assessment of a worldwide collection of 895 barley 
accessions based on the targeted resequencing of phenology genes. A versatile 
target-capture method was used to detect genome-wide polymorphisms in a panel of 
174 flowering time-related genes, chosen based on prior knowledge from barley, 
rice and Arabidopsis thaliana. Association studies identified novel 
polymorphisms that accounted for observed phenotypic variation in phenology and 
grain yield, and explained improvements in adaptation as a result of historical 
breeding of Australian barley cultivars. We found that 50% of genetic variants 
associated with grain yield, and 67% of the plant height variation was also 
associated with phenology. The precise identification of favourable alleles 
provides a genomic basis to improve barley yield traits and to enhance 
adaptation for specific production areas.

© 2018 The Authors. Plant Biotechnology Journal published by Society for 
Experimental Biology and The Association of Applied Biologists and John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/pbi.13029
PMCID: PMC6587706
PMID: 30407713 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DM is affiliated with InterGrain Pty Ltd WA. PT 
is affiliated with Australian Grain Technologies Pty Ltd (AGT), SA. There are no 
financial relationships or competing interests on the part of any author that 
could potentially bias the findings reported in the manuscript.