1. Avicenna J Phytomed. 2018 Nov-Dec;8(6):543-551.

Topical application of Cassia fistula L. fruit gel in management of cutaneous 
lesions of pemphigus vulgaris: A double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical 
trial.

Atarzadeh F(1)(2), Kamalinejad M(3), Amin G(4), Salehi A(5), Dastgheib L(6), 
Jaladat AM(2), Heydari M(2), Gouyandeh Z(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Traditional Iranian Medicine, School of Traditional Medicine, 
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Traditional Persian Medicine, School of Medicine, Shiraz 
University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.
(3)School of Pharmacy, Shaheed Beheshti University of Medical Scinces, Tehran, 
Iran.
(4)Department of Pharmacognosy and Department of Traditional Pharmacy, Tehran 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(5)Research Center for Traditional Medicine and History of Medicine, Shiraz 
University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.
(6)Shiraz Molecular Dermatology Research Center, Department of Dermatology, 
Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.

OBJECTIVE: Cassia fistula L. fruit extract has been traditionally used in the 
treatment of pemphigus vulgaris (PV) lesions in Iran. The aim of this study was 
to determine the efficacy of C. fistula fruit gel on healing time of PV lesions 
in a clinical setting.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This was a randomized, double-blind placebo-controlled 
clinical trial that was performed in dermatology ward at Saadi hospital, 
affiliated to Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran. Right- or 
left- sided lesions of PV patients on standard systemic treatment were 
randomized for treatment with either C. fistula fruit gel or placebo prescribed 
twice daily. The largest diameter of each lesion was measured at the baseline 
(day 0) and on days 10 and 20. Epithelialization Index (EI), as outcome measure 
was calculated and compared between the two groups.
RESULTS: The present study comprised 20 patients, with overall 82 cutaneous 
lesions including 41 lesions in the C. fistula fruit gel group and 41 lesions in 
the placebo group. The EI in the C. fistula fruit gel group was significantly 
higher than that of the placebo group both on day 10 (65±28vs 30±34; p=0.001) 
and at the end of the study (91±22 vs 69±49; p=0.003).
CONCLUSION: Topical application of C. fistula fruit gel can be considered as an 
effective adjuvant therapy in treatment of PV.

PMCID: PMC6235662
PMID: 30456202

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was identified 
in this study.