1. Stem Cells Transl Med. 2019 Mar;8(3):236-246. doi: 10.1002/sctm.18-0035. Epub 
2018 Nov 26.

Role of CXCR2 in the Ac-PGP-Induced Mobilization of Circulating Angiogenic Cells 
and its Therapeutic Implications.

Kwon YW(1), Lee SJ(2), Heo SC(1), Lee TW(1), Park GT(1), Yoon JW(1), Kim SC(3), 
Shin HJ(4), Lee SC(5), Kim JH(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Pusan National University School of Medicine, 
Yangsan, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Pusan National University School of 
Medicine, Yangsan, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Pusan National University School of 
Medicine, Yangsan, Republic of Korea.
(4)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Pusan National University School of 
Medicine, Yangsan, Republic of Korea.
(5)Functional Genomics Research Center, KRIBB, Daejeon, Republic of Korea.
(6)Research Institute of Convergence Biomedical Science and Technology, Pusan 
National University Yangsan Hospital, Yangsan, Republic of Korea.

Circulating angiogenic cells (CACs) have been implicated in the repair of 
ischemic tissues, and their mobilization from bone marrow is known to be 
regulated by the activations of chemokine receptors, including CXCR2 and CXCR4. 
This study was conducted to investigate the role of N-acetylated 
proline-glycine-proline (Ac-PGP; a collagen-derived chemotactic tripeptide) on 
CAC mobilization and its therapeutic potential for the treatment of peripheral 
artery diseases. Ac-PGP was administered daily to a murine hind limb ischemia 
model, and the effects of Ac-PGP on blood perfusion and CAC mobilization (Sca1+ 
Flk1+ cells) into peripheral blood were assessed. Intramuscular administration 
of Ac-PGP significantly improved ischemic limb perfusion and increased limb 
salvage rate by increasing blood vessel formation, whereas Ac-PGP-induced blood 
perfusion and angiogenesis in ischemic limbs were not observed in CXCR2-knockout 
mice. In addition, Ac-PGP-induced CAC mobilization was found to occur in 
wild-type mice but not in CXCR2-knockout mice. Transplantation of bone marrow 
from green fluorescent protein (GFP) transgenic mice to wild-type mice showed 
bone marrow-derived cells homed to ischemic limbs after Ac-PGP administration 
and that GFP-positive cells contributed to the formation of ILB4-positive 
capillaries and α smooth muscle actin (α-SMA)-positive arteries. These results 
suggest CXCR2 activation in bone marrow after Ac-PGP administration improves 
blood perfusion and reduces tissue necrosis by inducing CAC mobilization. These 
findings suggest a new pharmaceutical basis for the treatment of critical limb 
ischemia. Stem Cells Translational Medicine 2019;8:236&246.

© 2018 The Authors. Stem Cells Translational Medicine published by Wiley 
Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press.

DOI: 10.1002/sctm.18-0035
PMCID: PMC6392381
PMID: 30474937 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors indicated no potential conflicts of 
interest.