1. Sleep Med Rev. 2019 Feb;43:23-36. doi: 10.1016/j.smrv.2018.09.006. Epub 2018
Nov  8.

Neurobiological and immunogenetic aspects of narcolepsy: Implications for 
pharmacotherapy.

Szabo ST(1), Thorpy MJ(2), Mayer G(3), Peever JH(4), Kilduff TS(5).

Author information:
(1)Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA; Durham Veterans Affairs 
Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA. Electronic address: steven.szabo@duke.edu.
(2)Montefiore Medical Center, Bronx, NY, USA. Electronic address: 
michael.thorpy@einstein.yu.edu.
(3)Hephata Klinik, Schwalmstadt, Germany. Electronic address: 
geert.mayer@t-online.de.
(4)University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S 3G5, Canada. Electronic address: 
john.peever@utoronto.ca.
(5)Center for Neuroscience, Biosciences Division, SRI International, Menlo Park, 
CA 94025, USA. Electronic address: thomas.kilduff@sri.com.

Excessive daytime sleepiness (EDS) and cataplexy are common symptoms of 
narcolepsy, a sleep disorder associated with the loss of hypocretin/orexin 
(Hcrt) neurons. Although only a few drugs have received regulatory approval for 
narcolepsy to date, treatment involves diverse medications that affect multiple 
biochemical targets and neural circuits. Clinical trials have demonstrated 
efficacy for the following classes of drugs as narcolepsy treatments: alerting 
medications (amphetamine, methylphenidate, modafinil/armodafinil, solriamfetol 
[JZP-110]), antidepressants (tricyclic antidepressants, selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitors, serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors), sodium 
oxybate, and the H3-receptor inverse agonist/antagonist pitolisant. Enhanced 
catecholamine availability and regulation of locus coeruleus (LC) norepinephrine 
(NE) neuron activity is likely central to the therapeutic activity of most of 
these compounds. LC NE neurons are integral to sleep/wake regulation and muscle 
tone; reduced excitatory input to the LC due to compromise of Hcrt/orexin 
neurons (likely due to autoimmune factors) results in LC NE dysregulation and 
contributes to narcolepsy/cataplexy symptoms. Agents that increase 
catecholamines and/or LC activity may mitigate EDS and cataplexy by elevating NE 
regulation of GABAergic inputs from the amygdala. Consequently, novel 
medications and treatment strategies aimed at preserving and/or modulating 
Hcrt/orexin-LC circuit integrity are warranted in narcolepsy/cataplexy.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.smrv.2018.09.006
PMCID: PMC6351197
PMID: 30503715 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest Dr. Szabo has an 
investigator-initiated grant from Otsuka Pharmaceuticals and funding support 
from the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and the Brain Behavior Research 
Foundation (formerly known as NARSAD). He has served on the advisory board for 
Jazz Pharmaceuticals and as a consultant/speaker for Neurocrine Biosciences, 
Teva Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd, and Otsuka/Lundbeck Pharmaceuticals. Dr. 
Thorpy has received research/grant support and consultancy fees from Jazz 
Pharmaceuticals, Avadel Pharmaceuticals, Harmony Biosciences, Balance 
Therapeutics, and Merck Inc. Dr. Peever has received funding from the National 
Science and Engineering Research Council and the Canadian Institutes of Health 
Research. Dr. Mayer has received honoraria from the Paul Ehrlich Institute, 
Germany, has served on the speakers’ bureau for UCB Pharma and Sanofi, and is a 
board member of the European Narcolepsy Network. Dr. Kilduff has received 
funding for narcolepsy-related research from the National Institutes of Health, 
Jazz Pharmaceuticals and TevaBranded Pharmaceuticals Products R&D, Inc.