1. Epilepsy Behav Case Rep. 2018 Nov 1;11:39-42. doi: 10.1016/j.ebcr.2018.10.003.
 eCollection 2019.

Autosomal dominant temporal lobe epilepsy associated with heterozygous reelin 
mutation: 3 T brain MRI study with advanced neuroimaging methods.

Česká K(1), Aulická Š(1), Horák O(1), Danhofer P(1), Říha P(2), Mareček R(2), 
Šenkyřík J(3), Rektor I(2)(4), Brázdil M(2)(4), Ošlejšková H(1).

Author information:
(1)Brno Epilepsy Centre, Department of Paediatric Neurology, University 
Hospital, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic.
(2)Central European Institute of Technology (CEITEC), Masaryk University, Brno, 
Czech Republic.
(3)Department of Paediatric Radiology, University Hospital Masaryk University 
Brno, Czech Republic.
(4)Brno Epilepsy Centre, First Department of Neurology, St. Anne's University 
Hospital, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic.

PURPOSE: Autosomal dominant lateral temporal epilepsy (ADLTE) is a genetic focal 
epilepsy syndrome characterized by focal seizures with dominant auditory 
symptomatology. We present a case report of an 18-year-old patient with acute 
onset of seizures associated with epilepsy. Based on the clinical course of the 
disease and the results of the investigation, the diagnosis of ADLTE with a 
proven mutation in the RELN gene, which is considered causative, was 
subsequently confirmed. The aim of this study was to use 3 Tesla (3 T) magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) and advanced neuroimaging methods in a patient with a 
confirmed diagnosis of ADTLE.
METHODS: 3 T MRI brain scan and advanced neuroimaging methods were used in the 
standard protocols to analyzse voxel-based MRI, cortical thickness, and 
functional connectivity.
RESULTS: Morphometric MRI analysis (blurred grey-white matter junctions, 
voxel-based morphometry, and cortical thickness analysis) did not provide any 
informative results. The functional connectivity analysis revealed higher local 
synchrony in the patient in the left temporal (middle temporal gyrus), left 
frontal (supplementary motor area, superior frontal gyrus), and left parietal 
(gyrus angularis, gyrus supramarginalis) regions and the cingulate (middle 
cingulate gyrus) as compared to healthy controls.
CONCLUSIONS: Evidence of multiple areas of functional connectivity supports the 
theory of epileptogenic networks in ADTLE. Further studies are needed to 
elucidate this theory.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ebcr.2018.10.003
PMCID: PMC6313257
PMID: 30619712