1. PLoS One. 2019 Jan 17;14(1):e0210830. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0210830. 
eCollection 2019.

Establishment of a pulmonary epithelial barrier on biodegradable 
poly-L-lactic-acid membranes.

Montesanto S(1)(2), Smithers NP(1), Bucchieri F(3), Brucato V(2)(4), La Carrubba 
V(2)(4), Davies DE(1)(5), Conforti F(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)The Brooke Laboratory, Clinical and Experimental Sciences, Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Civil, Environmental, Aerospace, Materials Engineering (DICAM), 
University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.
(3)Department of Experimental Biomedicine and Clinical Neurosciences (BIONEC), 
University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.
(4)Interuniversitary Consortium for Material Science and Technology (INSTM) - 
Research Unit of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.
(5)NIHR Respiratory Biomedical Research Unit, University Hospital Southampton, 
Southampton, United Kingdom.

Development of biocompatible and functional scaffolds for tissue engineering is 
a major challenge, especially for development of polarised epithelia that are 
critical structures in tissue homeostasis. Different in vitro models of the lung 
epithelial barrier have been characterized using non-degradable polyethylene 
terephthalate membranes which limits their uses for tissue engineering. Although 
poly-L-lactic acid (PLLA) membranes are biodegradable, those prepared via 
conventional Diffusion Induced Phase Separation (DIPS) lack open-porous geometry 
and show limited permeability compromising their use for epithelial barrier 
studies. Here we used PLLA membranes prepared via a modification of the standard 
DIPS protocol to control the membrane surface morphology and permeability. These 
were bonded to cell culture inserts for use in barrier function studies. 
Pulmonary epithelial cells (H441) readily attached to the PLLA membranes and 
formed a confluent cell layer within two days. This was accompanied by a 
significant increase in trans-epithelial electrical resistance and correlated 
with the formation of tight junctions and vectorial cytokine secretion in 
response to TNFα. Our data suggest that a structurally polarized and functional 
epithelial barrier can be established on PLLA membranes produced via a 
non-standard DIPS protocol. Therefore, PLLA membranes have potential utility in 
lung tissue engineering applications requiring bio-absorbable membranes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0210830
PMCID: PMC6336298
PMID: 30653572 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.