1. Mol Med Rep. 2019 Mar;19(3):2077-2086. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2019.9843. Epub 2019
Jan  10.

Expression of flTF and asTF splice variants in various cell strains and tissues.

Pan L(1), Yu Y(1), Yu M(1), Yao S(1), Mu Q(1), Luo G(1), Xu N(2).

Author information:
(1)Comprehensive Laboratory, Changzhou Key Lab of Individualized Diagnosis and 
Treatment Associated with High Technology Research, The Third Affiliated 
Hospital of Soochow University, Changzhou, Jiangsu 213003, P.R. China.
(2)Division of Clinical Chemistry and Pharmacology, Department of Laboratory 
Medicine, Lund University Hospital, S‑221 85 Lund, Sweden.

Tissue factor (TF) expressed at the protein level includes two isoforms: The 
membrane‑bound full‑length TF (flTF) and the soluble alternatively spliced TF 
(asTF). flTF is the major thrombogenic form of TF, whereas asTF is more closely 
associated with tumor growth, angiogenesis, metastasis and cell growth. In order 
to further investigate the different expression and functions of TF splice 
variants, the expression of these two splice variants were detected in numerous 
cell strains and tissues in the present study. Quantitative polymerase chain 
reaction was used to measure the transcript levels of the TF variants in 11 
human cell lines, including cervical cancer, breast cancer, hepatoblastoma, 
colorectal cancer and umbilical vein cells, and five types of tissue specimen, 
including placenta, esophageal cancer, breast cancer, cervical cancer (alongside 
normal cervical tissues) and non‑small cell lung cancer (alongside adjacent and 
normal tissues). Furthermore, the effects of chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA) and 
apolipoprotein M (apoM) on the two variants were investigated. The results 
demonstrated that flTF was the major form of TF, and the mRNA expression levels 
of flTF were higher than those of asTF in all specimens tested. CDCA 
significantly upregulated the mRNA expression levels of the two variants. 
Furthermore, overexpression of apoM promoted the expression levels of asTF in 
Caco‑2 cells. The mRNA expression levels of asTF in cervical cancer tissues were 
significantly higher than in the corresponding normal tissues. To the best of 
our knowledge, the present study is the first to compare the expression of flTF 
and asTF in various samples. The results demonstrated that CDCA and apoM may 
modulate TF isoforms in different cell lines, and suggested that asTF may serve 
a role in the pathophysiological mechanism underlying cervical cancer 
development. In conclusion, the TF isoforms serve important and distinct roles 
in pathophysiological processes.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2019.9843
PMCID: PMC6390075
PMID: 30664196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]