1. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Apr 1;36(4):766-783. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz016.

Rapid Genetic Code Evolution in Green Algal Mitochondrial Genomes.

Noutahi E(1), Calderon V(2), Blanchette M(3)(4), El-Mabrouk N(1), Lang BF(5).

Author information:
(1)Département d'Informatique et de Recherche opérationnelle (DIRO), Université 
de Montréal, CP 6128 succursale Centre-Ville, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(2)Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(3)School of Computer Science, McGill University, McConnell Engineering Bldg., 
Montréal, QC H3A 0E9, Canada.
(4)McGill Centre for Bioinformatics, McGill University, Montréal, QC, Canada.
(5)Département de Biochimie, Centre Robert Cedergren, Université de Montréal, CP 
6128 succursale Centre-Ville, Montreal, QC, Canada.

Genetic code deviations involving stop codons have been previously reported in 
mitochondrial genomes of several green plants (Viridiplantae), most notably 
chlorophyte algae (Chlorophyta). However, as changes in codon recognition from 
one amino acid to another are more difficult to infer, such changes might have 
gone unnoticed in particular lineages with high evolutionary rates that are 
otherwise prone to codon reassignments. To gain further insight into the 
evolution of the mitochondrial genetic code in green plants, we have conducted 
an in-depth study across mtDNAs from 51 green plants (32 chlorophytes and 19 
streptophytes). Besides confirming known stop-to-sense reassignments, our study 
documents the first cases of sense-to-sense codon reassignments in Chlorophyta 
mtDNAs. In several Sphaeropleales, we report the decoding of AGG codons 
(normally arginine) as alanine, by tRNA(CCU) of various origins that carry the 
recognition signature for alanine tRNA synthetase. In Chromochloris, we identify 
tRNA variants decoding AGG as methionine and the synonymous codon CGG as 
leucine. Finally, we find strong evidence supporting the decoding of AUA codons 
(normally isoleucine) as methionine in Pycnococcus. Our results rely on a 
recently developed conceptual framework (CoreTracker) that predicts codon 
reassignments based on the disparity between DNA sequence (codons) and the 
derived protein sequence. These predictions are then validated by an evaluation 
of tRNA phylogeny, to identify the evolution of new tRNAs via gene duplication 
and loss, and structural modifications that lead to the assignment of new tRNA 
identities and a change in the genetic code.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz016
PMCID: PMC6551751
PMID: 30698742 [Indexed for MEDLINE]