1. Indian J Dermatol. 2019 Jan-Feb;64(1):1-6. doi: 10.4103/ijd.IJD_68_18.

Pathogenesis of Alopecia Areata Based on Bioinformatics Analysis.

Zhang Z(1), Wang X(2), Zhang R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Toxicology, School of Public Health, Shaanxi University of 
Chinese Medicine, Xi'an, China.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Affiliated Hospital of Shaanxi University of 
Chinese Medicine, Xianyang, China.

BACKGROUND: Alopecia areata (AA) describes a sudden localized patchy alopecia. 
The cause of AA is not completely clear and its incidence may be related to 
genetic, autoimmune, and environmental factors.
AIM: To explore the possible mechanisms of AA and to provide a basis for the 
early diagnosis and treatment of AA.
METHODS: Gene microarray data from 122 scalp skin biopsy tissue samples from 
patients with AA or healthy controls from the Gene-Cloud of Biotechnology 
Information database were analyzed using bioinformatics analysis methods. 
Molecular network analysis of the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) was 
conducted by Cytocluster using the Molecular Complex Detection (MCODE) 
algorithm.
RESULTS: The gene expression profile of skin lesions from patients with AA was 
significantly altered, with 111 DEGs found in the skin lesions of AA, compared 
with that of the healthy skin. The DEGs were mainly related to biological 
processes such as the development of the epidermis and inflammatory reaction. 
The protein-protein interaction network analysis of DEGs revealed bone 
morphogenetic protein 2 (BMP2) as a core protein interaction network. BMP2 acted 
not only via the inflammatory response but also via the signaling pathways in 
epithelial cell development and epidermal cell differentiation to affect the 
epidermal development. MCODE analysis further showed that keratins (KRTs) and 
keratin-associated proteins (KRTAPs) can affect the epidermal development via 
the epidermal development pathway.
CONCLUSIONS: The abnormal development of the epidermis and inflammatory 
reactions in skin tissue play important roles in the pathogenesis of AA and are 
closely related to BMP2, KRTs, and KRTAPs genes.
LIMITATIONS: Our study was limited by experimental verification.

DOI: 10.4103/ijd.IJD_68_18
PMCID: PMC6340232
PMID: 30745627

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.