1. mBio. 2019 Feb 12;10(1):e02751-18. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02751-18.

A Highly Polymorphic Receptor Governs Many Distinct Self-Recognition Types 
within the Myxococcales Order.

Cao P(1), Wei X(1), Awal RP(2), Müller R(2), Wall D(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Wyoming, Laramie, Wyoming, 
USA.
(2)Department of Microbial Natural Products, Helmholtz Institute for 
Pharmaceutical Research Saarland, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research and 
Department of Pharmacy, Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany.
(3)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Wyoming, Laramie, Wyoming, USA 
dwall2@uwyo.edu.

Self-recognition underlies sociality in many group-living organisms. In 
bacteria, cells use various strategies to recognize kin to form social groups 
and, in some cases, to transition into multicellular life. One strategy relies 
on a single genetic locus that encodes a variable phenotypic tag ("greenbeard") 
for recognizing other tag bearers. Previously, we discovered a polymorphic cell 
surface receptor called TraA that directs self-identification through homotypic 
interactions in the social bacterium Myxococcus xanthus Recognition by TraA 
leads to cellular resource sharing in a process called outer membrane exchange 
(OME). A second gene in the traA operon, traB, is also required for OME but is 
not involved in recognition. Our prior studies of TraA identified only six 
recognition groups among closely related M. xanthus isolates. Here we 
hypothesize that the number of traA polymorphisms and, consequently, the 
diversity of recognition in wild isolates are much greater. To test this 
hypothesis, we expand the scope of TraA characterization to the order 
Myxococcales From genomic sequences within the three suborders of Myxococcales, 
we identified 90 traA orthologs. Sequence analyses and functional 
characterization of traAB loci suggest that OME is well maintained among diverse 
myxobacterial taxonomic groups. Importantly, TraA orthologs are highly 
polymorphic within their variable domain, the region that confers selectivity in 
self-recognition. We experimentally defined 10 distinct recognition groups and, 
based on phylogenetic and experimental analyses, predicted >60 recognition 
groups among the 90 traA alleles. Taken together, our findings revealed a 
widespread greenbeard locus that mediates the diversity of self-recognition 
across the order MyxococcalesIMPORTANCE Many biological species distinguish self 
from nonself by using different mechanisms. Higher animals recognize close kin 
via complex processes that often involve the five senses, cognition, and 
learning, whereas some microbes achieve self-recognition simply through the 
activity of a single genetic locus. Here we describe a single locus, traA, in 
myxobacteria that governs cell-cell recognition within natural populations. We 
found that traA is widespread across the order Myxococcales TraA is highly 
polymorphic among diverse myxobacterial isolates, and such polymorphisms 
determine selectivity in self-recognition. Through bioinformatic and 
experimental analyses, we showed that traA governs many distinct recognition 
groups within Myxococcales This report provides an example in which a single 
locus influences social recognition across a wide phylogenetic range of natural 
populations.

Copyright © 2019 Cao et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02751-18
PMCID: PMC6372800
PMID: 30755513 [Indexed for MEDLINE]