1. Gastroenterol Hepatol Bed Bench. 2018 Winter;11(Suppl 1):S45-S52.

Evaluation of IL-12A, IL-12B, IL-23A and IL-27 mRNA expression level genes in 
peripheral mononuclear cells of inflammatory bowel disease patients in an 
Iranian population.

Norouzinia M(1), Chaleshi V(2), Alinaghi S(2), Beheshti Shirazi SS(3), 
Keramatinia A(4), Nourian M(2).

Author information:
(1)Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases Research Center, Research Institute for 
Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Basic and Molecular Epidemiology of Gastrointestinal Disorders Research 
Center, Research Institute for Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases, Shahid 
Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Foodborne and Waterborne Diseases Research Center, Research Institute for 
Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Proteomics Research Center, Faculty of Paramedical Sciences, Shahid Beheshti 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

AIM: Aim of this study was to compare the gene expression of Interleukin 12 
members in two phase of IBD.
BACKGROUND: Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a well-known gastrointestinal 
disorder in the world that fluctuates between remission and flare-up phases. 
Each of these phases has an individual immune system response profile. 
Therefore, analyzing the interleukins (IL) expression status improves the 
diagnosis and the classification of the IBD cases.
METHODS: In this a case-control study, among 400 patients whom admitted to the 
IBD clinic, forty nine IBD patients were included. Patients were divided into 
three categories based on 1) the phase of the disease, 2) the type of IBD, 
Ulcerative colitis (UC) or Crohn's disease (CD), and 3) the therapeutic 
pathways. Using the real-time PCR method, the expression levels of IL-12A, 
IL-12B, IL-23A, and IL-27 were examined in the peripheral blood mononuclear cell 
(PBMC) and compared to the pre-described subgroups.
RESULTS: the data showed upregulation in the expression levels of IL-12A and 
IL-12B in the remission phase in comparison with the flare-up. However, no 
significant changes were obtained from the evaluation of IL-23A and IL-27. In 
addition, the mRNA levels of the target genes in the subgroups of Category 2 as 
well as Category 3 were similar.
CONCLUSION: Our results showed that expression patterns of the IL-12A and IL-12B 
genes varied between the remission and flare-up phases for the IBD patients, and 
may be considered as potential biomarkers for the detection and the 
classification of IBD cases.

PMCID: PMC6347999
PMID: 30774807

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.