1. PLoS One. 2019 Feb 22;14(2):e0201424. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0201424. 
eCollection 2019.

An interdisciplinary study around the reliquary of the late cardinal Jacques de 
Vitry.

Decorte R(1)(2), Polet C(3), Boudin M(4), Tilquin F(5), Matroule JY(5), Dieu 
M(6), Charles C(7), Carlier A(8), Lebecque F(8), Deparis O(9).

Author information:
(1)Forensic Biomedical Sciences, Department of Imaging & Pathology, KU Leuven 
(KUL), Leuven, Belgium.
(2)Laboratory of Forensic Genetics and Molecular Archaeology, Department of 
Forensic Medicine, UZ Leuven (UZL), Leuven, Belgium.
(3)Department of Palaeontology, Royal Belgian Institute of Natural Sciences, 
Brussels, Belgium.
(4)Radiocarbon Dating Laboratory, Royal Institute for Cultural Heritage 
(KIK-IRPA), Brussels, Belgium.
(5)Research Unit in Microorganisms Biology (URBM), Narilis Institute, ILEE 
Institute, University of Namur, Namur, Belgium.
(6)Mass Spectrometry Facility (MaSUN), University of Namur, Namur, Belgium.
(7)Moretus Plantin University Library, University of Namur, Namur, Belgium.
(8)Archeological Society of Namur (SAN), Namur, Belgium.
(9)Heritages, Transmissions, Inheritances (PaTHs) Institute & Department of 
Physics, University of Namur, Namur, Belgium.

The reliquary of Jacques de Vitry, a prominent clergyman and theologian in the 
early 13th century, has experienced several transfers over the last centuries, 
which seriously question the attribution of the remains to the late Cardinal. 
Uncertainty about the year of his birth poses an additional question regarding 
his age at death in 1240. The reliquary, located in the Saint Marie d'Oigines 
church, Belgium, was reopened in 2015 for an interdisciplinary study around his 
relics as well as the Treasure of Oignies, a remarkable cultural heritage 
notably built from Jacques de Vitry's donation. Anthropological, isotopic and 
genetic analyses were performed independently on the remains found in the 
reliquary. Results of the analyses provided evidence that the likelihood that 
these remains are those of Jacques de Vitry is very high: the remains belong to 
the same human male individual and the historical tradition about his age is 
confirmed. In addition, a separate relic (left tibia) was analysed and found to 
match with the remains of the reliquary (right tibia). The unique Jacques de 
Vitry's mitre, made of parchment, was sampled non-destructively and the 
extracted parchment collagen was analysed by a proteomic method in order to 
determine the animal species. The results showed that, surprisingly, not all 
parts of the mitre were made from the same species. All together, these findings 
are expected to fertilize knowledge carried by historical tradition around the 
relics of Jacques de Vitry and his related cultural heritage.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0201424
PMCID: PMC6386372
PMID: 30794540 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.