1. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2019 May;68(5):765-772. doi: 
10.1007/s00262-019-02311-1. Epub 2019 Feb 26.

First-line therapy-stratified survival in BRAF-mutant melanoma: a retrospective 
multicenter analysis.

Schilling B(1), Martens A(2), Geukes Foppen MH(3), Gebhardt C(4)(5)(6), Hassel 
JC(7), Rozeman EA(3), Gesierich A(1), Gutzmer R(8), Kähler KC(9), Livingstone 
E(10), Diamantopoulos PT(11), Gogas H(11), Madonna G(12), Ascierto PA(12), 
Goldinger SM(13), Mangana J(13), Garbe C(2), Schadendorf D(10), Blank C(3), 
Weide B(14).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany.
(2)Department of Dermatology, University Medical Center Tübingen, 
Liebermeisterstr. 25, 72076, Tübingen, Germany.
(3)Department of Medical Oncology, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Hamburg-Eppendorf (UKE), 
Hamburg, Germany.
(5)Department of Dermatology, University Medical Center Mannheim, Ruprecht-Karl 
University of Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany.
(6)Skin Cancer Unit, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany.
(7)Department of Dermatology and National Center for Tumor Diseases, University 
Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(8)Department of Dermatology, Skin Cancer Center, Hannover Medical School, 
Hannover, Germany.
(9)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, 
Germany.
(10)Department of Dermatology, West German Cancer Center, University Hospital, 
University Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.
(11)First Department of Internal Medicine, Laikon General Hospital, National and 
Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece.
(12)Istituto Nazionale Tumori Fondazione Pascale, Naples, Italy.
(13)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital of Zürich, Zurich, 
Switzerland.
(14)Department of Dermatology, University Medical Center Tübingen, 
Liebermeisterstr. 25, 72076, Tübingen, Germany. 
benjamin.weide@med.uni-tuebingen.de.

BACKGROUND: Inhibition of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway as 
well as programmed death 1 receptor (PD-1) blockade was shown to prolong overall 
survival (OS) in patients with advanced B-Raf proto-oncogene (BRAF)-mutant 
melanoma. However, due to the lack of head-to-head trials, it remains unclear if 
one of these therapeutic approaches should be preferred in first-line therapy. 
Here, we present a retrospective analysis comparing anti-PD-1 monotherapy with 
BRAF/MAPK/ERK kinase (MEK) combined inhibition used as first-line agents in a 
real-world clinical setting.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Clinical data, routine blood counts and lactate 
dehydrogenase (LDH) levels of 301 patients with unresectable or metastatic 
melanoma harboring an activating mutation in BRAF (V600E/K) were included. Of 
these, 106 received anti-PD-1 antibodies, while 195 patients were treated with a 
selective BRAF inhibitor combined with an MEK inhibitor as palliative first-line 
therapy. Patients were sub-grouped according to previously described predictive 
and prognostic markers.
RESULTS: OS was significantly longer in patients receiving anti-PD-1 monotherapy 
compared to patients receiving combined MAPK inhibitors. Subsequent therapies 
were comparable among these groups. The difference in OS was less pronounced in 
patients with high LDH levels and visceral metastatic spread.
CONCLUSION: First-line treatment with a PD-1 blocking antibody might be 
associated with longer OS than first-line inhibition of the MAPK pathway in 
patients with advanced melanoma harboring mutant BRAF. These 
hypothesis-generating data need to be confirmed or rejected in prospective, 
randomized trials.

DOI: 10.1007/s00262-019-02311-1
PMCID: PMC11028062
PMID: 30806748 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Bastian Schilling reports advisory roles for or 
has received honoraria from Pierre Fabre Pharmaceuticals, Incyte, Novartis, 
Roche, Bristol-Myers Squibb (BMS) and Merck Sharp & Dohme (MSD), research 
funding from BMS, Pierre Fabre Pharmaceuticals and MSD, and travel support from 
Novartis, Roche, BMS, Pierre Fabre Pharmaceuticals and Amgen. Christoffer 
Gebhardt reports advisory roles for or has received honoraria from Pierre Fabre 
Pharmaceuticals, Beiersdorf, BMS, MSD, Novartis, Roche and Sysmex, and travel 
support from BMS, MSD, Novartis and Roche. Jessica C. Hassel reports advisory 
roles for Pierre Fabre and Sanofi, and honoraria from BMS, MSD, Novartis, Roche 
and Pfizer. Anja Gesierich reports advisory roles for BMS, MSD, Novartis, Roche 
and Pfizer, has received honoraria from MSD and BMS, and travel support from 
BMS, MSD, Novartis and Roche. Ralf Gutzmer reports advisory roles for Roche, 
BMS, MSD, Amgen, Almirall, Leo, Pfizer, Novartis, GlaxoSmithKline (GSK), Incyte, 
Merck and Pierre-Fabre, has received honoraria from Roche, BMS, MSD, GSK, 
Novartis, Merck, Almirall, Amgen, Galderma, Astra-Zeneca and Pierre-Fabre, 
research funding from Novartis, Johnson & Johnson and Pfizer, honoraria from 
Roche, BMS, MSD, GSK, Novartis, Merck, Almirall, Amgen, Galderma, Astra-Zeneca 
and Pierre-Fabre, and travel support from Roche, BMS, MSD, GSK, Novartis, Merck, 
Almirall, Amgen, Galderma, Astra-Zeneca and Pierre-Fabre. Elisabeth Livingstone 
reports advisory roles for Roche, BMS, Novartis and Actelion, has received 
honoraria from Roche, BMS, MSD, Amgen, Novartis, Boehringer-Ingelheim (BI) and 
medac, and travel support from Roche, BMS, MSD, Amgen, Novartis, BI and medac. 
Panagiotis T. Diamantopoulos reports honoraria from Novartis and Roche, and 
travel support from Roche, Novartis, Janssen and Amgen. Helen Gogas reports 
honoraria from BMS, Roche, MSD, Novartis, Amgen and Pierre Fabre, and research 
funding from BMS, Roche, MSD and Novartis. Simone M. Goldinger reports advisory 
roles for Roche, Novartis, MSD and BMS, and has received travel support from 
Roche, Novartis, MSD and BMS. Joanna Mangana reports advisory roles for Merck 
and Pfizer, has received research funding from BMS, and travel support from MSD. 
Claus Garbe reports advisory roles for Amgen, BMS, MSD, Philogen, Roche and LEO 
Pharma, has received honoraria from Novartis, Amgen, BMS, MSD, Philogen, Roche 
and LEO Pharma, and research funding from Novartis, BMS and Roche. Dirk 
Schadendorf has received honoraria from Roche Pharma, BMS, Novartis, Merck 
Serono, MSD, Amgen, Incyte, LEO, Pfizer, Pierre Fabre, Array, Astra Zeneca, 
Regeneron, Philogen, Sanofi and Mologen, and research funding from Novartis and 
BMS. Christian Blank reports advisory roles for BMS, MSD, Roche, Novartis, GSK, 
Lilly, Pfizer and Genmab, and has received research funding from Novartis and 
BMS. Benjamin Weide has received honoraria from Merck/MSD, BMS, Philogen, 
Curevac, Roche, Novartis and Amgen, research funding from MSD and BMS, and 
travel support from MSD and BMS. All other authors declare no conflicts of 
interest.