1. Front Pharmacol. 2019 Feb 8;10:74. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2019.00074. eCollection 
2019.

Challenges Facing Airway Epithelial Cell-Based Therapy for Cystic Fibrosis.

Berical A(1)(2), Lee RE(3), Randell SH(3)(4), Hawkins F(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Regenerative Medicine, Boston Medical Center and Boston 
University, Boston, MA, United States.
(2)The Pulmonary Center, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, 
United States.
(3)Cystic Fibrosis Research Center, Marsico Lung Institute, University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, United States.
(4)Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, United States.

Mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene 
cause the life-limiting hereditary disease, cystic fibrosis (CF). Decreased or 
absent functional CFTR protein in airway epithelial cells leads to abnormally 
viscous mucus and impaired mucociliary transport, resulting in bacterial 
infections and inflammation causing progressive lung damage. There are more than 
2000 known variants in the CFTR gene. A subset of CF individuals with specific 
CFTR mutations qualify for pharmacotherapies of variable efficacy. These drugs, 
termed CFTR modulators, address key defects in protein folding, trafficking, 
abundance, and function at the apical cell membrane resulting from specific CFTR 
mutations. However, some CFTR mutations result in little or no CFTR mRNA or 
protein expression for which a pharmaceutical strategy is more challenging and 
remote. One approach to rescue CFTR function in the airway epithelium is to 
replace cells that carry a mutant CFTR sequence with cells that express a normal 
copy of the gene. Cell-based therapy theoretically has the potential to serve as 
a one-time cure for CF lung disease regardless of the causative CFTR mutation. 
In this review, we explore major challenges and recent progress toward this 
ambitious goal. The ideal therapeutic cell would: (1) be autologous to avoid the 
complications of rejection and immune-suppression; (2) be safely modified to 
express functional CFTR; (3) be expandable ex vivo to generate sufficient cell 
quantities to restore CFTR function; and (4) have the capacity to engraft, 
proliferate and persist long-term in recipient airways without complications. 
Herein, we explore human bronchial epithelial cells (HBECs) and induced 
pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) as candidate cell therapies for CF and explore 
the challenges facing their delivery to the human airway.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2019.00074
PMCID: PMC6376457
PMID: 30800069