1. Endocr Connect. 2019 Apr;8(4):326-337. doi: 10.1530/EC-19-0082.

Circulating aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein (AIP) is independent 
of GH secretion.

Stojanovic M(1)(2), Wu Z(3), Stiles CE(4), Miljic D(1)(2), Soldatovic I(2)(5), 
Pekic S(1)(2), Doknic M(1)(2), Petakov M(1)(2), Popovic V(2), Strasburger C(3), 
Korbonits M(4).

Author information:
(1)Neuroendocrinology Department, Clinic for Endocrinology, Diabetes and 
Metabolic Diseases, Clinical Centre of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia.
(2)University of Belgrade, Medical Faculty, Belgrade, Serbia.
(3)Department of Medicine for Endocrinology, Diabetes and Nutritional Medicine, 
Charité Universitätsmedizin, Campus Mitte, Berlin, Germany.
(4)Centre for Endocrinology, William Harvey Research Institute, Barts and the 
London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, 
London, UK.
(5)Insitute of Medical Statistics and Informatics, Belgrade, Serbia.

BACKGROUND: Aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein (AIP) is 
evolutionarily conserved and expressed widely throughout the organism. 
Loss-of-function AIP mutations predispose to young-onset pituitary adenomas. AIP 
co-localizes with growth hormone in normal and tumorous somatotroph secretory 
vesicles. AIP protein is detectable in circulation. We aimed to investigate 
possible AIP and GH co-secretion, by studying serum AIP and GH levels at 
baseline and after GH stimulation or suppression, in GH deficiency (GHD) and in 
acromegaly patients.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: Insulin tolerance test (ITT) was performed in GHD patients 
(n = 13) and age-BMI-matched normal GH axis control patients (n = 31). Oral 
glucose tolerance test (OGTT) was performed in active acromegaly patients (n = 
26) and age-BMI-matched normal GH axis control patients (n = 18). In-house 
immunometric assay was developed for measuring circulating AIP.
RESULTS: Serum AIP levels were in the 0.1 ng/mL range independently of gender, 
age or BMI. Baseline AIP did not differ between GHD and non-GHD or between 
acromegaly and patients with no acromegaly. There was no change in peak, trough 
or area under the curve during OGTT or ITT. Serum AIP did not correlate with GH 
during ITT or OGTT.
CONCLUSIONS: Human circulating serum AIP in vivo was assessed by a novel 
immunometric assay. AIP levels were independent of age, sex or BMI and 
unaffected by hypoglycaemia or hyperglycaemia. Despite co-localization in 
secretory vesicles, AIP and GH did not correlate at baseline or during GH 
stimulation or suppression tests. A platform of reliable serum AIP measurement 
is established for further research of its circulatory source, role and impact.

DOI: 10.1530/EC-19-0082
PMCID: PMC6432870
PMID: 30830858