1. Part Fibre Toxicol. 2019 Mar 6;16(1):12. doi: 10.1186/s12989-019-0296-2.

Health effects of particulate matter air pollution in underground railway 
systems - a critical review of the evidence.

Loxham M(1)(2)(3)(4), Nieuwenhuijsen MJ(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Academic Unit of Clinical and Experimental Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Southampton, Mailpoint 888, Level F, University Hospital 
Southampton, Tremona Road, Southampton, SO16 6YD, UK. m.loxham@soton.ac.uk.
(2)NIHR Southampton Biomedical Research Centre, University Hospital Southampton, 
Southampton, UK. m.loxham@soton.ac.uk.
(3)Institute for Life Sciences, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK. 
m.loxham@soton.ac.uk.
(4)Southampton Marine and Maritime Institute, University of Southampton, 
Southampton, UK. m.loxham@soton.ac.uk.
(5)ISGlobal, Centre for Research in Environmental Epidemiology (CREAL), 
Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona, Spain.
(7)CIBER Epidemiología y Salud Pública (CIBERESP), Madrid, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Exposure to ambient airborne particulate matter is a major risk 
factor for mortality and morbidity, associated with asthma, lung cancer, heart 
disease, myocardial infarction, and stroke, and more recently type 2 diabetes, 
dementia and loss of cognitive function. Less is understood about differential 
effects of particulate matter from different sources. Underground railways are 
used by millions of people on a daily basis in many cities. Poor air exchange 
with the outside environment means that underground railways often have an 
unusually high concentration of airborne particulate matter, while a high degree 
of railway-associated mechanical activity produces particulate matter which is 
physicochemically highly distinct from ambient particulate matter. The 
implications of this for the health of exposed commuters and employees is 
unclear.
MAIN BODY: A literature search found 27 publications directly assessing the 
potential health effects of underground particulate matter, including in vivo 
exposure studies, in vitro toxicology studies, and studies of particulate matter 
which might be similar to that found in underground railways. The methodology, 
findings, and conclusions of these studies were reviewed in depth, along with 
further publications directly relevant to the initial search results. In vitro 
studies suggest that underground particulate matter may be more toxic than 
exposure to ambient/urban particulate matter, especially in terms of endpoints 
related to reactive oxygen species generation and oxidative stress. This appears 
to be predominantly a result of the metal-rich nature of underground particulate 
matter, which is suggestive of increased health risks. However, while there are 
measureable effects on a variety of endpoints following exposure in vivo, there 
is a lack of evidence for these effects being clinically significant as may be 
implied by the in vitro evidence.
CONCLUSION: There is little direct evidence that underground railway particulate 
matter exposure is more harmful than ambient particulate matter exposure. This 
may be due to disparities between in vivo exposures and in vitro models, and 
differences in exposure doses, as well as statistical under powering of in vivo 
studies of chronic exposure. Future research should focus on outcomes of chronic 
in vivo exposure, as well as further work to understand mechanisms and potential 
biomarkers of exposure.

DOI: 10.1186/s12989-019-0296-2
PMCID: PMC6404319
PMID: 30841934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: ML is 
a co-opted member of a subcommittee of the Committee on the Medical Effects of 
Air Pollution (COMEAP), who have prepared a report for Transport for London on 
the potential health effects of air pollution in the London Underground. MJN 
received payment from Transport for London for preparing a summary of literature 
relevant to underground railway air quality. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature 
remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.