1. Hum Mutat. 2019 Jun;40(6):816-827. doi: 10.1002/humu.23742. Epub 2019 Apr 13.

Pyruvate carboxylase deficiency type A and type C: Characterization of five 
novel pathogenic variants in PC and analysis of the genotype-phenotype 
correlation.

Coci EG(1)(2), Gapsys V(3), Shur N(4)(5), Shin-Podskarbi Y(6), de Groot BL(3), 
Miller K(4), Vockley J(7), Sondheimer N(8), Ganetzky R(9), Freisinger P(10).

Author information:
(1)Department for Neuropediatrics, University Children's Hospital, Ruhr 
University Bochum, Bochum, Germany.
(2)Institute for Neuropediatrics and Social Pediatrics, Hamburg, Germany.
(3)Computational Biomolecular Dynamics Group, Max Plank Institute for 
Biophysical Chemistry, Göttingen, Germany.
(4)Division of Genetics, Albany Medical Center, Albany, New York.
(5)Children's National Medical Center, Washington, District of Columbia.
(6)Molecular Genetics and Metabolism Laboratory, Munich, Germany.
(7)Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, University of Pittsburgh School of 
Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(8)Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada.
(9)Division of Human Genetics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, Klinikum Reutlingen, Reutlingen, Germany.

Pyruvate carboxylase deficiency (PCD) is caused by biallelic mutations of the PC 
gene. The reported clinical spectrum includes a neonatal form with early death 
(type B), an infantile fatal form (type A), and a late-onset form with isolated 
mild intellectual delay (type C). Apart from homozygous stop-codon mutations 
leading to type B PCD, a genotype-phenotype correlation has not otherwise been 
discernible. Indeed, patients harboring biallelic heterozygous variants leading 
to PC activity near zero can present either with a fatal infantile type A or 
with a benign late onset type C form. In this study, we analyzed six novel 
patients with type A (three) and type C (three) PCD, and compared them with 
previously reported cases. First, we observed that type C PCD is not associated 
to homozygous variants in PC. In silico modeling was used to map former and 
novel variants associated to type A and C PCD, and to predict their potential 
effects on the enzyme structure and function. We found that variants lead to 
type A or type C phenotype based on the destabilization between the two major 
enzyme conformers. In general, our study on novel and previously reported 
patients improves the overall understanding on type A and C PCD.

© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.23742
PMID: 30870574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]