1. Am J Kidney Dis. 2019 Jun;73(6):806-814. doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2019.01.024. Epub
 2019 Mar 29.

Serum Calcification Propensity and Coronary Artery Calcification Among Patients 
With CKD: The CRIC (Chronic Renal Insufficiency Cohort) Study.

Bundy JD(1), Cai X(2), Scialla JJ(3), Dobre MA(4), Chen J(5), Hsu CY(6), Leonard 
MB(7), Go AS(8), Rao PS(9), Lash JP(10), Townsend RR(11), Feldman HI(12), de 
Boer IH(13), Block GA(14), Wolf M(3), Smith ER(15), Pasch A(16), Isakova T(17); 
CRIC Study Investigators.

Collaborators: Appel LJ, Feldman HI, Go AS, He J, Lash JP, Rao PS, Rahman M, 
Townsend RR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School of 
Medicine, Chicago, IL; Center for Translational Metabolism and Health, Institute 
for Public Health and Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School of 
Medicine, Chicago, IL. Electronic address: jdbundy@northwestern.edu.
(2)Center for Translational Metabolism and Health, Institute for Public Health 
and Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL.
(3)Department of Medicine, Duke Clinical Research Institute, Duke University, 
Durham, NC.
(4)Department of Medicine, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, 
Cleveland, OH.
(5)Department of Medicine, Tulane University School of Medicine, New Orleans, 
LA.
(6)Department of Medicine, University of California San Francisco School of 
Medicine, San Francisco, CA.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Palo Alto.
(8)Comprehensive Clinical Research Unit, Kaiser Permanente Northern California 
Division of Research, Oakland, CA.
(9)Department of Medicine, University of Michigan Health System, Ann Arbor, MI.
(10)Department of Medicine, University of Illinois College of Medicine at 
Chicago, Chicago, IL.
(11)Departments of Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.
(12)Departments of Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA; Biostatistics, Epidemiology, and Informatics, 
Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA; 
Center for Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Perelman School of Medicine 
at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.
(13)Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA.
(14)Colorado Kidney Care, Denver, CO.
(15)Department of Nephrology, The Royal Melbourne Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria, 
Australia.
(16)Calciscon AG, Biel-Nidau, Switzerland.
(17)Center for Translational Metabolism and Health, Institute for Public Health 
and Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL; 
Department of Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, 
Chicago, IL. Electronic address: tamara.isakova@northwestern.edu.

RATIONALE & OBJECTIVE: Coronary artery calcification (CAC) is prevalent among 
patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD) and increases risks for 
cardiovascular disease events and mortality. We hypothesized that a novel serum 
measure of calcification propensity is associated with CAC among patients with 
CKD stages 2 to 4.
STUDY DESIGN: Prospective cohort study.
SETTING & PARTICIPANTS: Participants from the Chronic Renal Insufficiency Cohort 
(CRIC) Study with baseline (n=1,274) and follow-up (n=780) CAC measurements.
PREDICTORS: Calcification propensity, quantified as transformation time (T50) 
from primary to secondary calciprotein particles, with lower T50 corresponding 
to higher calcification propensity. Covariates included age, sex, 
race/ethnicity, clinical site, estimated glomerular filtration rate, 
proteinuria, diabetes, systolic blood pressure, number of antihypertensive 
medications, current smoking, history of cardiovascular disease, total 
cholesterol level, and use of statin medications.
OUTCOMES: CAC prevalence, severity, incidence, and progression.
ANALYTICAL APPROACH: Multivariable-adjusted generalized linear models.
RESULTS: At baseline, 824 (65%) participants had prevalent CAC. After 
multivariable adjustment, T50 was not associated with CAC prevalence but was 
significantly associated with greater CAC severity among participants with 
prevalent CAC: 1-SD lower T50 was associated with 21% (95% CI, 6%-38%) greater 
CAC severity. Among 780 participants followed up an average of 3 years later, 65 
(20%) without baseline CAC developed incident CAC, while 89 (19%) with baseline 
CAC had progression, defined as annual increase≥100 Agatston units. After 
multivariable adjustment, T50 was not associated with incident CAC but was 
significantly associated with CAC progression: 1-SD lower T50 was associated 
with 28% (95% CI, 7%-53%) higher risk for CAC progression.
LIMITATIONS: Potential selection bias in follow-up analyses; inability to 
distinguish intimal from medial calcification.
CONCLUSIONS: Among patients with CKD stages 2 to 4, higher serum calcification 
propensity is associated with more severe CAC and CAC progression.

Copyright © 2019 National Kidney Foundation, Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2019.01.024
PMCID: PMC6535131
PMID: 30935773 [Indexed for MEDLINE]