1. Elife. 2019 Apr 5;8:e42571. doi: 10.7554/eLife.42571.

Narrow equilibrium window for complex coacervation of tau and RNA under cellular 
conditions.

Lin Y(#)(1), McCarty J(#)(2), Rauch JN(3)(4), Delaney KT(5), Kosik KS(3)(4), 
Fredrickson GH(5)(6), Shea JE(2)(7), Han S(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Biomolecular Science and Engineering, University of California Santa Barbara, 
Santa Barbara, United States.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California Santa 
Barbara, Santa Barbara, United States.
(3)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, University of 
California Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, United States.
(4)Neuroscience Research Institute, University of California Santa Barbara, 
Santa Barbara, United States.
(5)Materials Research Laboratory, University of California Santa Barbara, Santa 
Barbara, United States.
(6)Department of Chemical Engineering, University of California Santa Barbara, 
Santa Barbara, United States.
(7)Department of Physics, University of California Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, 
United States.
(#)Contributed equally

The mechanism that leads to liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS) of the tau 
protein, whose pathological aggregation is implicated in neurodegenerative 
disorders, is not well understood. Establishing a phase diagram that delineates 
the boundaries of phase co-existence is key to understanding whether LLPS is an 
equilibrium or intermediate state. We demonstrate that tau and RNA reversibly 
form complex coacervates. While the equilibrium phase diagram can be fit to an 
analytical theory, a more advanced model is investigated through field theoretic 
simulations (FTS) that provided direct insight into the thermodynamic driving 
forces of tau LLPS. Together, experiment and simulation reveal that tau-RNA LLPS 
is stable within a narrow equilibrium window near physiological conditions over 
experimentally tunable parameters including temperature, salt and tau 
concentrations, and is entropy-driven. Guided by our phase diagram, we show that 
tau can be driven toward LLPS under live cell coculturing conditions with 
rationally chosen experimental parameters.

© 2019, Lin et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.42571
PMCID: PMC6450672
PMID: 30950394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: YL, JM, JR, KD, KK, GF, JS, SH No competing 
interests declared