1. Mol Genet Metab Rep. 2019 Mar 23;19:100465. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2019.100465. 
eCollection 2019 Jun.

Identification of an iron-responsive subtype in two children diagnosed with 
relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis using whole exome sequencing.

van Rensburg SJ(1), Peeters AV(2), van Toorn R(3), Schoeman J(3), Moremi KE(1), 
van Heerden CJ(4), Kotze MJ(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Chemical Pathology, Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine 
and Health Sciences, Stellenbosch University, Cape Town, South Africa.
(2)Division of Anatomical Pathology, Department of Pathology, Faculty of 
Medicine and Health Sciences, Stellenbosch University, Cape Town, South Africa.
(3)Paediatric Medicine and Child Health, Faculty of Medicine and Health 
Sciences, Stellenbosch University, Cape Town, South Africa.
(4)Central Analytical Facility (CAF), DNA Sequencing Unit, Stellenbosch 
University, Stellenbosch, South Africa.
(5)Division of Chemical Pathology, Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine 
and Health Sciences, Stellenbosch University, National Health Laboratory Service 
(NHLS), Cape Town, South Africa.

BACKGROUND: Multiple sclerosis is a disorder related to demyelination of axons. 
Iron is an essential cofactor in myelin synthesis. Previously, we described two 
children (males of mixed ancestry) with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis 
(RRMS) where long-term remission was achieved by regular iron supplementation. A 
genetic defect in iron metabolism was postulated, suggesting that more advanced 
genetic studies could shed new light on disease pathophysiology related to iron.
METHODS: Whole exome sequencing (WES) was performed to identify causal pathways. 
Blood tests were performed over a 10 year period to monitor the long-term effect 
of a supplementation regimen. Clinical wellbeing was assessed quarterly by a 
pediatric neurologist and regular feedback was obtained from the schoolteachers.
RESULTS: WES revealed gene variants involved in iron absorption and transport, 
in the transmembrane protease, serine 6 (TMPRSS6) and transferrin (TF) genes; 
multiple genetic variants in CUBN, which encodes cubilin (a receptor involved in 
the absorption of vitamin B12 as well as the reabsorption of transferrin-bound 
iron and vitamin D in the kidneys); SLC25A37 (involved in iron transport into 
mitochondria) and CD163 (a scavenger receptor involved in hemorrhage 
resolution). Variants were also found in COQ3, involved with synthesis of 
Coenzyme Q10 in mitochondria. Neither of the children had the HLA-DRB1*1501 
allele associated with increased genetic risk for MS, suggesting that the 
genetic contribution of iron-related genetic variants may be instrumental in 
childhood MS. In both children the RRMS has remained stable without activity 
over the last 10 years since initiation of nutritional supplementation and 
maintenance of normal iron levels, confirming the role of iron deficiency in 
disease pathogenesis in these patients.
CONCLUSION: Our findings highlight the potential value of WES to identify 
heritable risk factors that could affect the reabsorption of transferrin-bound 
iron in the kidneys causing sustained iron loss, together with inhibition of 
vitamin B12 absorption and vitamin D reabsorption (CUBN) and iron transport into 
mitochondria (SLC25A37) as the sole site of heme synthesis. This supports a 
model for RRMS in children with an apparent iron-deficient biochemical subtype 
of MS, with oligodendrocyte cell death and impaired myelination possibly caused 
by deficits of energy- and antioxidant capacity in mitochondria.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2019.100465
PMCID: PMC6434495
PMID: 30963028