1. Polymers (Basel). 2018 Dec 27;11(1):34. doi: 10.3390/polym11010034.

Roughness and Fiber Fraction Dominated Wetting of Electrospun Fiber-Based Porous 
Meshes.

Szewczyk PK(1), Ura DP(2), Metwally S(3), Knapczyk-Korczak J(4), Gajek M(5), 
Marzec MM(6), Bernasik A(7)(8), Stachewicz U(9).

Author information:
(1)International Centre of Electron Microscopy for Materials Science, Faculty of 
Metals Engineering and Industrial Computer Science, AGH University of Science 
and Technology, 30-059 Kraków, Poland. pszew@agh.edu.pl.
(2)International Centre of Electron Microscopy for Materials Science, Faculty of 
Metals Engineering and Industrial Computer Science, AGH University of Science 
and Technology, 30-059 Kraków, Poland. urad@agh.edu.pl.
(3)International Centre of Electron Microscopy for Materials Science, Faculty of 
Metals Engineering and Industrial Computer Science, AGH University of Science 
and Technology, 30-059 Kraków, Poland. metwally@agh.edu.pl.
(4)International Centre of Electron Microscopy for Materials Science, Faculty of 
Metals Engineering and Industrial Computer Science, AGH University of Science 
and Technology, 30-059 Kraków, Poland. jknapczyk@agh.edu.pl.
(5)Faculty of Materials Science and Ceramics, AGH University of Science and 
Technology, 30-059 Kraków, Poland. mgajek@agh.edu.pl.
(6)Academic Centre for Materials and Nanotechnology, AGH University of Science 
and Technology, 30-059 Kraków, Poland. marzecm@agh.edu.pl.
(7)Academic Centre for Materials and Nanotechnology, AGH University of Science 
and Technology, 30-059 Kraków, Poland. bernasik@agh.edu.pl.
(8)Faculty of Physics and Applied Computer Science, AGH University of Science 
and Technology, 30-059 Kraków, Poland. bernasik@agh.edu.pl.
(9)International Centre of Electron Microscopy for Materials Science, Faculty of 
Metals Engineering and Industrial Computer Science, AGH University of Science 
and Technology, 30-059 Kraków, Poland. ustachew@agh.edu.pl.

Wettability of electrospun fibers is one of the key parameters in the biomedical 
and filtration industry. Within this comprehensive study of contact angles on 
three-dimensional (3D) meshes made of electrospun fibers and films, from seven 
types of polymers, we clearly indicated the importance of roughness analysis. 
Surface chemistry was analyzed with X-ray photoelectron microscopy (XPS) and it 
showed no significant difference between fibers and films, confirming that the 
hydrophobic properties of the surfaces can be enhanced by just roughness without 
any chemical treatment. The surface geometry was determining factor in wetting 
contact angle analysis on electrospun meshes. We noted that it was very 
important how the geometry of electrospun surfaces was validated. The commonly 
used fiber diameter was not necessarily a convincing parameter unless it was 
correlated with the surface roughness or fraction of fibers or pores. 
Importantly, this study provides the guidelines to verify the surface free 
energy decrease with the fiber fraction for the meshes, to validate the changes 
in wetting contact angles. Eventually, the analysis suggested that meshes could 
maintain the entrapped air between fibers, decreasing surface free energies for 
polymers, which increased the contact angle for liquids with surface tension 
above the critical Wenzel level to maintain the Cassie-Baxter regime for 
hydrophobic surfaces.

DOI: 10.3390/polym11010034
PMCID: PMC6401689
PMID: 30960018

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.