1. Front Neurosci. 2019 Apr 12;13:356. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2019.00356. eCollection
 2019.

Reversible Functional Changes Evoked by Anodal Epidural Direct Current 
Electrical Stimulation of the Rat Auditory Cortex.

Colmenárez-Raga AC(1), Díaz I(1), Pernia M(1), Pérez-González D(1), 
Delgado-García JM(2), Carro J(1), Plaza I(1), Merchán MA(1).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Neurociencias de Castilla y León, University of Salamanca, 
Salamanca, Spain.
(2)Division of Neurosciences, Pablo de Olavide University, Seville, Spain.

Rat auditory cortex was subjected to 0.1 mA anodal direct current in seven 
10-min sessions on alternate days. Based on the well-known auditory cortex 
control of olivocochlear regulation through corticofugal projections, auditory 
brainstem responses (ABRs) were recorded as an indirect test of the 
effectiveness and reversibility of the multisession protocol of epidural 
stimulation. Increases of 20-30 dB ABR auditory thresholds shown after epidural 
stimulation reverted back to control levels 10 min after a single session. 
However, increases in thresholds revert 4 days after multisession stimulation. 
Less changes in wave amplitudes and threshold shifts were shown in ABR recorded 
contralaterally to the electrically stimulated side of the brain. To assess 
tissue effects of epidural electric stimulation on the brain cortex, well 
characterized functional anatomical markers of glial cells (GFAP/astrocytes and 
Iba1/microglial cells) and neurons (c-Fos) were analyzed in alternate serial 
sections by quantitative immunocytochemistry. Restricted astroglial and 
microglial reactivity was observed within the cytoarchitectural limits of the 
auditory cortex. However, interstitial GFAP overstaining was also observed in 
the ventricular surface and around blood vessels, thus supporting a potential 
global electrolytic stimulation of the brain. These results correlate with 
extensive changes in the distribution of c-Fos immunoreactive neurons among 
layers along sensory cortices after multisession stimulation. Quantitative 
immunocytochemical analysis supported this idea by showing a significant 
increase in the number of positive neurons in supragranular layers and a 
decrease in layer 6 with no quantitative changes detected in layer 5. Our data 
indicate that epidural stimulation of the auditory cortex induces a reversible 
decrease in hearing sensitivity due to local, restricted epidural stimulation. A 
global plastic response of the sensory cortices, also reported here, may be 
related to electrolytic effects of electric currents.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2019.00356
PMCID: PMC6473088
PMID: 31031588