1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2019 Jul 1;85(14):e00762-19. doi:
10.1128/AEM.00762-19.  Print 2019 Jul 15.

NfiR, a New Regulatory Noncoding RNA (ncRNA), Is Required in Concert with the 
NfiS ncRNA for Optimal Expression of Nitrogenase Genes in Pseudomonas stutzeri 
A1501.

Zhan Y(#)(1), Deng Z(#)(2), Yan Y(1), Zhang H(1), Lu C(1), Yang Z(1), Shang 
L(1), Huang Y(1), Lv F(1), Liu Y(1), Liu Y(1), Wang S(1), Chen S(3), Zhang 
XX(4), Cheng Q(5), Lin M(5).

Author information:
(1)Biotechnology Research Institute/National Key Facility for Crop Gene 
Resources and Genetic Improvement, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, 
Beijing, China.
(2)Shenyang Medical College, Shenyang, China.
(3)Key Laboratory for Agrobiotechnology, Ministry of Agriculture, China 
Agricultural University, Beijing, China.
(4)Institute of Natural and Mathematical Sciences, Massey University at Albany, 
Auckland, New Zealand.
(5)Biotechnology Research Institute/National Key Facility for Crop Gene 
Resources and Genetic Improvement, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, 
Beijing, China chengqi@caas.cn linmin@caas.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

Expression of nitrogenase genes (nifHDK) is strictly regulated at both 
transcriptional and posttranscriptional levels. Efficient nitrogenase activity 
requires maintaining sufficient levels of nif mRNAs, yet the underlying 
mechanism is not fully understood due to its complexity. We have previously 
shown that a novel regulatory noncoding RNA (ncRNA), NfiS, optimizes nitrogen 
fixation through targeting nifK mRNA in Pseudomonas stutzeri A1501. Here, we 
report the identification and characterization of a second ncRNA inducible under 
nitrogen fixation conditions (nitrogen-free and microaerobic conditions), termed 
NfiR (for nitrogen fixation condition-inducible ncRNA), the expression of which 
is dependent on two global regulators, NtrC and Hfq. Comparative phenotypic and 
proteomic analyses of an nfiR mutant identify a role of NfiR in regulating the 
expression of nitrogenase genes. Further microscale thermophoresis and genetic 
complementation showed that an 11-nucleotide (nt) sequence in the stem-loop 
structure of NfiR (nucleotides 12 to 22) pairs with its counterpart in the 
coding region of nifD mRNA (nucleotides 1194 to 1207) by eight nucleotides. 
Significantly, deletion of nfiR caused a 60% reduction of nitrogenase activity, 
and the half-life of nifD mRNA was reduced from 20 min for the wild type to 
15 min for the ΔnfiR mutant. With regard to nitrogenase activity and stability 
of the nifD and nifK transcripts, phenotypes were more severe for the double 
deletion mutant lacking nfiR and nfiS, suggesting that NfiR, in concert with 
NfiS, optimizes nitrogenase production at the posttranscriptional 
level.IMPORTANCE Biological nitrogen fixation is an energy-expensive process 
requiring the hydrolysis of 16 ATPs. Consequently, the expression of nif genes 
is highly regulated at both transcriptional and posttranscriptional levels 
through complex regulatory networks. Global regulation involves a number of 
regulatory proteins, such as the nif-specific activator NifA and the global 
nitrogen regulator NtrC, as well as various regulatory ncRNAs. We show that the 
two P. stutzeri ncRNAs, namely NfiS and NfiR (for nitrogen fixation 
condition-inducible ncRNA), optimize nitrogen fixation and environmental stress 
responses. NfiS and NfiR respond differently to various environmental signals 
and differ in their secondary structures. In addition, the two ncRNAs target the 
mRNAs of nifK and nifD, respectively. Such ncRNA-based posttranscriptional 
regulation of nitrogenase expression might be an evolved survival strategy, 
particularly in nitrogen-limiting environments. This study not only highlights 
the significant roles of regulatory ncRNAs in the coordination and ﬁne tuning of 
various physiological processes but also provides a new paradigm for 
posttranscriptional regulation in nitrogen-fixing bacteria.

Copyright © 2019 Zhan et al.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.00762-19
PMCID: PMC6606865
PMID: 31076427 [Indexed for MEDLINE]