1. J Vet Intern Med. 2019 Jul;33(4):1775-1783. doi: 10.1111/jvim.15519. Epub 2019
 May 18.

Modified stall-side crossmatch for transfusions in horses.

Casenave P(1), Leclere M(1), Beauchamp G(2), Blais MC(1).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Sciences Department, Faculté de Médecine Vétérinaire, Université de 
Montréal, Saint-Hyacinthe, Quebec, Canada.
(2)Faculté de Médecine Vétérinaire, Université de Montréal, Saint-Hyacinthe, 
Quebec, Canada.

BACKGROUND: After-hours or out-of-clinic crossmatches are often limited by the 
lack of access to specialized material and technical expertise.
HYPOTHESIS/OBJECTIVES: The goal was to adapt a stall-side crossmatch test for 
pretransfusion evaluation in horses.
ANIMALS: Twelve healthy mares (plasma and blood donors, teaching mares).
METHODS: In a prospective study, blood from 12 mares was used to compare the 
results of 132 crossmatches performed with a rapid gel assay to crossmatches 
performed with a microgel column assay, and with predicted compatibilities based 
on blood types and detection of antibodies at a reference laboratory (microplate 
assay). The rapid gel assay protocol for dogs was adapted to decrease the 
formation of rouleaux that initially precluded equine erythrocytes migration 
through the gel.
RESULTS: There was a good agreement between the rapid gel assay and the microgel 
assay as well as with the predicted compatibilities (κ > .6 for both). Agreement 
was higher between the microgel assay and the predicted compatibilities (κ = 
.8). The rapid gel assay failed to detect 6 predicted Aa incompatibilities 
(agglutinins-related), 3 of which were also not detected with the microgel 
assay.
CONCLUSIONS AND CLINICAL IMPORTANCE: Based on these results, the modified rapid 
gel assay could be useful in settings when access to the microgel assay is not 
available. Discrepancies between both gel techniques and predicted 
compatibilities were most often low-grade agglutination, which warrants further 
investigation to assess their clinical importance.

© 2019 The Authors. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine published by Wiley 
Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of the American College of Veterinary Internal 
Medicine.

DOI: 10.1111/jvim.15519
PMCID: PMC6639470
PMID: 31102487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Since the completion of this study, Dr Blais has 
started a collaboration with DMS laboratories. This collaboration is 
non‐financial. Funding was provided by the Equine Health Fund from the Faculty 
of Veterinary Medicine of the Université de Montréal, supported by Zoetis. 
Funding sources did not have any involvement in the study design, data analysis 
and interpretation, or writing and publication of the manuscript.