1. Front Immunol. 2019 May 3;10:991. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.00991. eCollection 
2019.

MASP-1 Increases Endothelial Permeability.

Debreczeni ML(1), Németh Z(1), Kajdácsi E(1), Schwaner E(1), Makó V(2), Masszi 
A(1), Doleschall Z(3), Rigó J(4), Walter FR(5), Deli MA(5), Pál G(6), Dobó J(7), 
Gál P(7), Cervenak L(1).

Author information:
(1)Research Laboratory, 3rd Department of Internal Medicine, Semmelweis 
University, Budapest, Hungary.
(2)MTA-SE Research Group of Immunology and Hematology, Hungarian Academy of 
Sciences and Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.
(3)Department of Pathogenetics, National Institute of Oncology, Budapest, 
Hungary.
(4)First Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Semmelweis University, 
Budapest, Hungary.
(5)Biological Research Centre, Institute of Biophysics, Hungarian Academy of 
Sciences, Szeged, Hungary.
(6)Department of Biochemistry, Eötvös Loránd University, Budapest, Hungary.
(7)Research Centre for Natural Sciences, Institute of Enzymology, Hungarian 
Academy of Sciences, Budapest, Hungary.

Pathologically increased vascular permeability is an important dysfunction in 
the pathomechanism of life-threatening conditions, such as sepsis, 
ischemia/reperfusion, or hereditary angioedema (HAE), diseases accompanied by 
uncontrolled activation of the complement system. HAE for example is caused by 
the deficiency of C1-inhibitor (the main regulator of early complement 
activation), which leads to edematous attacks threatening with circulatory 
collapse. We have previously reported that endothelial cells become activated 
during HAE attacks. A natural target of C1-inhibitor is mannan-binding 
lectin-associated serine protease-1 (MASP-1), a multifunctional serine protease, 
which plays a key role in the activation of complement lectin pathway. We have 
previously shown that MASP-1 induces the pro-inflammatory activation of 
endothelial cells and in this study we investigated whether MASP-1 can directly 
affect endothelial permeability. All experiments were performed on human 
umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs). Real-time micro electric sensing 
revealed that MASP-1 decreases the impedance of HUVEC monolayers and in a 
recently developed permeability test (XperT), MASP-1 dose-dependently increased 
endothelial paracellular transport. We show that protease activated receptor-1 
mediated intracellular Ca2+-mobilization, Rho-kinase activation dependent myosin 
light chain (MLC) phosphorylation, cytoskeletal actin rearrangement, and 
disruption of interendothelial junctions are underlying this phenomenon. 
Furthermore, in a whole-transcriptome microarray analysis MASP-1 significantly 
changed the expression of 25 permeability-related genes in HUVECs-for example it 
up-regulated bradykinin B2 receptor expression. According to our results, MASP-1 
has potent permeability increasing effects. During infections or injuries MASP-1 
may help eliminate the microbes and/or tissue debris by enhancing the 
extravasation of soluble and cellular components of the immune system, however, 
it may also play a role in the pathomechanism of diseases, where edema formation 
and complement lectin pathway activation are simultaneously present. Our 
findings also raise the possibility that MASP-1 may be a promising target of 
anti-edema drug development.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.00991
PMCID: PMC6509239
PMID: 31130964 [Indexed for MEDLINE]