1. J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr (Berl). 2019 Sep;103(5):1585-1593. doi: 
10.1111/jpn.13130. Epub 2019 May 29.

Effect of the β-carotene oxygenase 2 genotype on the content of carotenoids, 
retinol and α-tocopherol in the liver, fat and milk of rabbit does, reproduction 
parameters and kitten growth.

Strychalski J(1), Gugołek A(1), Brym P(2), Antoszkiewicz Z(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Fur-bearing Animal Breeding and Game Management, Faculty of 
Animal Bioengineering, University of Warmia and Mazury, Olsztyn, Poland.
(2)Department of Animal Genetics, Faculty of Animal Bioengineering, University 
of Warmia and Mazury, Olsztyn, Poland.
(3)Department of Animal Nutrition and Feed Science, Faculty of Animal 
Bioengineering, University of Warmia and Mazury, Olsztyn, Poland.

Mutations in the β-carotene oxygenase 2 (BCO2) gene can impair the function of 
the enzyme that breaks down carotenoids. As a result, gradual accumulation of 
unoxidized carotenoids in animal tissues gives them a yellow colour. The aim of 
the study was to determine the content of carotenoids, retinol and α-tocopherol 
in the liver, fat and milk of rabbit does with three different genotypes 
determined by AAT-deletion mutation at codon 248 of the BCO2 gene and to find 
out whether differences in the concentrations of the above compounds in the 
tissues and milk of the does affect reproduction parameters and the rearing rate 
of kittens. The experimental materials comprised 36 does, 12 of each genotype of 
the BCO2 gene, with their litters. Females with their litters were placed in 
individual cages, on deep litter. Between days 7 and 13 of lactation, samples of 
milk were collected from the does. The kittens stayed with their mothers until 
35 days of age. After weaning, the does were sacrificed. Tissue samples of liver 
and perirenal fat were collected for chemical analyses. Additionally, based on 
samples taken from one female, RNA expression levels were determined from the 
mammary gland and liver, adipose tissue and skin. It was found that homozygous 
does with deletion at codon 248 of the BCO2 gene were characterized by 
considerably higher concentrations of xanthophylls and beta-carotene in the 
liver, adipose tissue and milk than does with the remaining genotypes. However, 
the differences in the content of the above compounds in milk had no influence 
on litter weight or the number and rearing rate of kittens. Additionally, RNA 
expression of the BCO2 gene was found in the mammary tissue of lactating doe and 
its level was similar to those noted in the liver and adipose tissue.

© 2019 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/jpn.13130
PMID: 31141232 [Indexed for MEDLINE]