1. Pediatrics. 2019 Jul;144(1):e20181741. doi: 10.1542/peds.2018-1741.

Inflammatory Arthritis as a Possible Feature of Coffin-Siris Syndrome.

Melo Gomes S(1)(2), Dias C(3)(4)(5), Omoyinmi E(6), Compeyrot-Lacassagne S(2), 
Klein N(6), Sebire NJ(7), Brogan P(6)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infection, Immunity, and Inflammation, University College 
London Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom; 
s.melogomes@ucl.ac.uk.
(2)Departments of Rheumatology.
(3)Clinical Genetics, and.
(4)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, School of Basic and Medical 
Biosciences, King's College London, London, United Kingdom; and.
(5)The Francis Crick Institute, London, United Kingdom.
(6)Department of Infection, Immunity, and Inflammation, University College 
London Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom.
(7)Histopathology, Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, United Kingdom.

Coffin-Siris syndrome (CSS) and Nicolaides-Baraitser syndrome (NBS) are 2 
overlapping syndromes caused by mutations in genes of the 
barrier-to-autointegration factor chromatin-remodeling complex, presenting with 
multiple malformations and intellectual disability. Musculoskeletal changes such 
as noninflammatory prominence of interphalangeal joints in hands, feet, and, to 
a lesser extent, knee joints are common in NBS (up to 85%) and also reported in 
CSS. We present the case of a 7-year-old boy with polyarthritis of several 
years' duration (without uveitis), developmental delay, microcephaly, and 
dysmorphic features reminiscent of NBS. Sanger sequencing of the SMARCA2 gene 
revealed no mutations. Laboratory test results were normal. With synovial 
biopsy, we confirmed a chronic inflammatory synovitis. Brain MRI revealed 
dysgenesis of the corpus callosum. Treatment with methotrexate and, 
subsequently, etanercept led to significant clinical improvement. Whole-exome 
sequencing revealed a de novo heterozygous nonsense mutation in the ARID1B gene, 
resulting in a premature stop codon (c.C5404T; p.R1802×), a genotype consistent 
with CSS. The absence of significantly raised inflammatory markers and a 
clinical diagnosis of a genetic syndrome associated with noninflammatory joint 
changes may have contributed to this patient's polyarthritis being missed for 
several years. We propose that some patients with CSS may have inflammatory 
arthritis (with or without coexisting skeletal dysplasia), which may be helped 
by treatment as described herein. Early recognition and treatment of 
inflammatory arthritis in CSS would have a significant impact on reducing 
disease burden and improving quality of life for patients with this rare genetic 
syndrome.

Copyright © 2019 by the American Academy of Pediatrics.

DOI: 10.1542/peds.2018-1741
PMID: 31243159 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: POTENTIAL CONFLICT OF INTEREST: Dr Brogan has 
received a grant from Novartis, consulting fees from Roche, speaker fees from 
UCB, committee fees and an institutional grant from Swedish Orphan Biovitrum for 
gene hunting in autoinflammation, an institutional grant from Novimmune for a 
clinical trial, and other institutional fees from ChemoCentryx; the other 
authors have indicated they have no potential conflicts of interest to disclose.