1. Sci Rep. 2019 Jul 30;9(1):11027. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-47299-x.

Identifying Archaeological Bone via Non-Destructive ZooMS and the Materiality of 
Symbolic Expression: Examples from Iroquoian Bone Points.

McGrath K(1), Rowsell K(2)(3), Gates St-Pierre C(4), Tedder A(5), Foody G(6), 
Roberts C(2), Speller C(2)(7), Collins M(2)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)BioArCh, Department of Archaeology, University of York, York, UK. 
krista.mcgrath@york.ac.uk.
(2)BioArCh, Department of Archaeology, University of York, York, UK.
(3)London School of Economics and Political Science, London, UK.
(4)Département d'anthropologie, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec, 
Canada.
(5)School of Chemistry & Bioscience, University of Bradford, Bradford, UK.
(6)Department of Biological and Geographical Sciences, School of Applied 
Sciences, University of Huddersfield, Huddersfield, UK.
(7)Department of Anthropology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, 
Canada.
(8)EvoGenomics, Natural History Museum of Denmark, University of Copenhagen, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(9)McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research, University of Cambridge, 
Cambridge, UK.

Today, practical, functional and symbolic choices inform the selection of raw 
materials for worked objects. In cases where we can discern the origin of worked 
bone, tooth, ivory and antler objects in the past, we assume that similar 
choices are being made. However, morphological species identification of worked 
objects is often impossible due to the loss of identifying characteristics 
during manufacture. Here, we describe a novel non-destructive ZooMS 
(Zooarchaeology by Mass Spectrometry) method which was applied to bone points 
from Pre-Contact St. Lawrence Iroquoian village sites in southern Quebec, 
Canada. The traditional ZooMS technique requires destructive analysis of a 
sample, which can be problematic when dealing with artefacts. Here we instead 
extracted proteins from the plastic bags in which the points had been stored. 
ZooMS analysis revealed hitherto unexpected species, notably black bear (Ursus 
americanus) and human (Homo sapiens sapiens), used in point manufacture. These 
surprising results (confirmed through genomic sequencing) highlight the 
importance of advancing biomolecular research in artefact studies. Furthermore, 
they unexpectedly and exceptionally allow us to identify and explore the 
tangible, material traces of the symbolic relationship between bears and humans, 
central to past and present Iroquoian cosmology and mythology.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-019-47299-x
PMCID: PMC6667708
PMID: 31363122 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.