1. Front Genet. 2019 Aug 8;10:699. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2019.00699. eCollection
2019.

Discovery of Genomic Characteristics and Selection Signatures in Korean 
Indigenous Goats Through Comparison of 10 Goat Breeds.

Kim JY(1)(2), Jeong S(1), Kim KH(1)(2), Lim WJ(1)(2), Lee HY(1)(2), Kim N(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Genome Editing Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and 
Biotechnology (KRIBB), Daejeon, South Korea.
(2)Department of Bioinformatics, KRIBB School of Bioscience, University of 
Science and Technology (UST), Daejeon, South Korea.

Indigenous breeds develop their own genomic characteristics by adapting to local 
environments or cultures over long periods of time. Most of them are not 
particularly productive in commercial terms, but they have abilities to survive 
in harsh environments or tolerate to specific diseases. Their adaptive 
characteristics play an important role as genetic materials for improving 
commercial breeds. As a step toward this goal, we analyzed the genome of Korean 
indigenous goats within 10 goat breeds. We collected 136 goat individuals by 
sequencing 46 new goats and employing 90 publicly available goats. Our 
whole-genome data was comprised of three indigenous breeds (Korean indigenous 
goat, Iranian indigenous goat, and Moroccan indigenous goat; n = 29, 18, 20), 
six commercial breeds (Saanen, Boer, Anglo-Nubian, British Alpine, Alpine, and 
Korean crossbred; n = 16, 11, 5, 5, 2, 13), and their ancestral species (Capra 
aegagrus; n = 17). We identified that the Iranian indigenous goat and the 
Moroccan indigenous goat have relatively similar genomic characteristics within 
a large category of genomic diversity but found that the Korean indigenous goat 
has unique genomic characteristics distinguished from the other nine breeds. 
Through population analysis, we confirmed that these characteristics have 
resulted from a near-isolated environment with strong genetic drift. The Korean 
indigenous goat experienced a severe genetic bottleneck upon entering the Korean 
Peninsula about 2,000 years ago, and has subsequently rarely experienced genetic 
interactions with other goat breeds. From selection analysis and gene-set 
enrichment analysis, we revealed selection signals for Salmonella infection and 
cardiomyopathy in the genome of the Korean indigenous goat. These adaptive 
characteristics were further identified with genomic-based evidence. We 
uncovered genomic regions of selective sweeps in the LBP and BPI genes 
(Salmonella infection) and the TTN and ITGB6 genes (cardiomyopathy), among 
several candidate genes. Our research presents unique genomic characteristics 
and distinctive selection signals of the Korean indigenous goat based on the 
extensive comparison. Although the adaptive traits require further validation 
through biological experiments, our findings are expected to provide a direction 
for future biodiversity conservation strategies and to contribute another option 
to genomic-based breeding programmes for improving the viability of Capra 
hircus.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2019.00699
PMCID: PMC6694180
PMID: 31440273