1. Eur J Rheumatol. 2020 Feb;7(Suppl1):S78-S81. doi:
10.5152/eurjrheum.2019.18177.

Baricitinib in therapy of COPA syndrome in a 15-year-old girl.

Krutzke S(1), Rietschel C(2), Horneff G(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Paediatrics, Centre for Paediatric Rheumatology, Clinic 
Sankt Augustin, Sankt Augustin, Germany.
(2)Department for Pediatric Rheumatology, Clementine Kinderhospital, Frankfurt, 
Germany.
(3)Department of Pediatric and Adolescents medicine, University Hospital of 
Cologne, Cologne, Germany.

COPA syndrome is a newly discovered hereditary immunodeficiency affecting the 
lung, kidneys, and joints. The mutated gene encodes the α subunit of the 
coatomer complex I, a protein transporter from the Golgi back to the endoplasmic 
reticulum. The impaired return of proteins leads to intracellular stress. The 
syndrome is an autoimmune and autoinflammatory disease that can be grouped among 
the interferonopathies. The knowledge about COPA syndrome and its treatment is 
still limited. In this paper, we describe an additional patient, a 15-year-old 
girl with rheumatoid factor-positive polyarthritis and rheumatoid nodules since 
the age of 2, who developed interstitial lung disease. The detected mutation 
c.698G>A was causing the disease. The patient presented with symmetric 
polyarthritis on wrists, fingers, and hip and ankle joints, with significant 
functional impairment, and high disease activity. Laboratory parameters 
demonstrated chronic inflammation, hypergammaglobulinemia, high titre ANA 
(antinuclear antibodies) and CCP (anti-citrullinated protein) antibodies, and 
rheumatoid factors. Therapies with various DMARDs (Disease Modifying 
Anti-Rheumatic Drugs) and biologicals failed. Upon baricitinib application, the 
clinical activity decreased dramatically with disappearance of joint pain and 
morning stiffness and significant decrease of joint swelling. A low disease 
activity was reached after 12 months, with complete disappearance of rheumatoid 
nodules. In contrast to IL-1 (interleukin-1), IL-6, and TNF (tumor necrosis 
factor) inhibitors, baricitinib was very successful, probably because 
baricitinib acts as a JAK-1/2 (janus kinase-1/2) inhibitor in the IFNα/β 
(inteferone α/β) pathway. A relatively higher dose in children is necessary. 
COPA syndrome represents a novel disorder of intracellular transport. Reviewing 
published literature on COPA syndrome, in addition to our patient, there were 31 
cases further described.

DOI: 10.5152/eurjrheum.2019.18177
PMCID: PMC7004263
PMID: 31449490

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: Gerd Horneff received 
scientific grants, advisory board membership and speakers fee from Abbvie, 
Pfizer, BMS, Novartis, Bayer, Sobi and Chugai/Roche. The other authors have no 
conflict of interest to declare.