1. Hepatology. 2020 Apr;71(4):1228-1246. doi: 10.1002/hep.30921. Epub 2020 Jan
24.

hnRNPU/TrkB Defines a Chromatin Accessibility Checkpoint for Liver Injury and 
Nonalcoholic Steatohepatitis Pathogenesis.

Xiong J(1)(2), Liu T(2), Mi L(2), Kuang H(2), Xiong X(2), Chen Z(2), Li S(2), 
Lin JD(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Basic Medicine, Nanjing Medical 
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.
(2)Life Sciences Institute and Department of Cell & Developmental Biology, 
University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor, MI.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) is a progressive liver 
disease that is characterized by liver injury, inflammation, and fibrosis. NASH 
pathogenesis is linked to reprogramming of chromatin landscape in the liver that 
predisposes hepatocytes to stress-induced tissue injury. However, the molecular 
nature of the putative checkpoint that maintains chromatin architecture and 
preserves hepatocyte health remains elusive.
APPROACH AND RESULTS: Here we show that heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein 
U (hnRNPU), a nuclear matrix protein that governs chromatin architecture and 
gene transcription, is a critical factor that couples chromatin disruption to 
NASH pathogenesis. RNA-seq and chromatin immunoprecipitation-seq studies 
revealed an extensive overlap between hnRNPU occupancy and altered gene 
expression during NASH. Hepatocyte-specific inactivation of hnRNPU disrupted 
liver chromatin accessibility, activated molecular signature of NASH, and 
sensitized mice to diet-induced NASH pathogenesis. Mechanistically, hnRNPU 
deficiency stimulated the expression of a truncated isoform of TrkB (TRKB-T1) 
that promotes inflammatory signaling in hepatocytes and stress-induced cell 
death. Brain-derived neurotrophic factor treatment reduced membrane TRKB-T1 
protein and protected mice from diet-induced NASH.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings illustrate a mechanism through which disruptions of 
chromatin architecture drive the emergence of disease-specific signaling 
patterns that promote liver injury and exacerbate NASH pathogenesis.

© 2019 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.30921
PMCID: PMC7048669
PMID: 31469911 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.