1. Photosynth Res. 2019 Dec;142(3):283-305. doi: 10.1007/s11120-019-00664-3. Epub
 2019 Sep 20.

In vivo photoprotection mechanisms observed from leaf spectral absorbance 
changes showing VIS-NIR slow-induced conformational pigment bed changes.

Van Wittenberghe S(1)(2), Alonso L(3), Malenovský Z(4), Moreno J(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Earth Observation, Image Processing Laboratory, University of 
Valencia, C/Catedrático José Beltrán, 2, 46980, Paterna, Valencia, Spain. 
Shari.Wittenberghe@uv.es.
(2)Optics of Photosynthesis Laboratory, Institute for Atmospheric and Earth 
System Research/Forest Sciences, Faculty of Agriculture and Forestry, University 
of Helsinki, 00014, Helsinki, Finland. Shari.Wittenberghe@uv.es.
(3)Laboratory of Earth Observation, Image Processing Laboratory, University of 
Valencia, C/Catedrático José Beltrán, 2, 46980, Paterna, Valencia, Spain.
(4)Geography and Spatial Sciences, School of Technology, Environments and 
Design, University of Tasmania, Private Bag 76, Hobart, TAS, 7001, Australia.

Regulated heat dissipation under excessive light comprises a complexity of 
mechanisms, whereby the supramolecular light-harvesting pigment-protein complex 
(LHC) shifts state from light harvesting towards heat dissipation, quenching the 
excess of photo-induced excitation energy in a non-photochemical way. Based on 
whole-leaf spectroscopy measuring upward and downward spectral radiance fluxes, 
we studied spectrally contiguous (hyperspectral) transient time series of 
absorbance A(λ,t) and passively induced chlorophyll fluorescence F(λ,t) dynamics 
of intact leaves in the visible and near-infrared wavelengths (VIS-NIR, 
400-800 nm) after sudden strong natural-like illumination exposure. Besides 
light avoidance mechanism, we observed on absorbance signatures, calculated from 
simultaneous reflectance R(λ,t) and transmittance T(λ,t) measurements as 
A(λ,t) = 1 - R(λ,t) - T(λ,t), major dynamic events with specific onsets and 
kinetical behaviour. A consistent well-known fast carotenoid absorbance feature 
(500-570 nm) appears within the first seconds to minutes, seen from both the 
reflected (backscattered) and transmitted (forward scattered) radiance 
differences. Simultaneous fast Chl features are observed, either as an increased 
or decreased scattering behaviour during quick light adjustment consistent with 
re-organizations of the membrane. The carotenoid absorbance feature shows up 
simultaneously with a major F decrease and corresponds to the xanthophyll 
conversion, as quick response to the proton gradient build-up. After xanthophyll 
conversion (t = 3 min), a kinetically slower but major and smooth absorbance 
increase was occasionally observed from the transmitted radiance measurements as 
wide peaks in the green (~ 550 nm) and the near-infrared (~ 750 nm) wavelengths, 
involving no further F quenching. Surprisingly, in relation to the response to 
high light, this broad and consistent VIS-NIR feature indicates a slowly induced 
absorbance increase with a sigmoid kinetical behaviour. In analogy to 
sub-leaf-level observations, we suggest that this mechanism can be explained by 
a structure-induced low-energy-shifted energy redistribution involving both Car 
and Chl. These findings might pave the way towards a further non-invasive 
spectral investigation of antenna conformations and their relations with energy 
quenching at the intact leaf level, which is, in combination with F 
measurements, of a high importance for assessing plant photosynthesis in vivo 
and in addition from remote observations.

DOI: 10.1007/s11120-019-00664-3
PMCID: PMC6874624
PMID: 31541418 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.