1. Sleep. 2019 Dec 24;42(12):zsz177. doi: 10.1093/sleep/zsz177.

Sleep duration and quality are not associated with brown adipose tissue volume 
or activity-as determined by 18F-FDG uptake, in young, sedentary adults.

Acosta FM(1), Sanchez-Delgado G(1), Martinez-Tellez B(1)(2), Migueles JH(1), 
Amaro-Gahete FJ(1), Rensen PCN(2), Llamas-Elvira JM(3), Blondin DP(4), Ruiz 
JR(1).

Author information:
(1)PROFITH "PROmoting FITness and Health through physical activity" Research 
Group, Department of Physical and Sports Education, Sport and Health University 
Research Institute (iMUDS), Faculty of Sports Science, University of Granada, 
Granada, Spain.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, and Einthoven Laboratory 
for Experimental Vascular Medicine, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 
The Netherlands.
(3)Nuclear Medicine Services, "Virgen de las Nieves" University Hospital, 
Granada, Spain.
(4)Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Department of 
Pharmacology-Physiology, Université de Sherbrooke and Centre de Recherche du 
Centre hospitalier universitaire de Sherbrooke, Quebec, Canada.

STUDY OBJECTIVES: Short sleep duration and sleep disturbances have been related 
to obesity and metabolic disruption. However, the behavioral and physiological 
mechanisms linking sleep and alterations in energy balance and metabolism are 
incompletely understood. In rodents, sleep regulation is closely related to 
appropriate brown adipose tissue (BAT) thermogenic activity, but whether the 
same is true in humans has remained unknown. The present work examines whether 
sleep duration and quality are related to BAT volume and activity (measured by 
18F-FDG) and BAT radiodensity in humans.
METHODS: A total of 118 healthy adults (69% women, 21.9 ± 2.2 years, body mass 
index: 24.9 ± 4.7 kg/m2) participated in this cross-sectional study. Sleep 
duration and other sleep variables were measured using a wrist-worn 
accelerometer for seven consecutive days for 24 hours per day. The Pittsburgh 
Sleep Quality Index was used to assess sleep quality. All participants then 
underwent a personalized cold exposure to determine their BAT volume, activity, 
and radiodensity (a proxy of the intracellular triglyceride content), using 
static positron emission tomography combined with computed tomography (PET/CI) 
scan.
RESULTS: Neither sleep duration nor quality was associated with BAT volume or 
activity (the latter represented by the mean and peak standardized 18F-FDG 
uptake values) or radiodensity (all p > .1). The lack of association remained 
after adjusting the analyses for sex, date of PET/CT, and body composition.
CONCLUSIONS: Although experiments in rodent models indicate a strong 
relationship to exist between sleep regulation and BAT function, it seems that 
sleep duration and quality may not be directly related to the BAT variables 
examined in the present work.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: NCT02365129 (ClinicalTrials.gov).

© Sleep Research Society 2019. Published by Oxford University Press [on behalf 
of the Sleep Research Society].

DOI: 10.1093/sleep/zsz177
PMCID: PMC6930133
PMID: 31555815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]