1. Haematologica. 2020 Jul;105(7):1948-1956. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2019.227876. 
Epub 2019 Sep 26.

Antithrombotic prophylaxis for surgery-associated venous thromboembolism risk in 
patients with inherited platelet disorders. The SPATA-DVT Study.

Paciullo F(1), Bury L(1), Noris P(2), Falcinelli E(1), Melazzini F(2), Orsini 
S(1), Zaninetti C(2)(3), Abdul-Kadir R(4), Obeng-Tuudah D(4), Heller PG(5)(6), 
Glembotsky AC(5)(6), Fabris F(7), Rivera J(8), Lozano ML(8), Butta N(9), Favier 
R(10), Cid AR(11), Fouassier M(12), Podda GM(13), Santoro C(14), Grandone 
E(15)(16), Henskens Y(17), Nurden P(8), Zieger B(18), Cuker A(19), Devreese 
K(20), Tosetto A(21), De Candia E(22)(23), Dupuis A(24), Miyazaki K(25), Othman 
M(26), Gresele P(27).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Section of Internal and Cardiovascular Medicine, 
University of Perugia, Italy.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, IRCCS Policlinico S. Matteo Foundation, 
University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
(3)PhD program in Experimental Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
(4)Haemophilia Centre and Haemostasis Unit, The Royal Free Foundation Hospital 
and University College London, London, UK.
(5)Hematología Investigación, Instituto de Investigaciones Médicas Alfredo 
Lanari, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(6)CONICET, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Instituto de Investigaciones Médicas 
-IDIM-, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(7)Clinica Medica 1 - Medicina Interna CLOPD, Dipartimento Assistenziale 
Integrato di Medicina, Azienda-Ospedale Università di Padova, Dipartimento di 
Medicina, Università di Padova, Padova, Italy.
(8)Servicio de Hematología y Oncología Médica, Hospital Universitario Morales 
Meseguery Centro Regional de Hemodonación, IMIB-Arrixaca, Universidad de Murcia, 
Murcia, Spain.
(9)Unidad de Hematología, Hospital Universitario La Paz-IDIPaz, Madrid, Spain.
(10)Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Armand Trousseau Children's Hospital, 
French Reference Centre for Inherited Platelet Disorders, Paris, France.
(11)Unidad de Hemostasia y Trombosis, Hospital Universitario y Politecnico La 
Fe, Valencia, Spain.
(12)Consultations d'Hémostase - CRTH, CHU de Nantes, Nantes, France.
(13)Medicina III, ASST Santi Paolo e Carlo, Dipartimento di Scienze della 
Salute, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy.
(14)Hematology, Department of Translational and Precision Medicine, La Sapienza 
University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(15)Unità di Ricerca in Aterosclerosi e Trombosi, I.R.C.C.S. "Casa Sollievo 
della Sofferenza", S. Giovanni Rotondo, Foggia, Italy.
(16)Ob/Gyn Department of the First I.M. Sechenov Moscow State Medical 
University, Moscow, The Russian Federation.
(17)Hematological Laboratory, Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, 
the Netherlands.
(18)Division of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Faculty of Medicine, Medical 
Center - University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(19)Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 
USA.
(20)Coagulation Laboratory, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Ghent University 
Hospital, Department of Diagnostic Sciences, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.
(21)Hematology Department, S. Bortolo Hospital, Vicenza, Italy.
(22)Hemostasis and Thrombosis Unit, Insitute of Internal Medicine, Policlinico 
Agostino Gemelli Foundation, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(23)Institute of Internal Medicine and Geriatrics, Università Cattolica del 
Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy.
(24)Université de Strasbourg, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche 
Médicale, Etablissement Français du Sang Grand Est, Unité Mixte de Recherche-S 
1255, Fédération de Médecine Translationnelle de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France.
(25)Department of Transfusion and Cell Transplantation Kitasato University 
School of Medicine, Sagamihara, Japan.
(26)Department of Biomedical and Molecular Sciences, School of Medicine, Queen's 
University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada.
(27)Department of Medicine, Section of Internal and Cardiovascular Medicine, 
University of Perugia, Italy paolo.gresele@unipg.it.

Major surgery is associated with an increased risk of venous thromboembolism 
(VTE), thus the application of mechanical or pharmacologic prophylaxis is 
recommended. The incidence of VTE in patients with inherited platelet disorders 
(IPD) undergoing surgical procedures is unknown and no information on the 
current use and safety of thromboprophylaxis, particularly of 
low-molecular-weight-heparin in these patients is available. Here we explored 
the approach to thromboprophylaxis and thrombotic outcomes in IPD patients 
undergoing surgery at VTE-risk participating in the multicenter SPATA study. We 
evaluated 210 surgical procedures carried out in 155 patients with well-defined 
forms of IPD (VTE-risk: 31% high, 28.6% intermediate, 25.2% low, 15.2% very 
low). The use of thromboprophylaxis was low (23.3% of procedures), with higher 
prevalence in orthopedic and gynecological surgeries, and was related to 
VTE-risk. The most frequently employed thromboprophylaxis was mechanical and 
appeared to be effective, as no patients developed thrombosis, including 
patients belonging to the highest VTE-risk classes. Low-molecular-weight-heparin 
use was low (10.5%) and it did not influence the incidence of post-surgical 
bleeding or of antihemorrhagic prohemostatic interventions use. Two 
thromboembolic events were registered, both occurring after high VTE-risk 
procedures in patients who did not receive thromboprophylaxis (4.7%). Our 
findings suggest that VTE incidence is low in patients with IPD undergoing 
surgery at VTE-risk and that it is predicted by the Caprini score. Mechanical 
thromboprophylaxis may be of benefit in patients with IPD undergoing invasive 
procedures at VTE-risk and low-molecular-weight-heparin should be considered for 
major surgery.

Copyright© 2020 Ferrata Storti Foundation.

DOI: 10.3324/haematol.2019.227876
PMCID: PMC7327644
PMID: 31558677 [Indexed for MEDLINE]