1. Int J Cancer. 2020 Jan 15;146(2):305-320. doi: 10.1002/ijc.32688. Epub 2019
Oct  31.

Pathogenic role of exosomes and microRNAs in HPV-mediated inflammation and 
cervical cancer: A review.

Sadri Nahand J(1)(2), Moghoofei M(3), Salmaninejad A(4)(5), Bahmanpour Z(6), 
Karimzadeh M(1), Nasiri M(1), Mirzaei HR(7), Pourhanifeh MH(8), Bokharaei-Salim 
F(1), Mirzaei H(8), Hamblin MR(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Virology, Faculty of Medicine, Iran University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Student Research Committee, Iran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, 
Iran.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Kermanshah University of 
Medical Sciences, Kermanshah, Iran.
(4)Drug Applied Research Center, Student Research Committee, Tabriz University 
of Medical Science, Tabriz, Iran.
(5)Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Tabriz 
University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran.
(6)Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Student Research 
Committee, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran.
(7)Department of Medical Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Tehran University of 
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(8)Research Center for Biochemistry and Nutrition in Metabolic Diseases, 
Institute for Basic Sciences, Kashan University of Medical Sciences, Kashan, 
Iran.
(9)Wellman Center for Photomedicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA.

Cervical cancer (CC) is the fourth most common cause of cancer death in women. 
The most important risk factor for the development of CC is cervical infection 
with human papilloma virus (HPV). Inflammation is a protective strategy that is 
triggered by the host against pathogens such as viral infections that acts 
rapidly to activate the innate immune response. Inflammation is beneficial if it 
is brief and well controlled; however, if the inflammation is excessive or it 
becomes of chronic duration, it can produce detrimental effects. HPV proteins 
are involved, both directly and indirectly, in the development of chronic 
inflammation, which is a causal factor in the development of CC. However, other 
factors may also have a potential role in stimulating chronic inflammation. 
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) (a class of noncoding RNAs) are strong regulators of gene 
expression. They have emerged as key players in several biological processes, 
including inflammatory pathways. Abnormal expression of miRNAs may be linked to 
the induction of inflammation that occurs in CC. Exosomes are a subset of 
extracellular vesicles shed by almost all types of cells, which can function as 
cargo transfer vehicles. Exosomes contain proteins and genetic material 
(including miRNAs) derived from their parent cells and can potentially affect 
recipient cells. Exosomes have recently been recognized to be involved in 
inflammatory processes and can also affect the immune response. In this review, 
we discuss the role of HPV proteins, miRNAs and exosomes in the inflammation 
associated with CC.

© 2019 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.32688
PMCID: PMC6999596
PMID: 31566705 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest MRH declares the following 
potential conflicts of interest. Scientific Advisory Boards: Transdermal Cap 
Inc, Cleveland, OH; BeWell Global Inc, Wan Chai, Hong Kong; Hologenix Inc. Santa 
Monica, CA; LumiThera Inc, Poulsbo, WA; Vielight, Toronto, Canada; Bright 
Photomedicine, Sao Paulo, Brazil; Quantum Dynamics LLC, Cambridge, MA; Global 
Photon Inc, Bee Cave, TX; Medical Coherence, Boston MA; NeuroThera, Newark DE; 
JOOVV Inc, Minneapolis-St. Paul MN; AIRx Medical, Pleasanton CA; FIR Industries, 
Inc. Ramsey, NJ; UVLRx Therapeutics, Oldsmar, FL; Ultralux UV Inc, Lansing MI; 
Illumiheal & Petthera, Shoreline, WA; MB Lasertherapy, Houston, TX; ARRC LED, 
San Clemente, CA; Varuna Biomedical Corp. Incline Village, NV; Niraxx Light 
Therapeutics, Inc, Boston, MA. Consulting; Lexington Int, Boca Raton, FL; USHIO 
Corp, Japan; Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany; Philips Electronics Nederland B.V. 
Eindhoven, Netherlands; Johnson & Johnson Inc, Philadelphia, PA; Sanofi-Aventis 
Deutschland GmbH, Frankfurt am Main, Germany. Stockholdings: Global Photon Inc, 
Bee Cave, TX; Mitonix, Newark, DE.