1. Front Behav Neurosci. 2019 Sep 13;13:212. doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2019.00212. 
eCollection 2019.

Intersections and Divergences Between Empathizing and Mentalizing: Development, 
Recent Advancements by Neuroimaging and the Future of Animal Modeling.

Cerniglia L(1), Bartolomeo L(1), Capobianco M(1), Lo Russo SLM(2), Festucci 
F(2), Tambelli R(3), Adriani W(1)(2), Cimino S(3).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Psychology, International Telematic University Uninettuno, Rome, 
Italy.
(2)Center for Behavioral Sciences and Mental Health, Istituto Superiore di 
Sanità (ISS), Rome, Italy.
(3)Department of Dynamic and Clinical Psychology, "Sapienza" University of Rome, 
Rome, Italy.

Both mentalization and empathy allow humans to understand others, through the 
representation of their mental states or their mood, respectively. The present 
review aims to explain those characteristics which are shared between empathy 
and the Theory of Mind. Research in neuroscience, based on naturalistic 
paradigms, has shown that abilities to mentalize and to empathize are associated 
with the activation of different neuro-cognitive circuits. As far as 
mirror-neuron processes are concerned, some structures (like Anterior Insula, 
AI; Anterior Cingulate Cortex, ACC) play a role both in the representation of 
one's own affective states and in comprehension of the same affective state when 
experienced by others. As for mentalization, the temporal parietal junction 
(TPj) and temporal poles (TP), the upper posterior temporal sulcus (pSTS) and 
the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) are greatly involved: the latter appears 
involved in the attribution of one's own and others' temperaments. 
Interestingly, the ventral/orbital portion of the PFC (orbito-frontal cortex, 
OFC) is involved in subserving shared affective experience during cognitive 
mentalizing. This brain region represents a point of overlap, from a 
psycho-biological point of view, where emotional mirroring and affective 
cognition meet up. As for animal models, laboratory rodents can well be tested 
for prosocial behavior. Some examples include deliberate actions, allowing 
another conspecific the possibility to feed ("giving food"): this willingness 
can vary across donors, depending on how the recipient is perceived. Other 
examples include the possibility to let a trapped conspecific come out ("giving 
help"). The state-of-the-art knowledge about this theme can inform the 
programming of specific clinical interventions, based on the reinforcement of 
empathic and/or mentalization abilities.

Copyright © 2019 Cerniglia, Bartolomeo, Capobianco, Lo Russo, Festucci, 
Tambelli, Adriani and Cimino.

DOI: 10.3389/fnbeh.2019.00212
PMCID: PMC6754072
PMID: 31572143