1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2019 Dec 2;47(21):e141. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkz811.

Low temperature isothermal amplification of microsatellites drastically reduces 
stutter artifact formation and improves microsatellite instability detection in 
cancer.

Daunay A(1), Duval A(2), Baudrin LG(1)(3), Buhard O(2), Renault V(4), Deleuze 
JF(1)(5), How-Kit A(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Genomics, Foundation Jean Dausset - CEPH (Centre d'Etude du 
Polymorphisme Humain), Paris, France.
(2)Sorbonne-Université, Université Pierre et Marie Curie - Paris 6, Paris, 
France, INSERM, UMRS 938-Centre de Recherche Saint-Antoine, Equipe 'Instabilité 
des Microsatellites et Cancers', Equipe labellisée par la Ligue Nationale contre 
le Cancer, and SIRIC CURAMUS, Paris, France Université Pierre et Marie Curie, 
Paris, France.
(3)Laboratory of Excellence GenMed, Paris, France.
(4)Laboratory for Bioinformatics, Foundation Jean Dausset - CEPH (Centre d'Etude 
du Polymorphisme Humain), Paris, France.
(5)Centre National de Recherche en Génomique Humaine, CEA-Institut François 
Jacob, Evry, France.

Microsatellites are polymorphic short tandem repeats of 1-6 nucleotides 
ubiquitously present in the genome that are extensively used in living organisms 
as genetic markers and in oncology to detect microsatellite instability (MSI). 
While the standard analysis method of microsatellites is based on PCR followed 
by capillary electrophoresis, it generates undesirable frameshift products known 
as 'stutter peaks' caused by the polymerase slippage that can greatly complicate 
the analysis and interpretation of the data. Here we present an easy 
multiplexable approach replacing PCR that is based on low temperature isothermal 
amplification using recombinase polymerase amplification (LT-RPA) that 
drastically reduces and sometimes completely abolishes the formation of stutter 
artifacts, thus greatly simplifying the calling of the alleles. Using HT17, a 
mononucleotide DNA repeat that was previously proposed as an optimal marker to 
detect MSI in tumor DNA, we showed that LT-RPA improves the limit of detection 
of MSI compared to PCR up to four times, notably for small deletions, and 
simplifies the identification of the mutant alleles. It was successfully applied 
to clinical colorectal cancer samples and enabled detection of MSI. This 
easy-to-handle, rapid and cost-effective approach may deeply improve the 
analysis of microsatellites in several biological and clinical applications.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkz811
PMCID: PMC6868440
PMID: 31584085 [Indexed for MEDLINE]