1. Sensors (Basel). 2019 Oct 16;19(20):4482. doi: 10.3390/s19204482.

Utility of Big Data in Predicting Short-Term Blood Glucose Levels in Type 1 
Diabetes Mellitus Through Machine Learning Techniques.

Rodríguez-Rodríguez I(1), Chatzigiannakis I(2), Rodríguez JV(3), Maranghi M(4), 
Gentili M(5), Zamora-Izquierdo MÁ(6).

Author information:
(1)Facultad de Informática, Departamento de Ingeniería de la Información y las 
Comunicaciones, Universidad de Murcia, 30100 Murcia, Spain. 
ignacio.rodriguez1@um.es.
(2)Dipartimento di Ingegneria Informatica Automatica e Gestionale 'Antonio 
Ruberti', Sapienza Università di Roma, 00185 Roma, Italy. 
ichatz@diag.uniroma1.it.
(3)Departamento de Tecnologías de la Información y las Comunicaciones, 
Universidad Politécnica de Cartagena; 30202 Cartagena, Spain. 
jvictor.rodriguez@upct.es.
(4)Dipartimento di Ingegneria Informatica Automatica e Gestionale 'Antonio 
Ruberti', Sapienza Università di Roma, 00185 Roma, Italy. 
marianna.maranghi@uniroma1.it.
(5)Dipartimento di Ingegneria Informatica Automatica e Gestionale 'Antonio 
Ruberti', Sapienza Università di Roma, 00185 Roma, Italy. 
gentili@diag.uniroma1.it.
(6)Facultad de Informática, Departamento de Ingeniería de la Información y las 
Comunicaciones, Universidad de Murcia, 30100 Murcia, Spain. mzamora@um.es.

Machine learning techniques combined with wearable electronics can deliver 
accurate short-term blood glucose level prediction models. These models can 
learn personalized glucose-insulin dynamics based on the sensor data collected 
by monitoring several aspects of the physiological condition and daily activity 
of an individual. Until now, the prevalent approach for developing data-driven 
prediction models was to collect as much data as possible to help physicians and 
patients optimally adjust therapy. The objective of this work was to investigate 
the minimum data variety, volume, and velocity required to create accurate 
person-centric short-term prediction models. We developed a series of these 
models using different machine learning time series forecasting techniques 
suitable for execution within a wearable processor. We conducted an extensive 
passive patient monitoring study in real-world conditions to build an 
appropriate data set. The study involved a subset of type 1 diabetic subjects 
wearing a flash glucose monitoring system. We comparatively and quantitatively 
evaluated the performance of the developed data-driven prediction models and the 
corresponding machine learning techniques. Our results indicate that very 
accurate short-term prediction can be achieved by only monitoring interstitial 
glucose data over a very short time period and using a low sampling frequency. 
The models developed can predict glucose levels within a 15-min horizon with an 
average error as low as 15.43 mg/dL using only 24 historic values collected 
within a period of sex hours, and by increasing the sampling frequency to 
include 72 values, the average error is reduced to 10.15 mg/dL. Our prediction 
models are suitable for execution within a wearable device, requiring the 
minimum hardware requirements while at simultaneously achieving very high 
prediction accuracy.

DOI: 10.3390/s19204482
PMCID: PMC6833040
PMID: 31623111 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.