1. Curr Pharm Des. 2019;25(41):4331-4343. doi: 10.2174/1381612825666191119093335.

Prenatal Stress and Maternal Immune Dysregulation in Autism Spectrum Disorders: 
Potential Points for Intervention.

Beversdorf DQ(1), Stevens HE(2), Margolis KG(3), Van de Water J(4).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Radiology, Neurology, and Psychological Sciences, and The 
Thompson Center for Neurodevelopmental Disorders, William and Nancy Thompson 
Endowed Chair in Radiology, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, United States.
(2)Departments of Psychiatry and Pediatrics, Iowa Neuroscience Institute, 
University of Iowa, Iowa City, United States.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology 
and Nutrition, Morgan Stanley Children's Hospital, Columbia University Medical 
Center, New York, United States.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, Allergy, and 
Clinical Immunology, And the MIND Institute, University of California, Davis, 
CA, United States.

BACKGROUND: Genetics is a major etiological contributor to autism spectrum 
disorder (ASD). Environmental factors, however, also appear to contribute. ASD 
pathophysiology due to gene x environment is also beginning to be explored. One 
reason to focus on environmental factors is that they may allow opportunities 
for intervention or prevention.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Herein, we review two such factors that have been 
associated with a significant proportion of ASD risk, prenatal stress exposure 
and maternal immune dysregulation. Maternal stress susceptibility appears to 
interact with prenatal stress exposure to affect offspring neurodevelopment. We 
also explore how maternal stress may interact with the microbiome in the 
neurodevelopmental setting. Additionally, understanding of the impact of 
maternal immune dysfunction on ASD has recently been advanced by recognition of 
specific fetal brain proteins targeted by maternal autoantibodies, and 
identification of unique mid-gestational maternal immune profiles. This might 
also be interrelated with maternal stress exposure. Animal models have been 
developed to explore pathophysiology targeting each of these factors.
CONCLUSION: We are beginning to understand the behavioral, pharmacopathological, 
and epigenetic effects related to these interactions, and we are beginning to 
explore potential mitigating factors. Continued growth in understanding of these 
mechanisms may ultimately allow for the identification of multiple potential 
targets for prevention or intervention for this subset of 
environmental-associated ASD cases.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1381612825666191119093335
PMCID: PMC7100710
PMID: 31742491 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST Dr. Beversdorf serves in 
an advisory capacity for Yamo Pharmaceuticals, Quadrant Biosciences, and 
Stalicla, unrelated to this work. Drs Stevens, Margolis, and Van de Water have 
nothing to disclose.