1. Br J Cancer. 2020 Feb;122(4):455-464. doi: 10.1038/s41416-019-0647-7. Epub
2019  Dec 3.

The effect of co-occurring lesions on leukaemogenesis and drug response in T-ALL 
and ETP-ALL.

Tavakoli Shirazi P(1)(2), Eadie LN(1), Heatley SL(1), Hughes TP(1), Yeung 
DT(1)(2)(3)(4), White DL(5)(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Cancer Program, Precision Medicine Theme, South Australian Health & Medical 
Research Institute (SAHMRI), Adelaide, SA, Australia.
(2)Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, 
Australia.
(3)Australian Genomics Health Alliance (AGHA), Parkville, VIC, Australia.
(4)Royal Adelaide Hospital, Adelaide, SA, Australia.
(5)Cancer Program, Precision Medicine Theme, South Australian Health & Medical 
Research Institute (SAHMRI), Adelaide, SA, Australia. deborah.white@sahmri.com.
(6)Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, 
Australia. deborah.white@sahmri.com.
(7)Faculty of Sciences, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, Australia. 
deborah.white@sahmri.com.
(8)Australian Genomics Health Alliance (AGHA), Parkville, VIC, Australia. 
deborah.white@sahmri.com.

Despite advances in the management of acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL), 
current regimens fail to significantly transform outcomes for patients with 
high-risk subtypes. Advances in genomic analyses have identified novel lesions 
including mutations in genes that encode chromatin modifiers and those that 
influence cytokine and kinase signalling, rendering many of these alterations 
potentially targetable by tyrosine kinase and epigenetic inhibitors currently in 
clinical use. Although specific genomic lesions, gene expression patterns, and 
immunophenotypic profiles have been associated with specific clinical outcomes 
in some cancers, the application of precision medicine approaches based on these 
data has been slow. This approach is complicated by the reality that patients 
often harbour multiple mutations, and in many cases, the precise functional 
significance and interaction of these mutations in driving leukaemia and drug 
responsiveness/resistance remains unknown. Given that signalling pathways 
driving leukaemic pathogenesis could plausibly result from the co-existence of 
specific lesions and the resultant perturbation of protein interactions, the use 
of combined therapeutics that target multiple aberrant pathways, according to an 
individual's mutational profile, might improve outcomes and lower a patient's 
risk of relapse. Here we outline the genomic alterations that occur in T cell 
ALL (T-ALL) and early T cell precursor (ETP)-ALL and review studies highlighting 
the possible effects of co-occurring lesions on leukaemogenesis and drug 
response.

DOI: 10.1038/s41416-019-0647-7
PMCID: PMC7028932
PMID: 31792348 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.