1. Int J Mol Sci. 2019 Dec 9;20(24):6200. doi: 10.3390/ijms20246200.

Melatonin-Nitric Oxide Crosstalk and Their Roles in the Redox Network in Plants.

Zhu Y(1), Gao H(1), Lu M(1), Hao C(1), Pu Z(1), Guo M(1), Hou D(1), Chen LY(2), 
Huang X(1).

Author information:
(1)Provincial Key Laboratory of Biotechnology of Shaanxi, Key Laboratory of 
Resource Biology and Biotechnology in Western China, Ministry of Education, 
College of Life Science, Northwest University, Xi'an 710069, China.
(2)Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Haixia Applied Plant Systems Biology, 
Center for Genomics and Biotechnology, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry 
University, Fuzhou 350002, China.

Melatonin, an amine hormone highly conserved during evolution, has a wide range 
of physiological functions in animals and plants. It is involved in plant 
growth, development, maturation, and aging, and also helps ameliorate various 
types of abiotic and biotic stresses, including salt, drought, heavy metals, and 
pathogens. Melatonin-related growth and defense responses of plants are complex, 
and involve many signaling molecules. Among these, the most important one is 
nitric oxide (NO), a freely diffusing amphiphilic biomolecule that can easily 
cross the cell membrane, produce rapid signal responses, and participate in a 
wide variety of physiological reactions. NO-induced S-nitrosylation is also 
involved in plant defense responses. NO interacts with melatonin as a long-range 
signaling molecule, and helps regulate plant growth and maintain oxidative 
homeostasis. Exposure of plants to abiotic stresses causes the increase of 
endogenous melatonin levels, with the consequent up-regulation of melatonin 
synthesis genes, and further increase of melatonin content. The application of 
exogenous melatonin causes an increase in endogenous NO and up-regulation of 
defense-related transcription factors, resulting in enhanced stress resistance. 
When plants are infected by pathogenic bacteria, NO acts as a downstream signal 
to lead to increased melatonin levels, which in turn induces the 
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascade and associated defense 
responses. The application of exogenous melatonin can also promote sugar and 
glycerol production, leading to increased levels of salicylic acid and NO. 
Melatonin and NO in plants can function cooperatively to promote lateral root 
growth, delay aging, and ameliorate iron deficiency. Further studies are needed 
to clarify certain aspects of the melatonin/NO relationship in plant physiology.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms20246200
PMCID: PMC6941097
PMID: 31818042 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.