1. Front Pharmacol. 2019 Dec 2;10:1452. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2019.01452.
eCollection  2019.

Exosomes From Astrocyte Processes: Signaling to Neurons.

Venturini A(1), Passalacqua M(2), Pelassa S(1), Pastorino F(3), Tedesco M(4)(5), 
Cortese K(6), Gagliani MC(6), Leo G(7), Maura G(1), Guidolin D(8), Agnati 
LF(7)(9), Marcoli M(1)(10), Cervetto C(1).

Author information:
(1)Section of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Department of Pharmacy, University of 
Genova, Genova, Italy.
(2)Section of Biochemistry, Department of Experimental Medicine, and Italian 
Institute of Biostructures and Biosystems, University of Genova, Genova, Italy.
(3)Laboratory of Experimental Therapies in Oncology, IRCCS Istituto G. Gaslini, 
Genova, Italy.
(4)3BrainAG, Wädenswil, Switzerland.
(5)Department of Informatics, Bioengineering, Robotics and System Engineering 
DIBRIS, University of Genova, Genova, Italy.
(6)Section of Anatomy, Department of Experimental Medicine, University of 
Genova, Genova, Italy.
(7)Department of Biomedical, Metabolic and Neural Sciences, University of Modena 
and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy.
(8)Department of Neurosciences, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(9)Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(10)Centre of Excellence for Biomedical Research CEBR, University of Genova, 
Genova, Italy.

It is widely recognized that extracellular vesicles subserve non-classical 
signal transmission in the central nervous system. Here we assess if the 
astrocyte processes, that are recognized to play crucial roles in intercellular 
communication at the synapses and in neuron-astrocyte networks, could convey 
messages through extracellular vesicles. Our findings indicate, for the first 
time that freshly isolated astrocyte processes prepared from adult rat cerebral 
cortex, can indeed participate to signal transmission in central nervous system 
by releasing exosomes that by volume transmission might target near or 
long-distance sites. It is noteworthy that the exosomes released from the 
astrocyte processes proved ability to selectively target neurons. The 
astrocyte-derived exosomes were proven positive for neuroglobin, a protein 
functioning as neuroprotectant against cell insult; the possibility that 
exosomes might transfer neuroglobin to neurons would add a mechanism to the 
potential astrocytic neuroprotectant activity. Notably, the exosomes released 
from the processes of astrocytes maintained markers, which prove their parental 
astrocytic origin. This potentially allows the assessment of the cellular origin 
of exosomes that might be recovered from body fluids.

Copyright © 2019 Venturini, Passalacqua, Pelassa, Pastorino, Tedesco, Cortese, 
Gagliani, Leo, Maura, Guidolin, Agnati, Marcoli and Cervetto.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2019.01452
PMCID: PMC6901013
PMID: 31849688