1. Hum Reprod Open. 2019 Dec 18;2019(4):hoz039. doi: 10.1093/hropen/hoz039. 
eCollection 2019.

No increased risk of relapse of breast cancer for women who give birth after 
assisted conception.

Rosenberg E(1), Fredriksson A(1), Einbeigi Z(2)(3), Bergh C(1)(3), Strandell 
A(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, SE 
413 45 Gothenburg, Sweden.
(2)Department of Medicine and Department of Oncology, Southern Älvsborg 
Hospital, SE 501 82, Borås, Sweden.
(3)Institute of Clinical Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy, Sahlgrenska University 
Hospital, SE 413 45 Gothenburg, Sweden.

STUDY QUESTION: Is childbirth after IVF associated with a risk of relapse in 
breast cancer?
SUMMARY ANSWER: Women who had been diagnosed with breast cancer and completed 
treatment had no increased risk of relapse if they gave birth after conceiving 
with IVF.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: Pregnancy and childbirth have not been shown to increase 
the risk of relapse in breast cancer. Ovarian stimulation during IVF increases 
the oestrogen levels and could theoretically increase the risk of relapse in 
breast cancer.
STUDY DESIGN SIZE DURATION: This is a retrospective register study, using 
national Swedish register data from the National Patient Register, the Medical 
Birth Register, the Swedish National Cancer Register, the National Breast Cancer 
Register, the National Quality Registry of Assisted Reproduction (Q-IVF), the 
National IVF Dataset, the Swedish Prescribed Drug Register and the Cause of 
Death Register. All women diagnosed with breast cancer who were between 20 and 
44 years of age during the years 1982 to 2014 and identified in the cancer 
registries were assessed.
PARTICIPANTS/MATERIALS SETTING METHODS: Women, previously diagnosed with breast 
cancer, who had given birth after IVF (29 after completed breast cancer 
treatment and 8 after fertility preservation) were compared with a matched 
control group who had given birth after spontaneous conception. Matching was 
done in a ratio 1:4, based on T-stage (size of the tumour) and year of diagnosis 
+/-5 years.
MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: We found 26 114 women that had been 
diagnosed with breast cancer when 20-44 years old and of those 860 had 
subsequently given birth, 823 after spontaneous and 37 after IVF conception. 
Follow-up time was similar between the groups, ranging from 2.6 to 24.0 years, 
with a mean follow-up time of 10.3 (SD 4.2) years in the IVF group and 10.7 (SD 
4.4) years in the control group. There were no relapses (0/37) in the IVF group. 
The relapse rate for the matched controls was 36/148 (24.8%). Ten women who 
suffered relapse died due to breast cancer.
LIMITATIONS REASONS FOR CAUTION: This is reassuring data; however, the result is 
based on a few cases. The poor coverage of important prognostic variables in the 
register resulted in uncertain comparability of the groups. The main limitation 
in this study is the extent of missing data on tumour-related variables, due to 
poor coverage from the early years of the National Breast Cancer Register. It is 
possible that the women accepted for IVF had a less aggressive breast cancer and 
were generally healthier than women delivering after conceiving spontaneously 
and therefore had a lower risk of relapse. Other limitations are the lack of 
information on the anticancer therapies used and type of disease relapse, plus 
the older of the two IVF registers did not hold information on unsuccessful IVF 
cycles, leaving only cycles leading to birth, to be analysed.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: We found no indication that women who had 
been diagnosed with breast cancer had an increased risk of relapse if they gave 
birth after conceiving with IVF. Based on our findings, there is no evidence to 
advise against IVF treatment in this group of women. More detailed registry data 
would be valuable for future studies, enabling proper matching of tumour 
characteristics between groups.
STUDY FUNDING/COMPETING INTERESTS: The study was financed by grants from the 
Swedish state under the agreement between the Swedish government and the county 
councils, the ALF-agreement (ALFGBG-720291), The Assar Gabrielsson Fund (FB 
15-20), The Breast Cancer Fund and the Swedish Association of Local Authorities 
and Regions, SKL. There are no conflicts of interest to declare.

Published byOxford University Press on behalf of the European Society of Human 
Reproduction and Embryology.

DOI: 10.1093/hropen/hoz039
PMCID: PMC6920108
PMID: 31872070