1. Int J Mol Sci. 2019 Dec 30;21(1):266. doi: 10.3390/ijms21010266.

Cell-to-Cell Communication in Learning and Memory: From Neuro- and 
Glio-Transmission to Information Exchange Mediated by Extracellular Vesicles.

Schiera G(1), Di Liegro CM(1), Di Liegro I(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological, Chemical and Pharmaceutical Sciences and 
Technologies (Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Biologiche, Chimiche e 
Farmaceutiche) (STEBICEF), University of Palermo, 90128 Palermo, Italy.
(2)Department of Biomedicine, Neurosciences and Advanced Diagnostics 
(Dipartimento di Biomedicina, Neuroscienze e Diagnostica avanzata) (Bi.N.D.), 
University of Palermo, 90127 Palermo, Italy.

Most aspects of nervous system development and function rely on the continuous 
crosstalk between neurons and the variegated universe of non-neuronal cells 
surrounding them. The most extraordinary property of this cellular community is 
its ability to undergo adaptive modifications in response to environmental cues 
originating from inside or outside the body. Such ability, known as neuronal 
plasticity, allows long-lasting modifications of the strength, composition and 
efficacy of the connections between neurons, which constitutes the biochemical 
base for learning and memory. Nerve cells communicate with each other through 
both wiring (synaptic) and volume transmission of signals. It is by now clear 
that glial cells, and in particular astrocytes, also play critical roles in both 
modes by releasing different kinds of molecules (e.g., D-serine secreted by 
astrocytes). On the other hand, neurons produce factors that can regulate the 
activity of glial cells, including their ability to release regulatory 
molecules. In the last fifteen years it has been demonstrated that both neurons 
and glial cells release extracellular vesicles (EVs) of different kinds, both in 
physiologic and pathological conditions. Here we discuss the possible 
involvement of EVs in the events underlying learning and memory, in both 
physiologic and pathological conditions.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21010266
PMCID: PMC6982255
PMID: 31906013 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.