1. BMC Cancer. 2020 Jan 20;20(1):47. doi: 10.1186/s12885-020-6540-1.

Widely metastatic glioblastoma with BRCA1 and ARID1A mutations: a case report.

Umphlett M(1), Shea S(1), Tome-Garcia J(1), Zhang Y(2), Hormigo A(3), Fowkes 
M(1), Tsankova NM(1)(4), Yong RL(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
NY, USA.
(2)Departments of Neurosurgery and Oncological Sciences, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, Medicine (Division Hem-Onc), Neurosurgery and the 
Tisch Cancer Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, 
USA.
(4)Department of Neuroscience, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, NY, USA.
(5)Departments of Neurosurgery and Oncological Sciences, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA. raymund.yong@mountsinai.org.

BACKGROUND: Glioblastoma (GBM) is a highly malignant brain neoplasm with poor 
survival. Despite its aggressive nature, metastatic spread of GBM is identified 
only rarely. While the molecular alterations associated with GBM and its 
subtypes are well-described, there remains a gap in understanding which 
alterations may predispose towards metastasis. In this report, we present a case 
of GBM with multi-organ metastases and discuss its genomic alterations.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 74-year-old woman was diagnosed with left occipital 
glioblastoma (IDH-wildtype, MGMT-unmethylated), for which she underwent 
resection, standard chemoradiation, and then stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) for 
local recurrence. One month after SRS, work-up for a pathologic hip fracture 
revealed a left breast mass, lytic lesions involving pelvic bones, and multiple 
pulmonary and hepatic lesions. Biopsies of the breast and bone lesions both 
demonstrated metastatic IDH-wildtype GBM. For worsening neurologic symptoms, the 
patient underwent debulking of a large right temporal lobe recurrence and 
expired shortly thereafter. Autopsy confirmed metastatic GBM in multiple 
systemic sites, including bilateral lungs, heart, liver, thyroid, left breast, 
small bowel, omentum, peritoneal surfaces, visceral surfaces, left pelvic bone, 
and hilar lymph nodes. Targeted sequencing was performed on tissue samples 
obtained pre- and postmortem, as well as on cell cultures and an orthotopic 
mouse xenograft derived from premortem surgical specimens. A BRCA1 mutation 
(p.I571T) was the only variant found in common among the primary, recurrence, 
and metastatic specimens, suggesting its likely status as an early driver 
mutation. Multiple subclonal ARID1A mutations, which promote genomic instability 
through impairment of DNA mismatch repair, were identified only in the 
recurrence. Mutational spectrum analysis demonstrated a high percentage of C:G 
to T:A transitions in the post-treatment samples but not in the primary tumor.
CONCLUSION: This case report examines a rare case of widely metastatic 
IDH-wildtype GBM with a clonal somatic mutation in BRCA1. Post-treatment 
recurrent tumor in the brain and in multiple systemic organs exhibited evidence 
of acquired DNA mismatch repair deficiency, which may be explained by functional 
loss of ARID1A. We identify a potential role for immune checkpoint and PARP 
inhibitors in the treatment of metastatic GBM.

DOI: 10.1186/s12885-020-6540-1
PMCID: PMC6971940
PMID: 31959133 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.