1. Hum Mol Genet. 2020 May 8;29(7):1107-1120. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddaa009.

Structural basis for the dominant or recessive character of GLIALCAM mutations 
found in leukodystrophies.

Elorza-Vidal X(1)(2), Xicoy-Espaulella E(1), Pla-Casillanis A(1), Alonso-Gardón 
M(1), Gaitán-Peñas H(1)(2), Engel-Pizcueta C(1), Fernández-Recio J(3)(4)(5), 
Estévez R(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Unitat de Fisiologia, Departament de Ciències Fisiològiques, Genes Disease 
and Therapy Program IDIBELL-Institute of Neurosciences, Universitat de 
Barcelona, L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain.
(2)Centro de Investigación en red de enfermedades raras (CIBERER), ISCIII, 
Madrid, Spain.
(3)Barcelona Supercomputing Center (BSC), Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Institut de Biologia Molecular de Barcelona, CSIC, Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Instituto de Ciencias de la Vid y del Vino (ICVV), CSIC- Universidad de La 
Rioja- Gobierno de la Rioja, Logroño, Spain.

Megalencephalic leukoencephalopathy with subcortical cysts (MLC) is a type of 
leukodystrophy characterized by white matter edema, and it is caused mainly by 
recessive mutations in MLC1 and GLIALCAM genes. These variants are called MLC1 
and MLC2A with both types of patients sharing the same clinical phenotype. In 
addition, dominant mutations in GLIALCAM have also been identified in a subtype 
of MLC patients with a remitting phenotype. This variant has been named MLC2B. 
GLIALCAM encodes for an adhesion protein containing two immunoglobulin (Ig) 
domains and it is needed for MLC1 targeting to astrocyte-astrocyte junctions. 
Most mutations identified in GLIALCAM abolish GlialCAM targeting to junctions. 
However, it is unclear why some mutations behave as recessive or dominant. Here, 
we used a combination of biochemistry methods with a new developed anti-GlialCAM 
nanobody, double-mutants and cysteine cross-links experiments, together with 
computer docking, to create a structural model of GlialCAM homo-interactions. 
Using this model, we suggest that dominant mutations affect different 
GlialCAM-GlialCAM interacting surfaces in the first Ig domain, which can occur 
between GlialCAM molecules present in the same cell (cis) or present in 
neighbouring cells (trans). Our results provide a framework that can be used to 
understand the molecular basis of pathogenesis of all identified GLIALCAM 
mutations.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddaa009
PMCID: PMC7206653
PMID: 31960914 [Indexed for MEDLINE]