1. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2020 Jun 8;100:109883. doi: 
10.1016/j.pnpbp.2020.109883. Epub 2020 Feb 4.

Prenatal THC exposure raises kynurenic acid levels in the prefrontal cortex of 
adult rats.

Beggiato S(1), Ieraci A(2), Tomasini MC(3), Schwarcz R(4), Ferraro L(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Sciences and Biotechnologies, University of Ferrara, 
Ferrara, Italy; Department of Medical, Oral and Biotechnological Sciences, 
University of Chieti-Pescara, Chieti, Italy. Electronic address: 
bggsrh@unife.it.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Milan, Milano, Italy.
(3)Department of Life Sciences and Biotechnologies, University of Ferrara, 
Ferrara, Italy.
(4)Maryland Psychiatric Research Center, Department of Psychiatry, University of 
Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(5)Department of Life Sciences and Biotechnologies, University of Ferrara, 
Ferrara, Italy; Laboratory for the Technology of Advanced Therapies (LTTA 
Centre), University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.

Cannabis remains one of the most widely used illicit drugs during pregnancy. The 
main psychoactive component of marijuana (Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol, THC) is 
correlated with untoward physiological effects in the offspring. Neurobehavioral 
and cognitive impairments have been reported in longitudinal studies on children 
and adolescents prenatally exposed to marijuana, and a link to psychiatric 
disorders has been proposed. Interestingly, the deleterious effects of prenatal 
cannabis use are similar to those observed in adult rats prenatally exposed to 
(L)-kynurenine, the direct bioprecursor of the neuroactive metabolite kynurenic 
acid (KYNA). We therefore investigated whether alterations in KYNA levels in the 
rat brain might play a role in the long-term consequences of prenatal 
cannabinoid exposure. Pregnant Wistar rats were treated daily with THC [5 mg/kg, 
p.o.] from gestational day (GD)5 through GD20. Using in vivo microdialysis in 
the medial prefrontal cortex, adult animals were then used to determine the 
extracellular levels of KYNA and glutamate. Compared to controls, extracellular 
basal KYNA levels were higher, and basal glutamate levels were lower, in 
prenatally THC-exposed rats. These rats also showed abnormal short-term memory. 
Following an additional acute challenge with a low dose of kynurenine 
(5 mg/kg i.p.) in adulthood, the increase in extracellular KYNA levels in the 
mPFC was more pronounced in in prenatally THC-exposed rats. These effects could 
be causally related to the cognitive dysfunction seen in prenatally THC-exposed 
rats. In the translational realm, these experiments raise the prospect of 
prevention of KYNA neosynthesis as a promising novel approach to combat some of 
the detrimental long-term effects of prenatal cannabis use.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pnpbp.2020.109883
PMCID: PMC7260707
PMID: 32032697 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare no conflict of interest.