1. Pediatr Rheumatol Online J. 2020 Feb 17;18(1):17. doi: 
10.1186/s12969-020-0409-3.

Consensus protocols for the diagnosis and management of the hereditary 
autoinflammatory syndromes CAPS, TRAPS and MKD/HIDS: a German PRO-KIND 
initiative.

Hansmann S(1), Lainka E(2), Horneff G(3), Holzinger D(4), Rieber N(5)(6), 
Jansson AF(7), Rösen-Wolff A(8), Erbis G(1), Prelog M(9), Brunner J(10), 
Benseler SM(1)(11), Kuemmerle-Deschner JB(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Rheumatology, autoinflammation reference centre 
Tuebingen (arcT), University Children's Hospital Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany.
(2)Department of Pediatric Rheumatology, University Children's Hospital Essen, 
Essen, Germany.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Asklepios Clinic Sankt Augustin GmbH, Sankt 
Augustin, Germany.
(4)Department of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, University of Duisburg-Essen, 
Essen, Germany.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Kinderklinik Muenchen Schwabing, Klinikum 
Schwabing, StKM GmbH und Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technical University of 
Munich, Munich, Germany.
(6)Department of Pediatrics I, University Children's Hospital Tuebingen, 
Tuebingen, Germany.
(7)Division of Pediatric Rheumatology and Immunology, Dr. von Hauner Children's 
Hospital, University Hospital Munich, Munich, Germany.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, TU Dresden, 
Dresden, Germany.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Pediatric Rheumatology and Special Immunology, 
University Hospital Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, Medical University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.
(11)Rheumatology, Department of Pediatrics, Alberta Children's Hospital, Alberta 
Children's Hospital Research Institute, Cumming School of Medicine, University 
of Calgary, Calgary, Canada.
(12)Department of Pediatric Rheumatology, autoinflammation reference centre 
Tuebingen (arcT), University Children's Hospital Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany. 
Jasmin.kuemmerle-deschner@med.uni-tuebingen.de.

BACKGROUND: Rare autoinflammatory diseases (AIDs) including Cryopyrin-Associated 
Periodic Syndrome (CAPS), Tumor Necrosis Receptor-Associated Periodic Syndrome 
(TRAPS) and Mevalonate Kinase Deficiency Syndrome (MKD)/ Hyper-IgD Syndrome 
(HIDS) are genetically defined and characterized by recurrent fever episodes and 
inflammatory organ manifestations. Early diagnosis and early start of effective 
therapies control the inflammation and prevent organ damage. The PRO-KIND 
initiative of the German Society of Pediatric Rheumatology (GKJR) aims to 
harmonize the diagnosis and management of children with rheumatic diseases 
nationally. The task of the PRO-KIND CAPS/TRAPS/MKD/HIDS working group was to 
develop evidence-based, consensus diagnosis and management protocols including 
the first AID treat-to-target strategies.
METHODS: The national CAPS/TRAPS/MKD/HIDS expert working group was established, 
defined its aims and conducted a comprehensive literature review synthesising 
the recent (2013 to 2018) published evidence including all available 
recommendations for diagnosis and management. General and disease-specific 
statements were anchored in the 2015 SHARE recommendations. An iterative expert 
review process discussed, adapted and refined these statements. Ultimately the 
GKJR membership vetted the proposed consensus statements, agreement of 80% was 
mandatory for inclusion. The approved statements were integrated into three 
disease specific consensus treatment plans (CTPs). These were developed to 
enable the implementation of evidence-based, standardized care into clinical 
practice.
RESULTS: The CAPS/TRAPS/MKD/HIDS expert working group of 12 German and Austrian 
paediatric rheumatologists completed the evidence synthesis and modified a total 
of 38 statements based on the SHARE recommendation framework. In iterative 
reviews 36 reached the mandatory agreement threshold of 80% in the final GKJR 
member survey. These included 9 overarching principles and 27 disease-specific 
statements (7 for CAPS, 11 TRAPS, 9 MKD/HIDS). A diagnostic algorithm was 
established based on the synthesized evidence. Statements were integrated into 
diagnosis- and disease activity specific treat-to-target CTPs for CAPS, TRAPS 
and MKD/HIDS.
CONCLUSIONS: The PRO-KIND CAPS/TRAPS/MKD/HIDS working group established the 
first evidence-based, actionable treat-to-target consensus treatment plans for 
three rare hereditary autoinflammatory diseases. These provide a path to a rapid 
evaluation, effective control of disease activity and tailored adjustment of 
therapies. Their implementation will decrease variation in care and optimize 
health outcomes for children with AID.

DOI: 10.1186/s12969-020-0409-3
PMCID: PMC7027082
PMID: 32066461 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: S.H. received honoraria from Novartis Pharma for 
Advisory Board attendance. E.L. received speaker honoraria from Novartis and 
SOBI and funding for the AID-registry by the Federal Ministry of Education and 
Research (BMBF: 01GM08104, 01GM1112D, 01GM1512D). G.H. received speaker 
honoraria from Novartis, MSD, Bayer, Bristol-Myers, Sobi, Boehringer and Chugai 
and received research grants from AbbVie, Chugai, Novartis, Pfizer, Roche and 
MSD. D.H. received speaker honoraria from Novartis Pharma. N.R. received 
research grants, travel grants for Advisory Board attendance and speaker 
honoraria from Novartis. A.J. has no financial disclosures. A.R.-W. received 
research grants, travel grants for Advisory Board attendance and speaker 
honoraria from Novartis. G.E. was partially funded through the Margarete 
Mueller-Bull Stiftung and a research grant of Novartis Pharma. G.E. also 
received speaker honoraria from Novartis Pharma. M.P. received speaking 
honoraria from Novartis, MSD, Pfizer, SOBI and Chugai and received research 
grants from Novartis, SOBI, Pfizer and Chugai. J.B. received speaker’s bureaus 
or consulting fees from AbbVie, Novartis, and Pfizer. S.B. received speaker 
honoraria from Novartis and SOBI. J.B.K.-D. performed clinical studies with and 
received educational, research and centre grants and honoraria from Novartis, 
AbbVie and SOBI.