1. J Gene Med. 2020 Jun;22(6):e3175. doi: 10.1002/jgm.3175. Epub 2020 Mar 17.

Ellis-van Creveld syndrome: Report of a case and recurrent variant.

Eftekhariyazdi M(1), Meshkani M(2), Moslem A(3), Hakimi P(4), Safari S(5), 
Khaligh A(3), Zare-Abdollahi D(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, School of Medicine, Sabzevar 
University of Medical Sciences, Sabzevar, Iran.
(2)Department of Genetics, Faculty of Biological sciences, Tarbiat Modares 
University, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Sabzevar University of Medical Sciences, Sabzevar, Iran.
(4)Department of Biology, Faculty of science, Islamic azad University, 
Neyshabour, Iran.
(5)Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Tehran University of 
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(6)Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Ellis-van Creveld syndrome (EvCS) is a rare autosomal recessive 
skeletal dysplasia that is characterized by short stature, short limbs, short 
ribs, polydactyly and structural heart defect. Despite locus heterogeneity, in 
the majority of the cases, the disorder segregates with mutations in the EVC and 
EVC2 genes, notably mutations with truncating protein as a final sequence. In 
the present study, we report the prenatal findings and genetic analysis of a 
terminated pregnancy affected by severe thoracic and skeletal dysplasia.
METHODS: After detailed physical and clinical examination, whole exome 
sequencing (WES) was performed and the variant was confirmed by Sanger 
sequencing.
RESULTS: One homozygote variant in EVC2 gene was identified in the fetus 
(NM_147127, c.942G>A, p.W314X). The EVC2 gene is strongly associated with EvCS, 
which is consistent with the sonographic findings of the fetus.
CONCLUSIONS: The homozygous p.W314X mutation found in this family was recently 
reported to be segregated in a consanguineous family originating from Pakistan. 
The occurrence of the p.W314X mutation in two unrelated families (Iranian and 
Pakistani) may be the result of an old founder effect or arose because of a 
mutational hotspot and is supporting evidence for the pathogenicity of this 
variant. Because skeletal dysplasia belongs to a broad spectrum of syndromes and 
therefore exhibits considerable background locus and allelic heterogeneity, our 
report highlights the need for appropriate genetic counseling and supports the 
feasibility of WES to determine an accurate diagnosis, as well as precise 
recurrence risk prediction.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/jgm.3175
PMID: 32072716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]