1. Sci Rep. 2020 Feb 27;10(1):3644. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-59509-y.

Complete genome and methylome analysis of Neisseria meningitidis associated with 
increased serogroup Y disease.

Stenmark B(1), Harrison OB(2), Eriksson L(3), Anton BP(4), Fomenkov A(4), 
Roberts RJ(4), Tooming-Klunderud A(5), Bratcher HB(2), Bray JE(2), 
Thulin-Hedberg S(3), Maiden MCJ(2), Mölling P(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Health, Örebro 
University, Örebro, Sweden. bianca.stenmark@regionorebrolan.se.
(2)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Health, Örebro 
University, Örebro, Sweden.
(4)New England Biolabs, Ipswich, Massachusetts, USA.
(5)Centre for Ecological and Evolutionary Synthesis, Department of Biosciences, 
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.

Invasive meningococcal disease (IMD) due to serogroup Y Neisseria meningitidis 
emerged in Europe during the 2000s. Draft genomes of serogroup Y isolates in 
Sweden revealed that although the population structure of these isolates was 
similar to other serogroup Y isolates internationally, a distinct strain (YI) 
and more specifically a sublineage (1) of this strain was responsible for the 
increase of serogroup Y IMD in Sweden. We performed single molecule real-time 
(SMRT) sequencing on eight serogroup Y isolates from different sublineages to 
unravel the genetic and epigenetic factors delineating them, in order to 
understand the serogroup Y emergence. Extensive comparisons between the 
serogroup Y sublineages of all coding sequences, complex genomic regions, 
intergenic regions, and methylation motifs revealed small point mutations in 
genes mainly encoding hypothetical and metabolic proteins, and non-synonymous 
variants in genes involved in adhesion, iron acquisition, and endotoxin 
production. The methylation motif CACNNNNNTAC was only found in isolates of 
sublineage 2. Only seven genes were putatively differentially expressed, and 
another two genes encoding hypothetical proteins were only present in sublineage 
2. These data suggest that the serogroup Y IMD increase in Sweden was most 
probably due to small changes in genes important for colonization and 
transmission.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-59509-y
PMCID: PMC7046676
PMID: 32108139 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: R.J.R., B.P.A. and A.F. work for New England 
Biolabs, a company that sells research reagents including restriction enzymes 
and DNA methyltransferases to the scientific community. The commercial 
affiliation of these authors does not alter our adherence policies on sharing 
data and materials. All other authors have no conflicts to declare.