1. Biopolymers. 2020 May;111(5):e23350. doi: 10.1002/bip.23350. Epub 2020 Feb 28.

The congenital cataract-causing mutations P20R and A171T are associated with 
important changes in the amyloidogenic feature, structure and chaperone-like 
activity of human αB-crystallin.

Ghahramani M(1), Yousefi R(1), Niazi A(2), Kurganov B(3).

Author information:
(1)Protein Chemistry Laboratory (PCL), Department of Biology, College of 
Sciences, Shiraz University, Shiraz, Iran.
(2)Institute of Biotechnology, Shiraz University, Shiraz, Iran.
(3)Bach Institute of Biochemistry, Research Center of Biotechnology of the 
Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia.

Cataract is the major reason for human blindness worldwide. α-Crystallin, as a 
key chaperone of eye lenses, keeps the lenticular tissues in its transparent 
state over time. In this study, cataract-causing familial mutations, P20R and 
A171T, were introduced in CRYАB gene. After successful expression in Escherichia 
coli and subsequent purification, the recombinant proteins were subjected to 
extensive structural and functional analyses using various spectroscopic 
techniques, gel electrophoresis, and electron microscopy. The results of 
fluorescence and Raman assessments suggest important but discreet conformational 
changes in human αB-Cry upon these cataractogenic mutations. Furthermore, the 
mutant proteins exhibited significant secondary structural alteration as 
revealed by FTIR and Raman spectroscopy. An increase in conformational stability 
was seen in the human αB-Cry bearing these congenital cataractogenic mutations. 
The oligomeric size distribution and chaperone-like activity of human αB-Cry 
were significantly altered by these mutations. The P20R mutant protein was 
observed to loose most of the chaperone-like activity. Finally, these 
cataractogenic mutant proteins exhibited an increased propensity to form the 
amyloid fibrils when incubated under environmental stress. Overall, the 
structural and functional changes in mutated human αB-Cry proteins can shed 
light on the pathogenic development of congenital cataracts.

© 2020 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/bip.23350
PMID: 32110827 [Indexed for MEDLINE]