1. Front Genet. 2020 Feb 11;11:35. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2020.00035. eCollection
2020.

Neonatal Alcohol Exposure in Mice Induces Select Differentiation- and 
Apoptosis-Related Chromatin Changes Both Independent of and Dependent on Sex.

Schaffner SL(1), Lussier AA(1), Baker JA(2), Goldowitz D(1), Hamre KM(2), Kobor 
MS(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Molecular Medicine and Therapeutics, British Columbia Children's 
Hospital Research Institute - Department of Medical Genetics, University of 
British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(2)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, University of Tennessee Health 
Science Center, Memphis, TN, United States.
(3)Human Early Learning Partnership, School of Population and Public Health, 
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

Prenatal alcohol exposure (PAE) affects many aspects of physiology and behavior, 
including brain development. Specifically, ethanol can influence expression of 
genes important for brain growth, including chromatin modifiers. Ethanol can 
also increase apoptotic cell death in the brain and alter epigenetic profiles 
such as modifications to histones and DNA methylation. Although differential sex 
outcomes and disruptions to the function of multiple brain regions have been 
reported in fetal alcohol spectrum disorder (FASD), the majority of our 
knowledge on molecular epigenetic and apoptotic dysregulation in PAE is based on 
data from males and is sometimes limited to assessments of the whole brain or 
one brain region. Here, we examined histone modifications, DNA methylation, and 
expression of genes involved in differentiation and proliferation 
related-chromatin modifications and apoptosis in the cerebral cortex and 
cerebellum of C57BL/6J mice exposed to an acute alcohol challenge on postnatal 
day 7, with a focus on differential outcomes between sexes and brain regions. We 
found that neonatal alcohol exposure altered histone modifications, and impacted 
expression of a select few chromatin modifier and apoptotic genes in both the 
cortex and cerebellum. The results were observed primarily in a sex-independent 
manner, although some additional trends toward sexual dimorphisms were observed. 
Alcohol exposure induced trends toward increased bulk H3K4me3 levels, increased 
Kmt2e expression, and elevated levels of Casp6 mRNA and bulk γH2A.X. Additional 
trends indicated that ethanol may impact Kdm4a promoter DNA methylation levels 
and bulk levels of the histone variant H2A.Z, although further studies are 
needed. We comprehensively examined effects of ethanol exposure across different 
sexes and brain regions, and our results suggest that major impacts of ethanol 
on bulk chromatin modifications underlying differentiation and apoptosis may be 
broadly applicable across the rodent cortex and cerebellum in both sexes.

Copyright © 2020 Schaffner, Lussier, Baker, Goldowitz, Hamre and Kobor.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2020.00035
PMCID: PMC7026456
PMID: 32117449