1. Ther Adv Med Oncol. 2020 Feb 22;12:1758835919890281. doi: 
10.1177/1758835919890281. eCollection 2020.

Early intravenous administration of nutritional support (IVANS) in metastatic 
gastric cancer patients at nutritional risk, undergoing first-line chemotherapy: 
study protocol of a pragmatic, randomized, multicenter, clinical trial.

Caccialanza R(1), Cereda E(2), Klersy C(3), Brugnatelli S(4), Borioli V(2), 
Ferrari A(4), Caraccia M(2), Lobascio F(2), Pagani A(4), Delfanti S(4), Aprile 
G(5), Reni M(6), Rimassa L(7), Melisi D(8), Cascinu S(9), Battistini L(10), 
Candiloro F(10), Pedrazzoli P(4).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Nutrition and Dietetics Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San 
Matteo, Viale Golgi 19, Pavia 27100, Italy.
(2)Clinical Nutrition and Dietetics Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San 
Matteo, Pavia, Italy.
(3)Biometry and Clinical Epidemiology Service, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San 
Matteo, Pavia, Italy.
(4)Medical Oncology Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy.
(5)Department of Oncology, San Bortolo General Hospital, Vicenza, Italy.
(6)Department of Medical Oncology, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute, 
Milan, Italy.
(7)Medical Oncology and Hematology Unit, Humanitas Clinical and Research Center 
IRCCS, Rozzano (Milan), Italy.
(8)Digestive Molecular Clinical Oncology Research Unit, Section of Medical 
Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of Verona, Verona, Italy.
(9)Department of Oncology and Hematology, University Hospital of Modena, Modena, 
Italy.
(10)Neuroimmunology Unit, IRCCS Santa Lucia Foundation, Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Malnutrition is common in cancer patients, particularly in those 
affected by gastrointestinal malignancies, and negatively affects treatment 
tolerance, survival, functional status, and quality of life (QoL). Nutritional 
support, including supplemental parenteral nutrition (SPN), has been recommended 
at the earliest opportunity in malnourished cancer patients. The limited 
available evidence on the efficacy of SPN in gastrointestinal cancer patients is 
positive, particularly with regards to QoL, body composition, and energy intake, 
but the evidence on survival is still scanty. Furthermore, studies regarding the 
early administration of SPN in combination with nutritional counseling from the 
beginning of first-line chemotherapy (CT) are lacking. We hypothesize that early 
systematic SPN in combination with nutritional counseling (NC), compared with NC 
alone, can benefit patients with previously untreated metastatic gastric cancer 
at nutritional risk undergoing first-line CT.
METHODS: The aim of this pragmatic, multicenter, randomized (1:1), 
parallel-group, open-label, controlled clinical trial is to evaluate the 
efficacy in terms of survival, weight maintenance, body composition, QoL and 
feasibility of cancer therapy of early systematic SNP. This is in combination 
with NC, compared with NC alone, in treatment-naïve metastatic gastric cancer 
patients at nutritional risk undergoing first-line CT.
DISCUSSION: Malnutrition in oncology remains an overlooked problem. Although the 
importance of SPN in gastrointestinal cancer patients has been acknowledged, no 
studies have yet evaluated the efficacy of early SPN in metastatic gastric 
patients undergoing CT. The present study, which guarantees the early provision 
of nutritional assessment and support to all the enrolled patients in accordance 
with the recent guidelines and recommendations, could represent one of the first 
proofs of the clinical effectiveness of early intensive nutritional support in 
cancer patients undergoing CT. This study could stimulate further large 
randomized trials in different cancer types, potentially resulting in the 
improvement of supportive care quality.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: This study is registered on ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT03949907.

© The Author(s), 2020.

DOI: 10.1177/1758835919890281
PMCID: PMC7036492
PMID: 32127922

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: RC has received 
research funding from Baxter Healthcare Corporation. RC and PP have served as 
consultants and/or on advisory panels for Baxter Healthcare Corporation. LB has 
served as scientific lecturer and/or on advisory panels for Baxter Healthcare 
Corporation, Roche, Merck, Teva, Genzyme and Novartis. RC and PP have 
participated in speakers’ bureaus for Baxter Healthcare Corporation. RC and EC 
have participated in speakers’ bureaus for Akern s.r.l.