1. Ophthalmol Retina. 2020 May;4(5):523-529. doi: 10.1016/j.oret.2019.12.008.
Epub  2020 Mar 5.

Peripapillary Sparing in Autosomal Recessive Bestrophinopathy.

Birtel J(1), Gliem M(2), Herrmann P(1), MacLaren RE(3), Bolz HJ(4), Charbel Issa 
P(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany; Center for 
Rare Diseases Bonn (ZSEB), University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany; Center for 
Rare Diseases Bonn (ZSEB), University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany; Oxford Eye 
Hospital, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, and Nuffield 
Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of 
Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(3)Oxford Eye Hospital, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, and 
Nuffield Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, 
University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(4)Senckenberg Centre for Human Genetics, Frankfurt, Germany; Institute of Human 
Genetics, University Hospital of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(5)Oxford Eye Hospital, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, and 
Nuffield Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, 
University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. Electronic address: 
study-enquiry@outlook.com.

PURPOSE: To demonstrate that peripapillary sparing on autofluorescence images is 
a characteristic feature of autosomal recessive bestrophinopathy (ARB).
DESIGN: Retrospective, cross-sectional case series and review of previous 
published cases.
PARTICIPANTS: Twelve patients with ARB.
METHODS: Ophthalmic assessment included best-corrected visual acuity testing, 
electrophysiologic examinations, and multimodal retinal imaging. Retinal imaging 
included OCT, blue-light autofluorescence imaging, fundus photography, and 
widefield pseudocolor and autofluorescence fundus imaging.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Presence of peripapillary sparing on fundus 
autofluorescence images.
RESULTS: Relatively normal-appearing peripapillary autofluorescence was 
identified in all patients, independent of the disease stage or presence of 
widespread changes on autofluorescence widefield images. OCT images of the 
peripapillary region revealed mild structural abnormalities, including a thinned 
outer nuclear layer and intraretinal or subretinal fluid. A review of previously 
published cases confirmed peripapillary sparing as consistent feature on fundus 
autofluorescence images. Genetic analysis revealed 10 previously reported 
mutations, 1 novel missense (c.83T>A; p.Ile28Asn) and 2 novel truncating 
(c.658C>T; p.Gln220* and c.1370C>G; p.Ser457*) variants in BEST1.
CONCLUSIONS: In ARB patients, peripapillary sparing is a consistent feature on 
fundus autofluorescence images, whereas the same region is less preserved on OCT 
images.

Copyright © 2019 American Academy of Ophthalmology. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.oret.2019.12.008
PMID: 32147488 [Indexed for MEDLINE]