1. Elife. 2020 Mar 6;9:e54224. doi: 10.7554/eLife.54224.

Presynaptic PTPσ regulates postsynaptic NMDA receptor function through direct 
adhesion-independent mechanisms.

Kim K(#)(1), Shin W(#)(1)(2), Kang M(1), Lee S(2), Kim D(2), Kang R(1), Jung 
Y(1), Cho Y(3), Yang E(4), Kim H(4), Bae YC(3), Kim E(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, KAIST, Daejeon, Republic of Korea.
(2)Center for Synaptic Brain Dysfunctions, Institute for Basic Science (IBS), 
Daejeon, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, School of Dentistry, Kyungpook 
National University, Daegu, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Anatomy and Division of Brain Korea 21, Biomedical Science, 
College of Medicine, Korea University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(#)Contributed equally

Synaptic adhesion molecules regulate synapse development and function. However, 
whether and how presynaptic adhesion molecules regulate postsynaptic NMDAR 
function remains largely unclear. Presynaptic LAR family receptor tyrosine 
phosphatases (LAR-RPTPs) regulate synapse development through mechanisms that 
include trans-synaptic adhesion; however, whether they regulate postsynaptic 
receptor functions remains unknown. Here we report that presynaptic PTPσ, a 
LAR-RPTP, enhances postsynaptic NMDA receptor (NMDAR) currents and 
NMDAR-dependent synaptic plasticity in the hippocampus. This regulation does not 
involve trans-synaptic adhesions of PTPσ, suggesting that the cytoplasmic 
domains of PTPσ, known to have tyrosine phosphatase activity and mediate 
protein-protein interactions, are important. In line with this, phosphotyrosine 
levels of presynaptic proteins, including neurexin-1, are strongly increased in 
PTPσ-mutant mice. Behaviorally, PTPσ-dependent NMDAR regulation is important for 
social and reward-related novelty recognition. These results suggest that 
presynaptic PTPσ regulates postsynaptic NMDAR function through trans-synaptic 
and direct adhesion-independent mechanisms and novelty recognition in social and 
reward contexts.

© 2020, Kim et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.54224
PMCID: PMC7069723
PMID: 32142410 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: KK, WS, MK, SL, DK, RK, YJ, YC, EY, HK, YB No 
competing interests declared, EK Reviewing editor, eLife