1. PLoS Genet. 2020 Mar 9;16(3):e1008646. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1008646. 
eCollection 2020 Mar.

Long transposon-rich centromeres in an oomycete reveal divergence of centromere 
features in Stramenopila-Alveolata-Rhizaria lineages.

Fang Y(1), Coelho MA(1), Shu H(2), Schotanus K(1), Thimmappa BC(3), Yadav V(1), 
Chen H(2), Malc EP(4), Wang J(4), Mieczkowski PA(4), Kronmiller B(5), Tyler 
BM(5), Sanyal K(3), Dong S(2), Nowrousian M(6), Heitman J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University Medical 
Center, Durham, North Carolina, United States of America.
(2)College of Plant Protection, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, China.
(3)Molecular Biology and Genetics Unit, Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced 
Scientific Research, Bangalore, India.
(4)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina, United States of America.
(5)Center for Genome Research and Biocomputing and Department of Botany and 
Plant Pathology, Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon, United States of 
America.
(6)Lehrstuhl fuer Molekulare und Zellulaere Botanik, Ruhr-Universitaet Bochum, 
Bochum, Germany.

Centromeres are chromosomal regions that serve as platforms for kinetochore 
assembly and spindle attachments, ensuring accurate chromosome segregation 
during cell division. Despite functional conservation, centromere DNA sequences 
are diverse and often repetitive, making them challenging to assemble and 
identify. Here, we describe centromeres in an oomycete Phytophthora sojae by 
combining long-read sequencing-based genome assembly and chromatin 
immunoprecipitation for the centromeric histone CENP-A followed by 
high-throughput sequencing (ChIP-seq). P. sojae centromeres cluster at a single 
focus at different life stages and during nuclear division. We report an 
improved genome assembly of the P. sojae reference strain, which enabled 
identification of 15 enriched CENP-A binding regions as putative centromeres. By 
focusing on a subset of these regions, we demonstrate that centromeres in P. 
sojae are regional, spanning 211 to 356 kb. Most of these regions are 
transposon-rich, poorly transcribed, and lack the histone modification H3K4me2 
but are embedded within regions with the heterochromatin marks H3K9me3 and 
H3K27me3. Strikingly, we discovered a Copia-like transposon (CoLT) that is 
highly enriched in the CENP-A chromatin. Similar clustered elements are also 
found in oomycete relatives of P. sojae, and may be applied as a criterion for 
prediction of oomycete centromeres. This work reveals a divergence of centromere 
features in oomycetes as compared to other organisms in the 
Stramenopila-Alveolata-Rhizaria (SAR) supergroup including diatoms and 
Plasmodium falciparum that have relatively short and simple regional 
centromeres. Identification of P. sojae centromeres in turn also advances the 
genome assembly.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1008646
PMCID: PMC7082073
PMID: 32150559 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.