1. Cureus. 2020 Feb 18;12(2):e7035. doi: 10.7759/cureus.7035.

Liquid Biopsies in Progressing Metastatic Colorectal Cancer- Application and 
their Therapeutic Implications According to the RAS Status.

Pereira J(1), Alves F(2), Ferreira F(1), Vasconcelos de Matos L(2), Massena 
A(2), Martins A(2).

Author information:
(1)Medical Oncology, Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Ocidental, Lisbon, PRT.
(2)Medical Oncology, Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Ocidental, Lisboa, PRT.

Introduction The treatment of metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC) now includes 
therapy with biological agents inthe first line of treatment. The advances of 
our knowledge in molecular biology of these tumors allowed the identification of 
signaling pathways involved in tumorigenesis as potential therapeutic 
targets. In this field, monoclonal antibodies against epidermal growth factor 
receptor (anti-EGFR) added to a chemotherapy doublet have demonstrated improved 
overall survival for these patients. However, mutations in oncogenes NRAS/KRAS 
are predictive of absence of response to these treatments. Therefore, genotyping 
in mCRC is essential to personalized treatment. It is known that tumoral 
heterogeneity and selective pression by targeted therapies can lead to changes 
in RAS mutational status, along the course of the disease. This opens the 
possibility of different targeted therapies. Tumor analysis through liquid 
biopsies allows for the detection of genetic alterations in a less invasive way 
than common solid tumor biopsy and is currently being validated in different 
settings, with promising results in mCRC. The main goal of this study was to 
assess therapeutic implications of Liquid Biopsy (LB) in treatment of 
progressive mCRC and its potential impact on survival.  Material and methods A 
retrospective, observational, unicentric study of patients diagnosed with 
progressive mCRC and who underwent LB after several lines of treatment, was 
performed. Analysis of patient and tumor characteristics, as well as LB results 
was performed with descriptive statistics and survival analysis according to 
Kaplan-Meier methods and COX analysis with STATA/IC software.  Results We 
included 18 patients on whom LB were performed (median age 61 years; 55% (n=10) 
men). The median follow-up was 37.4 months. At diagnosis, 12 patients had a KRAS 
mutation. In the LB reassessment, there was a change in the RAS status in six 
patients, who initially had a mutation and later showed KRASwt (wild type RAS). 
LB led to a change in the therapeutic plan in these six patients, allowing the 
use of anti-EGFR therapy. Progression Free Survival (PFS) and Overall Survival 
(OS) could not be calculated at this time. Conclusion LB can revolutionize the 
approach to mCRC by optimizing therapeutic sequencing in a continuum of care 
strategy. The search for genetic changes over the course of the disease allows a 
better therapeutic approach to each patient. In the study presented, the 
realization of LB allowed an increase in therapeutic options in 1/3 of the 
patients. It is important to continue these studies with larger samples in order 
to better validate this strategy.

Copyright © 2020, Pereira et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.7035
PMCID: PMC7082790
PMID: 32211268

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.