1. PLoS One. 2020 Mar 25;15(3):e0222072. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0222072. 
eCollection 2020.

The nuclear receptor NR4A1 is regulated by SUMO modification to induce 
autophagic cell death.

Zárraga-Granados G(1), Muciño-Hernández G(1), Sánchez-Carbente MR(2), 
Villamizar-Gálvez W(1), Peñas-Rincón A(1), Arredondo C(3), Andrés ME(3), Wood 
C(4), Covarrubias L(5), Castro-Obregón S(1).

Author information:
(1)División de Neurociencias, Departamento de Neurodesarrollo y Fisiología, 
Instituto de Fisiología Celular, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México 
City, México.
(2)Biotechnology Research Center, Universidad Autónoma del Estado de Morelos, 
Cuernavaca, Morelos, México.
(3)Departamento de Biología Celular y Molecular, Facultad de Ciencias 
Biológicas, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile.
(4)Laboratorio Nacional de Microscopía Avanzada, Instituto de Biotecnología, 
UNAM, Cuernavaca, Mexico.
(5)Departamento de Genética del Desarrollo y Fisiología Molecular, Instituto de 
Biotecnología, UNAM, Cuernavaca, Mexico.

NR4A is a nuclear receptor protein family whose members act as sensors of 
cellular environment and regulate multiple processes such as metabolism, 
proliferation, migration, apoptosis, and autophagy. Since the ligand binding 
domains of these receptors have no cavity for ligand interaction, their function 
is most likely regulated by protein abundance and post-translational 
modifications. In particular, NR4A1 is regulated by protein abundance, 
phosphorylation, and subcellular distribution (nuclear-cytoplasmic 
translocation), and acts both as a transcription factor and as a regulator of 
other interacting proteins. SUMOylation is a post-translational modification 
that can affect protein stability, transcriptional activity, alter 
protein-protein interactions and modify intracellular localization of target 
proteins. In the present study we evaluated the role of SUMOylation as a 
posttranslational modification that can regulate the activity of NR4A1 to induce 
autophagy-dependent cell death. We focused on a model potentially relevant for 
neuronal cell death and demonstrated that NR4A1 needs to be SUMOylated to induce 
autophagic cell death. We observed that a triple mutant in SUMOylation sites has 
reduced SUMOylation, increased transcriptional activity, altered intracellular 
distribution, and more importantly, its ability to induce autophagic cell death 
is impaired.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0222072
PMCID: PMC7094859
PMID: 32210435 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.