1. Front Immunol. 2020 Mar 25;11:496. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.00496. eCollection 
2020.

Engineering of Fc Multimers as a Protein Therapy for Autoimmune Disease.

Fitzpatrick EA(1), Wang J(2), Strome SE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Biochemistry, College of Medicine, 
University of Tennessee Health Science Center (UTHSC), Memphis, TN, United 
States.
(2)College of Graduate Health Sciences, University of Tennessee Health Science 
Center, Memphis, TN, United States.

The success of Intravenous Immunoglobulin in treating autoimmune and 
inflammatory processes such as immune thrombocytopenia purpura and Kawasaki 
disease has led to renewed interest in developing recombinant molecules capable 
of recapitulating these therapeutic effects. The anti-inflammatory properties of 
IVIG are, in part, due to the Fc region of the IgG molecule, which interacts 
with activating or inhibitory Fcγ receptors (FcγRs), the neonatal Fc Receptor, 
non-canonical FcRs expressed by immune cells and complement proteins. In most 
cases, Fc interactions with these cognate receptors are dependent upon 
avidity-avidity which naturally occurs when polyclonal antibodies recognize 
unique antigens on a given target. The functional consequences of these avid 
interactions include antibody dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity, antibody 
dependent cell phagocytosis, degranulation, direct killing, and/or complement 
activation-all of which are associated with long-term immunomodulatory effects. 
Many of these immunologic effects can be recapitulated using recombinant or 
non-recombinant approaches to induce Fc multimerization, affording the potential 
to develop a new class of therapeutics. In this review, we discuss the history 
of tolerance induction by immune complexes that has led to the therapeutic 
development of artificial Fc bearing immune aggregates and recombinant Fc 
multimers. The contribution of structure, aggregation and N-glycosylation to 
human IgG: FcγR interactions and the functional effect(s) of these interactions 
are reviewed. Understanding the mechanisms by which Fc multimers induce 
tolerance and attempts to engineer Fc multimers to target specific FcγRs and/or 
specific effector functions in autoimmune disorders is explored in detail.

Copyright © 2020 Fitzpatrick, Wang and Strome.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.00496
PMCID: PMC7109252
PMID: 32269572 [Indexed for MEDLINE]