1. PLoS One. 2020 Apr 9;15(4):e0231210. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0231210. 
eCollection 2020.

A comparative analysis of drinking water employing metagenomics.

Brumfield KD(1)(2), Hasan NA(2)(3), Leddy MB(4), Cotruvo JA(5), Rashed SM(1)(3), 
Colwell RR(1)(2)(3), Huq A(1).

Author information:
(1)Maryland Pathogen Research Institute, University of Maryland, MD, College 
Park, United States of America.
(2)University of Maryland Institute for Advanced Computer Studies, University of 
Maryland, College Park, MD, United States of America.
(3)CosmosID Inc., Rockville, MD, United States of America.
(4)Essential Environmental and Engineering Systems, Huntington Beach, CA, United 
States of America.
(5)Joseph Cotruvo and Associates LLC, Washington, DC, United States of America.

The microbiological content of drinking water traditionally is determined by 
employing culture-dependent methods that are unable to detect all 
microorganisms, especially those that are not culturable. High-throughput 
sequencing now makes it possible to determine the microbiome of drinking water. 
Thus, the natural microbiota of water and water distribution systems can now be 
determined more accurately and analyzed in significantly greater detail, 
providing comprehensive understanding of the microbial community of drinking 
water applicable to public health. In this study, shotgun metagenomic analysis 
was performed to determine the microbiological content of drinking water and to 
provide a preliminary assessment of tap, drinking fountain, sparkling natural 
mineral, and non-mineral bottled water. Predominant bacterial species detected 
were members of the phyla Actinobacteria and Proteobacteria, notably the genera 
Alishewanella, Salmonella, and Propionibacterium in non-carbonated non-mineral 
bottled water, Methyloversatilis and Methylibium in sparkling natural mineral 
water, and Mycobacterium and Afipia in tap and drinking fountain water. Fecal 
indicator bacteria, i.e., Escherichia coli or enterococci, were not detected in 
any samples examined in this study. Bacteriophages and DNA encoding a few 
virulence-associated factors were detected but determined to be present only at 
low abundance. Antibiotic resistance markers were detected only at abundance 
values below our threshold of confidence. DNA of opportunistic plant and animal 
pathogens was identified in some samples and these included bacteria 
(Mycobacterium spp.), protozoa (Acanthamoeba mauritaniensis and Acanthamoeba 
palestinensis), and fungi (Melampsora pinitorqua and Chryosporium 
queenslandicum). Archaeal DNA (Candidatus Nitrosoarchaeum) was detected only in 
sparkling natural mineral water. This preliminary study reports the complete 
microbiome (bacteria, viruses, fungi, and protists) of selected types of 
drinking water employing whole-genome high-throughput sequencing and 
bioinformatics. Investigation into activity and function of the organisms 
detected is in progress.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0231210
PMCID: PMC7145143
PMID: 32271799 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare the follow potential 
conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship and/or 
publication of this article: RRC is the founder of CosmosID, Inc., Rockville, MD 
and also a Professor at the University of Maryland; NAH and SMR are employees of 
CosmosID, Inc., Rockville, MD; JAC is the founder of Joseph Cotruvo and 
Associates LLC, Washington, DC; MBL is an employee of Essential Environmental 
and Engineering Systems, Huntington Beach, CA. The specific roles of these 
authors are articulated in the ‘author contributions’ section. This does not 
alter our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials, as 
detailed online in the guide for authors 
(https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/competing-interests).