1. Atmos Environ (1994). 2014 Oct;95:409-455. doi:
10.1016/j.atmosenv.2014.05.070.  Epub 2014 May 28.

Aircraft engine exhaust emissions and other airport-related contributions to 
ambient air pollution: A review.

Masiol M(1), Harrison RM(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Environmental Health and Risk Management, School of Geography, 
Earth and Environmental Sciences, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, 
Birmingham B15 2TT, United Kingdom.

Civil aviation is fast-growing (about +5% every year), mainly driven by the 
developing economies and globalisation. Its impact on the environment is heavily 
debated, particularly in relation to climate forcing attributed to emissions at 
cruising altitudes and the noise and the deterioration of air quality at 
ground-level due to airport operations. This latter environmental issue is of 
particular interest to the scientific community and policymakers, especially in 
relation to the breach of limit and target values for many air pollutants, 
mainly nitrogen oxides and particulate matter, near the busiest airports and the 
resulting consequences for public health. Despite the increased attention given 
to aircraft emissions at ground-level and air pollution in the vicinity of 
airports, many research gaps remain. Sources relevant to air quality include not 
only engine exhaust and non-exhaust emissions from aircraft, but also emissions 
from the units providing power to the aircraft on the ground, the traffic due to 
the airport ground service, maintenance work, heating facilities, fugitive 
vapours from refuelling operations, kitchens and restaurants for passengers and 
operators, intermodal transportation systems, and road traffic for transporting 
people and goods in and out to the airport. Many of these sources have received 
inadequate attention, despite their high potential for impact on air quality. 
This review aims to summarise the state-of-the-art research on aircraft and 
airport emissions and attempts to synthesise the results of studies that have 
addressed this issue. It also aims to describe the key characteristics of 
pollution, the impacts upon global and local air quality and to address the 
future potential of research by highlighting research needs.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.atmosenv.2014.05.070
PMCID: PMC7108289
PMID: 32288558