1. Pol J Microbiol. 2020;69(2):1-4. doi: 10.33073/pjm-2020-017.

Extensively Drug-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii Belonging to International 
Clone II from A Pet Cat with Urinary Tract Infection; The First Report from 
Pakistan.

Taj Z(1), Rasool MH(2), Almatroudi A(3), Saqalein M(1), Khurshid M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology , Government College University Faisalabad , 
Pakistan ; Pet Care Clinic , Faisalabad , Pakistan.
(2)Department of Microbiology , Government College University Faisalabad , 
Pakistan.
(3)Department of Medical Laboratories , College of Applied Medical Sciences , 
Qassim University , Qassim , Saudi Arabia.

The carbapenem-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii (CRAB) has got global attention 
as a notorious nosocomial pathogen. This study describes a case of urinary tract 
infection in a 2-years old pet female cat infected with A. baumannii. The 
susceptibility profiling, screening for the resistance determinants, and the 
multilocus sequence typing was performed. The A. baumannii isolate was found to 
harbor the blaOXA23-like gene and corresponded to International clone II that 
has been widely reported to be involved in human infections. The study proposes 
that the pets may contribute towards the spread of clinically relevant 
antimicrobial-resistant pathogens. The carbapenem-resistant Acinetobacter 
baumannii (CRAB) has got global attention as a notorious nosocomial pathogen. 
This study describes a case of urinary tract infection in a 2-years old pet 
female cat infected with A. baumannii. The susceptibility profiling, screening 
for the resistance determinants, and the multilocus sequence typing was 
performed. The A. baumannii isolate was found to harbor the blaOXA23-like gene 
and corresponded to International clone II that has been widely reported to be 
involved in human infections. The study proposes that the pets may contribute 
towards the spread of clinically relevant antimicrobial-resistant pathogens.

DOI: 10.33073/pjm-2020-017
PMCID: PMC7324854
PMID: 32343078 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors do not report 
any financial or personal connections with other persons or organizations, which 
might negatively affect the contents of this publication and/or claim authorship 
rights to this publication.