1. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 Apr 27;21(9):3092. doi: 10.3390/ijms21093092.

Transcriptome Analysis of Carbohydrate Metabolism Genes and Molecular Regulation 
of Sucrose Transport Gene LoSUT on the Flowering Process of Developing Oriental 
Hybrid Lily 'Sorbonne' Bulb.

Gu J(1), Zeng Z(1), Wang Y(1), Lyu Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Beijing Key Laboratory of Ornamental Plants Germplasm Innovation & Molecular 
Breeding, China National Engineering Research Center for Floriculture, Beijing 
Laboratory of Urban and Rural Ecological Environment, College of Landscape 
Architecture, Beijing Forestry University, Beijing 100083, China.

The quality of Lily cut flower was determined by the quality of bulbs. During 
the process of vernalization and flower bud differentiation, sugar massively 
accumulated in the bulb, which influenced the bulb development. However, the 
details of sugar genes' regulation mechanism for these processes were not fully 
understood. Here, morphological physiology, transcriptomes and gene engineering 
technology were used to explore this physiological change. Seventy-two genes of 
25 kinds of sugar metabolism-related genes were annotated after re-analyzing 
transcriptome data of Oriental hybrid lily 'Sorbonne' bulbs, which were 
generated on Hiseq Illumina 2000. The results showed that these genes were 
closely related to lily bulb vernalization and development. Combining gene 
expression pattern with gene co-expression network, five genes (Contig5669, 
Contig13319, Contig7715, Contig1420 and Contig87292) were considered to be the 
most potential signals, and the sucrose transporter gene (SUT) was the focus of 
this study. Carbohydrate transport pathway and genes' regulation mechanism were 
inferred through a physiological and molecular test. SUT seemed to be the sugar 
sensor that could sense and regulate sugar concentration, which might have 
effects on other genes, such as FT, LFY and so on. LoSUT2 and LoSUT4 genes were 
cloned from Oriental hybrid lily 'Sorbonne' by RACE, which was the first time 
for these genes in Oriental hybrid lily 'Sorbonne'. The physiological properties 
of these proteins were analyzed such as hydrophobicity and phosphorylation. In 
addition, secondary and tertiary structures of proteins were predicted, which 
indicated the two proteins were membrane proteins. Their cellular locations were 
verified through positioning the experiment of the fluorescent vector. They were 
highly expressed in cells around phloem, which illustrated the key role of these 
genes in sugar transport. Furthermore, transient expression assays showed that 
overexpressed LoSUT2 and LoSUT4 in Arabidopsis thaliana bloomed significantly 
earlier than the wild type and the expression of FT, SOC1 and LFY were also 
affected by LoSUT2 and LoSUT4, which indicated that LoSUT2 and LoSUT4 may 
regulate plants flowering time.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21093092
PMCID: PMC7247698
PMID: 32349427 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.