1. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2020 Apr 27;12(1):49. doi: 10.1186/s13195-020-00612-7.

Imaging biomarkers in neurodegeneration: current and future practices.

Young PNE(1), Estarellas M(2), Coomans E(3), Srikrishna M(1), Beaumont H(4), 
Maass A(5), Venkataraman AV(6)(7), Lissaman R(8), Jiménez D(9)(10), Betts 
MJ(5)(11), McGlinchey E(12), Berron D(13), O'Connor A(9), Fox NC(9), Pereira 
JB(13)(14), Jagust W(15)(16), Carter SF(17)(18), Paterson RW(9), Schöll 
M(19)(20)(21).

Author information:
(1)Wallenberg Centre for Molecular and Translational Medicine and the Department 
of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry, University of Gothenburg, Sahlgrenska 
University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(2)Centre for Medical Image Computing (CMIC), Department of Computer Science & 
Department of Medical Physics and Biomedical Engineering, University College 
London, London, UK.
(3)Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Vrije 
Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(4)Neuroscience and Aphasia Research Unit, Division of Neuroscience and 
Experimental Psychology, The University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(5)German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Magdeburg, Germany.
(6)Division of Brain Sciences, Imperial College London, London, UK.
(7)United Kingdom Dementia Research Institute, Imperial College London, London, 
UK.
(8)Cardiff University Brain Research Imaging Centre (CUBRIC), School of 
Psychology, Cardiff, UK.
(9)Dementia Research Centre, UCL Institute of Neurology, University College 
London, London, UK.
(10)Department of Neurological Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Chile, Santiago, Chile.
(11)Institute of Cognitive Neurology and Dementia Research, 
Otto-von-Guericke-University Magdeburg, Magdeburg, Germany.
(12)Trinity College Dublin, The University of Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.
(13)Clinical Memory Research Unit, Department of Clinical Sciences Malmö, Lund 
University, Lund, Sweden.
(14)Division of Clinical Geriatrics, Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences 
and Society, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(15)Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California, Berkeley, USA.
(16)Molecular Biophysics and Integrated Bioimaging, Lawrence Berkeley National 
Laboratory, Berkeley, CA, USA.
(17)Department of Psychiatry, School of Clinical Medicine, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(18)Wolfson Molecular Imaging Centre, Division of Neuroscience and Experimental 
Psychology, MAHSC, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(19)Wallenberg Centre for Molecular and Translational Medicine and the 
Department of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry, University of Gothenburg, 
Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden. michael.scholl@neuro.gu.se.
(20)Dementia Research Centre, UCL Institute of Neurology, University College 
London, London, UK. michael.scholl@neuro.gu.se.
(21)Department of Clinical Physiology, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, 
Gothenburg, Sweden. michael.scholl@neuro.gu.se.

There is an increasing role for biological markers (biomarkers) in the 
understanding and diagnosis of neurodegenerative disorders. The application of 
imaging biomarkers specifically for the in vivo investigation of 
neurodegenerative disorders has increased substantially over the past decades 
and continues to provide further benefits both to the diagnosis and 
understanding of these diseases. This review forms part of a series of articles 
which stem from the University College London/University of Gothenburg course 
"Biomarkers in neurodegenerative diseases". In this review, we focus on 
neuroimaging, specifically positron emission tomography (PET) and magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI), giving an overview of the current established practices 
clinically and in research as well as new techniques being developed. We will 
also discuss the use of machine learning (ML) techniques within these fields to 
provide additional insights to early diagnosis and multimodal analysis.

DOI: 10.1186/s13195-020-00612-7
PMCID: PMC7187531
PMID: 32340618 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.