1. PLoS One. 2020 Apr 30;15(4):e0232282. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0232282. 
eCollection 2020.

Adaptive genetic diversity and evidence of population genetic structure in the 
endangered Sierra Madre Sparrow (Xenospiza baileyi).

Ham-Dueñas JG(1), Canales-Del-Castillo R(1), Voelker G(2), Ruvalcaba-Ortega 
I(1), Aguirre-Calderón CE(3), González-Rojas JI(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratorio de Biología de la Conservación y Desarrollo Sustentable. Cd. 
Universitaria, Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León, Facultad de Ciencias 
Biológicas, San Nicolás de los Garza, Nuevo León, México.
(2)Department of Wildlife and Fisheries Sciences, Biodiversity Research and 
Teaching Collections, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, United 
States of America.
(3)Instituto Tecnológico de El Salto, El Salto, P.N., Durango, Mexico.

The magnitude and distribution of genetic diversity through space and time can 
provide useful information relating to evolutionary potential and conservation 
status in threatened species. In assessing genetic diversity in species that are 
of conservation concern, several studies have focused on the use of Toll-like 
receptors (TLRs). TLRs are innate immune genes related to pathogen resistance, 
and polymorphisms may reflect not only levels of functional diversity, but may 
also be used to assess genetic diversity within and among populations. Here, we 
combined four potentially adaptive markers (TLRs) with one mitochondrial (COI) 
marker to evaluate genetic variation in the endangered Sierra Madre Sparrow 
(Xenospiza baileyi). This species offers an ideal model to investigate 
population and evolutionary genetic processes that may be occurring in a habitat 
restricted endangered species with disjunct populations (Mexico City and 
Durango), the census sizes of which differ by an order of magnitude. TLRs 
diversity in the Sierra Madre Sparrow was relatively high, which was not 
expected given its two small, geographically isolated populations. Genetic 
diversity was different (but not significantly so) between the two populations, 
with less diversity seen in the smaller Durango population. Population genetic 
structure between populations was due to isolation and different selective 
forces acting on different TLRs; population structure was also evident in COI. 
Reduction of genetic diversity in COI was observed over 20 years in the Durango 
population, a result likely caused by habitat loss, a factor which may be the 
main cause of diversity decline generally. Our results provide information 
related to the ways in which adaptive variation can be altered by demographic 
changes due to human-mediated habitat alterations. Furthermore, our findings may 
help to guide conservation schemes for both populations and their restricted 
habitat.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0232282
PMCID: PMC7192469
PMID: 32352998 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.