1. Elife. 2020 May 19;9:e55155. doi: 10.7554/eLife.55155.

Predictable properties of fitness landscapes induced by adaptational tradeoffs.

Das SG(1), Direito SO(2), Waclaw B(2), Allen RJ(2), Krug J(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Biological Physics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(2)School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United 
Kingdom.

Fitness effects of mutations depend on environmental parameters. For example, 
mutations that increase fitness of bacteria at high antibiotic concentration 
often decrease fitness in the absence of antibiotic, exemplifying a tradeoff 
between adaptation to environmental extremes. We develop a mathematical model 
for fitness landscapes generated by such tradeoffs, based on experiments that 
determine the antibiotic dose-response curves of Escherichia coli strains, and 
previous observations on antibiotic resistance mutations. Our model generates a 
succession of landscapes with predictable properties as antibiotic concentration 
is varied. The landscape is nearly smooth at low and high concentrations, but 
the tradeoff induces a high ruggedness at intermediate antibiotic 
concentrations. Despite this high ruggedness, however, all the fitness maxima in 
the landscapes are evolutionarily accessible from the wild type. This implies 
that selection for antibiotic resistance in multiple mutational steps is 
relatively facile despite the complexity of the underlying landscape.

Plain Language Summary: Drug resistant bacteria pose a major threat to public 
health systems all over the world. Darwinian evolution is at the heart of this 
drug resistance: a mutation that allows bacteria to divide in the presence of a 
drug appears initially in a single cell. This mutation makes this cell and its 
descendants more likely to survive, so they can end up taking over the 
population. The evolution of resistance can be thought of in terms of ‘bacterial 
fitness landscapes’. These landscapes visualise the relationship between the 
mutations present in a population of bacteria and how quickly the bacteria 
divide or reproduce. They are called landscapes because they can be represented 
as a series of mountains and valleys. The peaks of this landscape represent 
combinations of mutations that give bacteria the greatest chance of dividing 
(the greatest fitness). In a landscape with multiple peaks, some peaks will be 
higher than others. If the landscape is smooth, bacteria can easily acquire 
mutations for drug resistance. However, in a rugged landscape, bacteria may get 
stuck at sub-optimal peaks, because the mutations that would enable them to 
reach a higher peak would first lead them to losing fitness. Several studies on 
the evolution of antibiotic resistance exist for specific bacteria and specific 
drugs, but relatively little is known about the general properties of the 
underlying fitness landscapes. Do these landscapes have features that can help 
explain the rapid evolution of high levels of resistance? Antibiotic resistance 
often comes at a cost – more resistant strains of bacteria tend to grow more 
slowly when the drug is absent. To build a model of antibiotic resistance 
landscapes, Das et al. performed growth experiments on several strains of 
Escherichia coli exposed to a drug called ciprofloxacin. They measured how the 
rate at which the bacteria divided changed at different antibiotic 
concentrations, and combined this with the observation about resistant strains 
growing slower to formulate a mathematical model of antibiotic resistance 
landscapes. The landscapes that resulted were found to be very rugged, but 
unexpectedly, the bacteria could still evolve to access all fitness peaks. This 
means that landscape ruggedness does not constrain the evolution of resistance. 
Understanding how and when resistance evolves is important both for the design 
of new drugs and the development of treatment protocols. A specific prediction 
of the model is that resistance evolution in fitness landscapes where resistant 
strains divide more slowly is reversible. This implies that the bacteria could 
regain their susceptibility to treatment when the drug concentration decreases, 
but this would depend on the specific bacteria and drug in question. More 
broadly, the model provides a framework for addressing the evolution of 
resistance in clinical and environmental settings, where drug concentrations 
vary widely in time and space.

© 2020, Das et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.55155
PMCID: PMC7297540
PMID: 32423531 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: SD, SD, BW, RA, JK No competing interests 
declared