1. Middle East J Dig Dis. 2020 Apr;12(2):65-88. doi: 10.34172/mejdd.2020.166.

Assessment of Genetic Aspects of Non-alcoholic Fatty Liver and Premature 
Cardiovascular Events.

Saki S(1), Saki N(2), Poustchi H(3), Malekzadeh R(3).

Author information:
(1)Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Hoveizeh Cohort Study, Ahvaz Jundishapur University of Medical Sciences, 
Ahvaz, Iran.
(3)Digestive Disease Research Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, 
Tehran, Iran.

Recent evidence has demonstrated a strong interplay and multifaceted 
relationship between non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) and 
cardiovascular disease (CVD). CVD is the major cause of death in patients with 
NAFLD. NAFLD also has strong associations with diabetes and metabolic syndrome. 
In this comprehensive review, we aimed to overview the primary environmental and 
genetic risk factors of NAFLD, and CVD and also focus on the genetic aspects of 
these two disorders. NAFLD and CVD are both heterogeneous diseases with common 
genetic and molecular pathways. We have searched for the latest published 
articles regarding this matter and tried to provide an overview of recent 
insights into the genetic aspects of NAFLD and CVD. The common genetic and 
molecular pathways involved in NAFLD and CVD are insulin resistance (IR), 
subclinical inflammation, oxidative stress, and atherogenic dyslipidemia. 
According to an investigation, the exact associations between genomic 
characteristics of NAFLD and CVD and casual relationships are not fully 
determined. Different gene polymorphisms have been identified as the genetic 
components of the NAFLDCVD association. Some of the most documented ones of 
these gene polymorphisms are patatin-like phospholipase domain-containing 
protein 3 (PNPLA3), transmembrane 6 superfamily member 2 (TM6SF2), 
hydroxysteroid 17-beta dehydrogenase 13 (HSD17B13), adiponectin-encoding gene 
(ADIPOQ), apolipoprotein C3 (APOC3), peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors 
(PPAR), leptin receptor (LEPR), sterol regulatory element-binding proteins 
(SREBP), tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α), microsomal triglyceride transfer 
protein (MTTP), manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD), membrane-bound 
O-acyltransferase domain-containing 7 (MBOAT7), and mutation in DYRK1B that 
substitutes cysteine for arginine at position 102 in kinase-like domain. Further 
cohort studies with a significant sample size using advanced genomic assessments 
and next-generation sequencing techniques are needed to shed more light on 
genetic associations between NAFLD and CVD.

© 2020 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.34172/mejdd.2020.166
PMCID: PMC7320986
PMID: 32626560

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST The authors declare no 
conflict of interest related to this work.