1. Neurooncol Adv. 2020 Feb 17;2(1):vdaa001. doi: 10.1093/noajnl/vdaa001. 
eCollection 2020 Jan-Dec.

Sexually dimorphic impact of the iron-regulating gene, HFE, on survival in 
glioblastoma.

Nesterova DS(1), Midya V(2), Zacharia BE(1), Proctor EA(1)(3)(4), Lee SY(1), 
Stetson LC(5), Lathia JD(6)(7)(8), Rubin JB(9), Waite KA(8)(10), Berens ME(11), 
Barnholtz-Sloan JS(8)(10), Connor JR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Pennsylvania State University College of 
Medicine, Hershey, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Division of Biostatistics & Bioinformatics, Pennsylvania State University, 
Hershey, Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, Pennsylvania State University, Hershey, 
Pennsylvania, USA.
(4)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Pennsylvania State University, 
University Park, Pennsylvania, USA.
(5)Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of Michigan Medical 
School, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(6)Department of Cardiovascular and Metabolic Sciences, Cleveland Clinic, Lerner 
Research Institute, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(7)Rose Ella Burkhardt Brain Tumor and Neuro-Oncology Center, Cleveland Clinic, 
Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(8)Case Comprehensive Cancer Center, Case Western Reserve University School of 
Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. 
Louis, Missouri, USA.
(10)Department of Population Health and Quantitative Sciences, Case Western 
Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(11)Cancer and Cell Biology Division, Translational Genomics Research Institute, 
Phoenix, Arizona, USA.

BACKGROUND: The median survival for patients with glioblastoma (GBM), the most 
common primary malignant brain tumor in adults, has remained approximately 1 
year for more than 2 decades. Recent advances in the field have identified GBM 
as a sexually dimorphic disease. It is less prevalent in females and they have 
better survival compared to males. The molecular mechanism of this difference 
has not yet been established. Iron is essential for many biological processes 
supporting tumor growth and its regulation is impacted by sex. Therefore, we 
interrogated the expression of a key component of cellular iron regulation, the 
HFE (homeostatic iron regulatory) gene, on sexually dimorphic survival in GBM.
METHODS: We analyzed TCGA microarray gene expression and clinical data of all 
primary GBM patients (IDH-wild type) to compare tumor mRNA expression of HFE 
with overall survival, stratified by sex.
RESULTS: In low HFE expressing tumors (below median expression, n = 220), 
survival is modulated by both sex and MGMT status, with the combination of 
female sex and MGMT methylation resulting in over a 10-month survival advantage 
(P < .0001) over the other groups. Alternatively, expression of HFE above the 
median (high HFE, n = 240) is associated with significantly worse overall 
survival in GBM, regardless of MGMT methylation status or patient sex. Gene 
expression analysis uncovered a correlation between high HFE expression and 
expression of genes associated with immune function.
CONCLUSIONS: The level of HFE expression in GBM has a sexually dimorphic impact 
on survival. Whereas HFE expression below the median imparts a survival benefit 
to females, high HFE expression is associated with significantly worse overall 
survival regardless of established prognostic factors such as sex or MGMT 
methylation.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press, the Society for 
Neuro-Oncology and the European Association of Neuro-Oncology.

DOI: 10.1093/noajnl/vdaa001
PMCID: PMC7212901
PMID: 32642673