1. Microbiology (Reading). 2020 Oct;166(10):936-946. doi: 10.1099/mic.0.000927.

Transcriptional response of Fusarium oxysporum and Neocosmospora solani 
challenged with amphotericin B or posaconazole.

Castillo-Castañeda A(1)(2), Cañas-Duarte SJ(3), Guevara-Suarez M(1)(2), Guarro 
J(4), Restrepo S(2), Celis Ramírez AM(1).

Author information:
(1)Grupo de Investigación Celular y Molecular de Microorganismos Patógenos 
(CeMoP), Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Universidad de Los Andes, Bogotá, 
Colombia.
(2)Laboratorio de Micología y Fitopatología (LAMFU), Facultad de Ingeniería, 
Universidad de Los Andes, Bogotá, Colombia.
(3)Department of Systems Biology, Blavatnik Institute at Harvard Medical School, 
Harvard University, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Facultat de Medicina I Ciéncies de la Salut, Departament de Ciéncies Médiques 
Básiques, Unitat de Microbiología. Universitat de Rovira I Virgili, Reus, 
España.

Some species of fusaria are well-known pathogens of humans, animals and plants. 
Fusarium oxysporum and Neocosmospora solani (formerly Fusarium solani) cause 
human infections that range from onychomycosis or keratitis to severe 
disseminated infections. In general, these infections are difficult to treat due 
to poor therapeutic responses in immunocompromised patients. Despite that, 
little is known about the molecular mechanisms and transcriptional changes 
responsible for the antifungal resistance in fusaria. To shed light on the 
transcriptional response to antifungals, we carried out the first reported 
high-throughput RNA-seq analysis for F. oxysporum and N. solani that had been 
exposed to amphotericin B (AMB) and posaconazole (PSC). We detected significant 
differences between the transcriptional profiles of the two species and we found 
that some oxidation-reduction, metabolic, cellular and transport processes were 
regulated differentially by both fungi. The same was found with several genes 
from the ergosterol synthesis, efflux pumps, oxidative stress response and 
membrane biosynthesis pathways. A significant up-regulation of the C-22 sterol 
desaturase (ERG5), the sterol 24-C-methyltransferase (ERG6) gene, the 
glutathione S-transferase (GST) gene and of several members of the major 
facilitator superfamily (MSF) was demonstrated in this study after treating F. 
oxysporum with AMB. These results offer a good overview of transcriptional 
changes after exposure to commonly used antifungals, highlights the genes that 
are related to resistance mechanisms of these fungi, which will be a valuable 
tool for identifying causes of failure of treatments.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.000927
PMCID: PMC7660915
PMID: 32644917 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author(s) declare that there are no 
conflicts of interest.