1. Front Immunol. 2020 Jun 26;11:1161. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.01161. eCollection
 2020.

Transient Decrease of Circulating and Tissular Dendritic Cells in Patients With 
Mycobacterial Disease and With Partial Dominant IFNγR1 Deficiency.

Dotta L(1), Vairo D(2), Giacomelli M(3), Moratto D(2), Tamassia N(4), Vermi 
W(5), Lonardi S(5), Casanova JL(6)(7)(8)(9)(10), Bustamante J(6)(7)(8)(11), 
Giliani S(2), Badolato R(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, A. Nocivelli Institute for Molecular Medicine, ASST 
Spedali Civili of Brescia, Brescia, Italy.
(2)Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine, A. Nocivelli Institute 
for Molecular Medicine, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy.
(3)A. Nocivelli Institute for Molecular Medicine, ASST Spedali Civili of 
Brescia, Brescia, Italy.
(4)Section of General Pathology, Department of Medicine, University of Verona, 
Verona, Italy.
(5)Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine, University of Brescia, 
Brescia, Italy.
(6)Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Necker Branch, INSERM 
UMR 1163, Paris, France.
(7)University of Paris, Imagine Institute, Paris, France.
(8)St. Giles Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Rockefeller 
Branch, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY, United States.
(9)Pediatric Hematology and Immunology Unit, Necker Hospital for Sick Children, 
AP-HP, Paris, France.
(10)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, New York, NY, United States.
(11)Center for the Study of Primary Immunodeficiencies, Necker Hospital for Sick 
Children, AP-HP, Paris, France.
(12)Department of Clinical and Experimental Sciences, Department of Pediatrics, 
A. Nocivelli Institute for Molecular Medicine, University of Brescia, Brescia, 
Italy.

Interferon-γ receptor 1 (IFNγR1) deficiency is one of the inborn errors of IFN-γ 
immunity underlying Mendelian Susceptibility to Mycobacterial Disease (MSMD). 
This molecular circuit plays a crucial role in regulating the interaction 
between dendritic cells (DCs) and T lymphocytes, thus affecting DCs activation, 
maturation, and priming of T cells involved in the immune response against 
intracellular pathogens. We studied a girl who developed at the age of 2.5 years 
a Mycobacterium avium infection characterized by disseminated necrotizing 
granulomatous lymphadenitis, and we compared her findings with other patients 
with the same genetic condition. The patient carried a heterozygous 818del4 
mutation in the IFNGR1 gene responsible of autosomal dominant (AD) partial 
IFNγR1 deficiency. During the acute infection blood cells immunophenotyping 
showed a marked reduction in DCs counts, including both myeloid (mDCs) and 
plasmacytoid (pDCs) subsets, that reversed after successful prolonged 
antimicrobial therapy. Histology of her abdomen lymph node revealed a profound 
depletion of tissue pDCs, as compared to other age-matched granulomatous 
lymphadenitis of mycobacterial origin. Circulating DCs depletion was also 
observed in another patient with AD partial IFNγR1 deficiency during 
mycobacterial infection. To conclude, AD partial IFNγR1 deficiency can be 
associated with a transient decrease in both circulating and tissular DCs during 
acute mycobacterial infection, suggesting that DCs counts monitoring might 
constitute a useful marker of treatment response.

Copyright © 2020 Dotta, Vairo, Giacomelli, Moratto, Tamassia, Vermi, Lonardi, 
Casanova, Bustamante, Giliani and Badolato.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.01161
PMCID: PMC7333364
PMID: 32676075 [Indexed for MEDLINE]