1. J Endocrinol. 2020 Oct;247(1):39-52. doi: 10.1530/JOE-20-0052.

Insulin sensing by astrocytes is critical for normal thermogenesis and body 
temperature regulation.

Manaserh IH(1)(2), Maly E(1), Jahromi M(1), Chikkamenahalli L(1), Park J(3), 
Hill J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, College of Medicine and Life 
Sciences, The University of Toledo, Toledo, Ohio, USA.
(2)Center for Diabetes and Endocrine Research, College of Medicine and Life 
Sciences, The University of Toledo, Toledo, Ohio, USA.
(3)Department of Neuroscience, College of Medicine and Life Sciences, The 
University of Toledo, Toledo, Ohio, USA.

The important role of astrocytes in the central control of energy balance and 
glucose homeostasis has recently been recognized. Changes in thermoregulation 
can lead to metabolic dysregulation, but the role of astrocytes in this process 
is not yet clear. Therefore, we generated mice congenitally lacking insulin 
receptors (Ir) in astrocytes (IrKOGFAP mice) to investigate the involvement of 
astrocyte insulin signaling. IrKOGFAP mice displayed significantly lower energy 
expenditure and a strikingly lower basal and fasting body temperature. When 
exposed to cold, however, they were able to mount a thermogenic response. 
IrKOGFAP mice displayed sex differences in metabolic function and thermogenesis 
that may contribute to the development of obesity and type II diabetes as early 
as 2 months of age. While brown adipose tissue exhibited higher adipocyte size 
in both sexes, more apoptosis was seen in IrKOGFAP males. Less innervation and 
lower BAR3 expression levels were also observed in IrKOGFAP brown adipose 
tissue. These effects have not been reported in models of astrocyte Ir deletion 
in adulthood. In contrast, body weight and glucose regulatory defects 
phenocopied such models. These findings identify a novel role for astrocyte 
insulin signaling in the development of normal body temperature control and 
sympathetic activation of BAT. Targeting insulin signaling in astrocytes has the 
potential to serve as a novel target for increasing energy expenditure.

DOI: 10.1530/JOE-20-0052
PMCID: PMC7456332
PMID: 32698146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared