1. BMJ Open Respir Res. 2020 Sep;7(1):e000698. doi: 10.1136/bmjresp-2020-000698.

Last-resort strategies during mask shortages: optimal design features of cloth 
masks and decontamination of disposable masks during the COVID-19 pandemic.

Bhattacharjee S(1)(2), Bahl P(3), Chughtai AA(4), MacIntyre CR(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Biosecurity Program, Kirby Institute, UNSW Sydney, Kensington, New South 
Wales, Australia shovon.bhattacharjee@student.unsw.edu.au.
(2)Department of Applied Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Noakhali Science 
and Technology University, Noakhali, Bangladesh.
(3)School of Mechanical and Manufacturing Engineering, UNSW Sydney, Kensington, 
New South Wales, Australia.
(4)School of Public Health and Community Medicine, UNSW Sydney, Kensington, New 
South Wales, Australia.
(5)Biosecurity Program, Kirby Institute, UNSW Sydney, Kensington, New South 
Wales, Australia.
(6)College of Public Service and Community Solutions and College of Health 
Solutions, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona, USA.

Face masks and respirators are the most widely used intervention measures for 
respiratory protection. In the wake of COVID-19, in response to shortages and 
lack of availability of surgical masks and respirators, the use of cloth masks 
has become a research focus. Various fabrics have been promoted with little 
evidence-based foundation and without guidelines on design principles for 
optimal performance. In these circumstances, it is essential to understand the 
properties, key performance factors, filter mechanisms and evidence on cloth 
masks materials. The general community might also need to decontaminate and 
reuse disposable, single-use devices as a last resort. We present an overview of 
the filter materials, filter mechanisms and effectiveness, key performance 
factors, and hydrophobicity of the common disposable masks, as well as cloth 
masks. We also reviewed decontamination methods for disposable respiratory 
devices. As an alternative to surgical masks and respirators, we recommend a 
cloth mask made of at least three layers (300-350 threads per inch) and adding a 
nylon stocking layer over the mask for a better fit. Water-resistant fabrics 
(polyesters/nylon), blends of fabrics and water-absorbing fabrics (cotton) 
should be in the outside layer, middle layer/layers and inside layer, 
respectively. The information outlined here will help people to navigate their 
choices if facing shortages of appropriate respiratory protection during the 
COVID-19 pandemic.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2020. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjresp-2020-000698
PMCID: PMC7484883
PMID: 32913005 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.