1. Front Vet Sci. 2020 Sep 2;7:518. doi: 10.3389/fvets.2020.00518. eCollection 
2020.

Inferring Relationship of Blood Metabolic Changes and Average Daily Gain With 
Feed Conversion Efficiency in Murrah Heifers: Machine Learning Approach.

Sikka P(1), Nath A(2), Paul SS(3), Andonissamy J(1), Mishra DC(4), Rao AR(4), 
Balhara AK(1), Chaturvedi KK(4), Yadav KK(5), Balhara S(1).

Author information:
(1)Animal Biochemistry, Division of Genetics and Breeding, Central Institute for 
Research on Buffaloes (ICAR), Hisar, India.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Pt. Jawahar Lal Nehru Memorial Medical College, 
Pt. Deendayal Upadhyay Memorial Health Sciences and Ayush University of 
Chhatisgarh, Raipur, India.
(3)Poultry Nutrition, Directorate of Poultry Research (DPR), ICAR, Hyderabad, 
India.
(4)Indian Agricultural Statistics Research Institute, Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research, New Delhi, India.
(5)Department of Bioinfromatics, School of Earth, Biological and Environmental 
Sciences, Central University of South Bihar, Patna, India.

Machine learning algorithms were employed for predicting the feed conversion 
efficiency (FCE), using the blood parameters and average daily gain (ADG) as 
predictor variables in buffalo heifers. It was observed that isotonic regression 
outperformed other machine learning algorithms used in study. Further, we also 
achieved the best performance evaluation metrics model with additive regression 
as the meta learner and isotonic regression as the base learner on 10-fold 
cross-validation and leaving-one-out cross-validation tests. Further, we created 
three separate partial least square regression (PLSR) models using all 14 
parameters of blood and ADG as independent (explanatory) variables and FCE as 
the dependent variable, to understand the interactions of blood parameters, ADG 
with FCE each by inclusion of all FCE values (i), only higher FCE values 
(negative RFI) (ii), and inclusion of only lower FCE (positive RFI) values 
(iii). The PLSR model including only the higher FCE values was concluded the 
best, based on performance evaluation metrics as compared to PLSR models 
developed by inclusion of the lower FCE values and all types of FCE values. IGF1 
and its interactions with the other blood parameters were found highly 
influential for higher FCE measures. The strength of the estimated interaction 
effects of the blood parameter in relation to FCE may facilitate understanding 
of intricate dynamics of blood parameters for growth.

Copyright © 2020 Sikka, Nath, Paul, Andonissamy, Mishra, Rao, Balhara, 
Chaturvedi, Yadav and Balhara.

DOI: 10.3389/fvets.2020.00518
PMCID: PMC7492607
PMID: 32984408