1. Syst Rev. 2020 Sep 28;9(1):221. doi: 10.1186/s13643-020-01463-x.

Association of working conditions including digital technology use and systemic 
inflammation among employees: study protocol for a systematic review.

Kaltenegger HC(1), Becker L(2), Rohleder N(2), Nowak D(3), Weigl M(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute and Clinic for Occupational, Social and Environmental Medicine, 
University Hospital, Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich, Ziemssenstraße 1, 
80336, München, Germany. helena.kaltenegger@med.uni-muenchen.de.
(2)Chair of Health Psychology, Institute of Psychology, Friedrich-Alexander 
University Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.
(3)Institute and Clinic for Occupational, Social and Environmental Medicine, 
University Hospital, Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich, Ziemssenstraße 1, 
80336, München, Germany.

BACKGROUND: With the dynamic advancement of digitalization, working environments 
are changing and risk for employee stress may be increasing. Work stress has 
been associated with a dysregulation of inflammatory processes as a component of 
immune function. Systemic low-grade inflammation is discussed as a key player in 
the relation between stress exposure and chronic illness, such as cardiovascular 
diseases. The objective of this investigation will be to evaluate the 
association of working conditions including digital technology use and systemic 
inflammation among employees.
METHODS: We designed and registered a study protocol for a systematic review of 
randomized controlled trials and prospective non-randomized studies (e.g., 
cohort, interrupted time series, or before-after studies). We will include 
studies conducted among adult workers reporting associations of working 
conditions and inflammatory activity. The outcome will be biomarkers of systemic 
low-grade inflammation on cell, plasma molecule and intracellular level, such as 
C-reactive protein, or different types of leukocytes, cytokines, etc. Literature 
searches will be conducted in several electronic databases (from January 1982 
onwards), including PubMed/MEDLINE, Embase, PsycINFO, Web of Science, and 
CENTRAL. Two reviewers will independently screen all retrieved records, 
full-text articles, and extract data. The study methodological quality (or bias) 
will be appraised using appropriate tools. Our results will be described 
qualitatively. Random effects meta-analysis will be conducted, if feasible and 
appropriate. Additional analyses will be performed to explore potential sources 
of heterogeneity.
DISCUSSION: This systematic review and meta-analysis will provide a synthesis of 
studies evaluating the association of working conditions and systemic 
inflammation. We anticipate our findings to identify knowledge gaps in the 
literature that future research should address. Moreover, results of our review 
may provide implications for corporate and public policy action for employee 
health promotion and prevention of occupational stress.
SYSTEMATIC REVIEW REGISTRATION: PROSPERO ID: CRD42020166887.

DOI: 10.1186/s13643-020-01463-x
PMCID: PMC7523305
PMID: 32988415 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.