1. J Evol Biol. 2020 Dec;33(12):1783-1794. doi: 10.1111/jeb.13717. Epub 2020 Oct 
25.

Ovarian fluid proteome variation associates with sperm swimming speed in an 
externally fertilizing fish.

Johnson SL(1), Borziak K(2), Kleffmann T(3), Rosengrave P(4)(5), Dorus S(2), 
Gemmell NJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand.
(2)Biology Department, Center for Reproductive Evolution, Syracuse University, 
Syracuse, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Centre for Protein Research, University of Otago, 
Dunedin, New Zealand.
(4)Department of Anatomy, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand.
(5)AgResearch, Biocontrol and Biosecurity, Christchurch, New Zealand.

Sperm velocity is a key trait that predicts the outcome of sperm competition. By 
promoting or impeding sperm velocity, females can control fertilization via 
postcopulatory cryptic female choice. In Chinook salmon, ovarian fluid (OF), 
which surrounds the ova, mediates sperm velocity according to male and female 
identity, biasing the outcome of sperm competition towards males with faster 
sperm. Past investigations have revealed proteome variation in OF, but the 
specific components of OF that differentially mediate sperm velocity have yet to 
be characterized. Here we use quantitative proteomics to investigate whether OF 
protein composition explains variation in sperm velocity and fertilization 
success. We found that OF proteomes from six females robustly clustered into two 
groups and that these groups are distinguished by the abundance of a restricted 
set of proteins significantly associated with sperm velocity. Exposure of sperm 
to OF from females in group I had faster sperm compared to sperm exposed to the 
OF of group II females. Overall, OF proteins that distinguished between these 
groups were enriched for vitellogenin and calcium ion interactions. Our findings 
suggest that these proteins may form the functional basis for cryptic female 
choice via the biochemical and physiological mediation of sperm velocity.

© 2020 European Society For Evolutionary Biology. Journal of Evolutionary 
Biology © 2020 European Society For Evolutionary Biology.

DOI: 10.1111/jeb.13717
PMCID: PMC7719593
PMID: 33034086 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.