1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2021 Jan;147(1):280-295. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaci.2020.08.043. Epub 2020 Oct 15.

IL-4-BATF signaling directly modulates IL-9 producing mucosal mast cell (MMC9) 
function in experimental food allergy.

Tomar S(1), Ganesan V(1), Sharma A(2), Zeng C(3), Waggoner L(3), Smith A(3), Kim 
CH(2), Licona-Limón P(4), Reinhardt RL(5), Flavell RA(6), Wang YH(7), Hogan 
SP(8).

Author information:
(1)Division of Allergy and Immunology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical 
Center, Cincinnati, Ohio; Mary H Weiser Food Allergy Center, Michigan Medicine, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Mich; Department of Pathology, Michigan 
Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Mich.
(2)Mary H Weiser Food Allergy Center, Michigan Medicine, University of Michigan, 
Ann Arbor, Mich; Department of Pathology, Michigan Medicine, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Mich.
(3)Division of Allergy and Immunology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical 
Center, Cincinnati, Ohio.
(4)Department of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Conn.
(5)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, University of Colorado Anschutz 
Medical Campus, Aurora, Colo; Department of Biomedical Research, National Jewish 
Health, Denver, Colo.
(6)Department of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Conn; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, Md.
(7)Division of Allergy and Immunology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical 
Center, Cincinnati, Ohio; Type 2 Inflammation and Fibrosis Cluster, Immunology 
and Inflammation Research, Sanofi, Cambridge, Mass. Electronic address: 
Yui-Hsi.Wang@sanofi.com.
(8)Division of Allergy and Immunology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical 
Center, Cincinnati, Ohio; Mary H Weiser Food Allergy Center, Michigan Medicine, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Mich; Department of Pathology, Michigan 
Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Mich. Electronic address: 
sihogan@med.umich.edu.

BACKGROUND: This study group has previously identified IL-9-producing mucosal 
mast cell (MMC9) as the primary source of IL-9 to drive intestinal mastocytosis 
and experimental IgE-mediated food allergy. However, the molecular mechanisms 
that regulate the expansion of MMC9s remain unknown.
OBJECTIVES: This study hypothesized that IL-4 regulates MMC9 development and 
MMC9-dependent experimental IgE-mediated food allergy.
METHODS: An epicutaneous sensitization model was used and bone marrow 
reconstitution experiments were performed to test the requirement of IL-4 
receptor α (IL-4Rα) signaling on MMC9s in experimental IgE-mediated food 
allergy. Flow cytometric, bulk, and single-cell RNA-sequencing analyses on small 
intestine (SI) MMC9s were performed to illuminate MMC9 transcriptional signature 
and the effect of IL-4Rα signaling on MMC9 function. A bone marrow-derived MMC9 
culture system was used to define IL-4-BATF signaling in MMC9 development.
RESULTS: Epicutaneous sensitization- and bone marrow reconstitution-based models 
of IgE-mediated food allergy revealed an IL-4 signaling-dependent cell-intrinsic 
effect on SI MMC9 accumulation and food allergy severity. RNA-sequencing 
analysis of SI-MMC9s identified 410 gene transcripts reciprocally regulated by 
IL-4 signaling, including Il9 and Batf. Insilico analyses identified a 3491-gene 
MMC9 transcriptional signature and identified 2 transcriptionally distinct SI 
MMC9 populations enriched for metabolic or inflammatory programs. Employing an 
in vitro MMC9-culture model system showed that generation of MMC9-like cells was 
induced by IL-4 and this was in part dependent on BATF.
CONCLUSIONS: IL-4Rα signaling directly modulates MMC9 function and exacerbation 
of experimental IgE-mediated food allergic reactions. IL-4Rα regulation of MMC9s 
is in part BATF-dependent and occurs via modulation of metabolic transcriptional 
programs.

Copyright © 2020 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2020.08.043
PMCID: PMC7856198
PMID: 33069715 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: The authors declare no 
conflicts.