1. PeerJ. 2020 Oct 12;8:e9752. doi: 10.7717/peerj.9752. eCollection 2020.

Genetic characterization of feline panleukopenia virus from dogs in Vietnam 
reveals a unique Thr101 mutation in VP2.

Hoang M(#)(1)(2), Wu CN(#)(3), Lin CF(1)(4), Nguyen HTT(2), Le VP(5), Chiou 
MT(1)(6), Lin CN(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, National 
Pingtung University of Science and Technology, Pingtung, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Anatomy and Histology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Vietnam 
National University of Agriculture, Hanoi, Vietnam.
(3)Department of Medical Laboratory Science and Biotechnology, Central Taiwan 
University of Science and Technology, Taichung, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Veterinary Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, National 
Chiayi University, Chiayi, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Infectious Disease, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, Vietnam National University of Agriculture, Hanoi, Vietnam.
(6)Animal Disease Diagnostic Center, College of Veterinary Medicine, National 
Pingtung University of Science and Technology, Pingtung, Taiwan.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Canine parvovirus type 2 (CPV-2) and feline parvovirus (FPV) are 
known as the main causes of several serious diseases and have a severe impact on 
puppies and kittens, respectively. FPV and new CPV-2 variants are all able to 
infect cats, causing diseases indistinguishable from feline panleukopenia. 
However, FPV only replicates efficiently in feline cells in vitro and replicates 
in dogs in the thymus and bone marrow without being shed in feces. In our 
previous study, the genotypes of six parvoviral isolates were unable to be 
identified using a SimpleProbe® real-time PCR assay.
METHODS: In the present study, we characterized previously unidentified FPV-like 
viruses isolated from dogs in Vietnam. The six isolates were utilized to 
complete VP2 gene sequencing and to conduct phylogenetic analyses.
RESULTS: Sequence analysis of the six parvoviral strains identified the species 
as being similar to FPV. Phylogenetic analysis demonstrated that the complete 
VP2 genes of the strains are similar to those of FPV. The FPV-like strains 
contain a Thr101 mutation in the VP2 protein, which is different from prototype 
FPV strains.
DISCUSSION: Our data provide evidence for the existence of changes in the 
charge, protein contact potential and molecular surface of the core of the 
receptor-binding size with an Ile101 to Thr101 mutation. This is also the first 
study to provide reliable evidence that FPV may be a threat to the Vietnamese 
dog population.

©2020 Hoang et al.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.9752
PMCID: PMC7560322
PMID: 33083102

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare there are no competing 
interests.