1. Materials (Basel). 2020 Oct 18;13(20):4644. doi: 10.3390/ma13204644.

Magnetic Iron Oxide Nanoparticle (IONP) Synthesis to Applications: Present and 
Future.

Ajinkya N(1), Yu X(1), Kaithal P(2), Luo H(1), Somani P(3), Ramakrishna S(4).

Author information:
(1)Materials and Interfaces Center, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen 518055, China.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cellular Engineering, Jacob Institute of 
Biotechnology and Bioengineering, SHUATS, Allahabad 211007, India.
(3)Center for Grand Challenges and Green Technologies, Applied Science 
Innovations Pvt. Ltd., Pune 411041, India.
(4)Center for Nanofibers and Nanotechnology, National University of Singapore, 
Singapore 117576, Singapore.

Iron oxides are chemical compounds which have different polymorphic forms, 
including γ-Fe2O3 (maghemite), Fe3O4 (magnetite), and FeO (wustite). Among them, 
the most studied are γ-Fe2O3 and Fe3O4, as they possess extraordinary properties 
at the nanoscale (such as super paramagnetism, high specific surface area, 
biocompatible etc.), because at this size scale, the quantum effects affect 
matter behavior and optical, electrical and magnetic properties. Therefore, in 
the nanoscale, these materials become ideal for surface functionalization and 
modification in various applications such as separation techniques, magnetic 
sorting (cells and other biomolecules etc.), drug delivery, cancer hyperthermia, 
sensing etc., and also for increased surface area-to-volume ratio, which allows 
for excellent dispersibility in the solution form. The current methods used are 
partially and passively mixed reactants, and, thus, every reaction has a 
different proportion of all factors which causes further difficulties in 
reproducibility. Direct active and complete mixing and automated approaches 
could be solutions to this size- and shape-controlled synthesis, playing a key 
role in its exploitation for scientific or technological purposes. An ideal 
synthesis method should be able to allow reliable adjustment of parameters and 
control over the following: fluctuation in temperature; pH, stirring rate; 
particle distribution; size control; concentration; and control over 
nanoparticle shape and composition i.e., crystallinity, purity, and rapid 
screening. Iron oxide nanoparticle (IONP)-based available clinical applications 
are RNA/DNA extraction and detection of infectious bacteria and viruses. Such 
technologies are important at POC (point of care) diagnosis. IONPs can play a 
key role in these perspectives. Although there are various methods for synthesis 
of IONPs, one of the most crucial goals is to control size and properties with 
high reproducibility to accomplish successful applications. Using multiple 
characterization techniques to identify and confirm the oxide phase of iron can 
provide better characterization capability. It is very important to understand 
the in-depth IONP formation mechanism, enabling better control over parameters 
and overall reaction and, by extension, properties of IONPs. This work provides 
an in-depth overview of different properties, synthesis methods, and mechanisms 
of iron oxide nanoparticles (IONPs) formation, and the diverse range of their 
applications. Different characterization factors and strategies to confirm phase 
purity in the IONP synthesis field are reviewed. First, properties of IONPs and 
various synthesis routes with their merits and demerits are described. We also 
describe different synthesis strategies and formation mechanisms for IONPs such 
as for: wustite (FeO), hematite (α-Fe2O3), maghemite (ɤ-Fe2O3) and magnetite 
(Fe3O4). We also describe characterization of these nanoparticles and various 
applications in detail. In conclusion, we present a detailed overview on the 
properties, size-controlled synthesis, formation mechanisms and applications of 
IONPs.

DOI: 10.3390/ma13204644
PMCID: PMC7603130
PMID: 33080937

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.