1. BMC Plant Biol. 2020 Oct 22;20(1):482. doi: 10.1186/s12870-020-02698-5.

Variation in the expression of a transmembrane protein influences cell growth in 
Arabidopsis thaliana petals by altering auxin responses.

Miller CN(1), Dumenil J(1), Lu FH(1), Smith C(1), McKenzie N(1), Chapman V(1), 
Ball J(1), Box M(1), Bevan M(2).

Author information:
(1)Cell and Developmental Biology Department John Innes Centre, Norwich Research 
Park, Norwich, NR4 7UH, UK.
(2)Cell and Developmental Biology Department John Innes Centre, Norwich Research 
Park, Norwich, NR4 7UH, UK. michael.bevan@jic.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: The same species of plant can exhibit very diverse sizes and shapes 
of organs that are genetically determined. Characterising genetic variation 
underlying this morphological diversity is an important objective in 
evolutionary studies and it also helps identify the functions of genes 
influencing plant growth and development. Extensive screens of mutagenised 
Arabidopsis populations have identified multiple genes and mechanisms affecting 
organ size and shape, but relatively few studies have exploited the rich 
diversity of natural populations to identify genes involved in growth control.
RESULTS: We screened a relatively well characterised collection of Arabidopsis 
thaliana accessions for variation in petal size. Association analyses identified 
sequence and gene expression variation on chromosome 4 that made a substantial 
contribution to differences in petal area. Variation in the expression of a 
previously uncharacterised gene At4g16850 (named as KSK) had a substantial role 
on variation in organ size by influencing cell size. Over-expression of KSK led 
to larger petals with larger cells and promoted the formation of stamenoid 
features. The expression of auxin-responsive genes known to limit cell growth 
was reduced in response to KSK over-expression. ANT expression was also reduced 
in KSK over-expression lines, consistent with altered floral identities. Auxin 
responses were reduced in KSK over-expressing cells, consistent with changes in 
auxin-responsive gene expression. KSK may therefore influence auxin responses 
during petal development.
CONCLUSIONS: Understanding how genetic variation influences plant growth is 
important for both evolutionary and mechanistic studies. We used natural 
populations of Arabidopsis thaliana to identify sequence variation in a promoter 
region of Arabidopsis accessions that mediated differences in the expression of 
a previously uncharacterised membrane protein. This variation contributed to 
altered auxin responses and cell size during petal growth.

DOI: 10.1186/s12870-020-02698-5
PMCID: PMC7584087
PMID: 33092536 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare they have no competing 
interests.