1. Microorganisms. 2020 Oct 31;8(11):1713. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms8111713.

Genetic Variation and Preliminary Indications of Divergent Niche Adaptation in 
Cryptic Clade II of Escherichia.

Shen ZY(1), Koh XP(2), Yu YP(1), Lau SCK(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ocean Science, The Hong Kong University of Science and 
Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China.
(2)Division of Environment and Sustainability, The Hong Kong University of 
Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China.

The evolution, habitat, and lifestyle of the cryptic clade II of Escherichia, 
which were first recovered at low frequency from non-human hosts and later from 
external environments, were poorly understood. Here, the genomes of selected 
strains were analyzed for preliminary indications of ecological differentiation 
within their population. We adopted the delta bitscore metrics to detect 
functional divergence of their orthologous genes and trained a random forest 
classifier to differentiate the genomes according to habitats (gastrointestinal 
vs external environment). Model was built with inclusion of other Escherichia 
genomes previously demonstrated to have exhibited genomic traits of adaptation 
to one of the habitats. Overall, gene degradation was more prominent in the 
gastrointestinal strains. The trained model correctly classified the genomes, 
identifying a set of predictor genes that were informative of habitat 
association. Functional divergence in many of these genes were reflective of 
ecological divergence. Accuracy of the trained model was confirmed by its 
correct prediction of the habitats of an independent set of strains with known 
habitat association. In summary, the cryptic clade II of Escherichia displayed 
genomic signatures that are consistent with divergent adaptation to 
gastrointestinal and external environments.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms8111713
PMCID: PMC7716201
PMID: 33142902

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.