1. J Pharm Bioallied Sci. 2020 Aug;12(Suppl 1):S313-S318. doi: 
10.4103/jpbs.JPBS_93_20. Epub 2020 Aug 28.

Effect of Nonsurgical Periodontal Therapy on Serum Levels of Interleukin-1β and 
Interleukin-8 in Smokers and Nonsmokers with Chronic Periodontitis.

Vijayakumar S(1), Koshi E(1), Sadasivan A(1), Indhuja RS(1), Vallabhan CG(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Periodontology, Sree Mookambika Institute of Dental Sciences, 
Kulasekharam, Tamil Nadu, India.

AIM: The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of nonsurgical periodontal 
therapy on serum levels of interleukin-1β (IL-1β) and interleukin-8 (IL-8) in 
smokers and nonsmokers with chronic periodontitis before and after scaling and 
root planing (SRP).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This was a comparative interventional study including a 
total of 52 (26 smokers and 26 nonsmokers with chronic periodontitis) subjects. 
Clinical parameters (gingival index [GI], plaque index [PI], recession, probing 
pocket depth [PPD], and clinical attachment level [CAL]) were recorded at 
baseline and 4 weeks after initial periodontal therapy. Initial periodontal 
therapy included oral hygiene instructions and full mouth SRP. Venous blood 
sample of 5 mL was collected from each subject at baseline and 4 weeks after 
initial periodontal therapy to evaluate serum IL-1β and IL-8. These biochemical 
parameters were assayed using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) method.
RESULTS: The periodontal parameters such as PI, GI, recession, PPD, and CAL were 
reduced after nonsurgical periodontal therapy. Smokers with chronic 
periodontitis showed statistically significant lower GI and higher PI, gingival 
recession, PPD, and CAL as compared to nonsmokers with chronic periodontitis. 
Statistically significant reduction in periodontal parameters was seen in both 
groups after periodontal therapy. IL-1β and IL-8 were increased in both groups 
at baseline; after SRP both groups showed statistically significant reduction in 
IL-1β and smokers with chronic periodontitis showed statistically significant 
increase in IL-8 after SRP.
CONCLUSION: Smokers with chronic periodontitis showed more periodontal 
destruction and systemic inflammatory markers compared to nonsmokers with 
chronic periodontitis. After periodontal therapy both groups showed 
statistically significant improvement in clinical parameters and biochemical 
parameters excluding IL-8.

Copyright: © 2020 Journal of Pharmacy and Bioallied Sciences.

DOI: 10.4103/jpbs.JPBS_93_20
PMCID: PMC7595457
PMID: 33149478

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.