1. Neurobiol Aging. 2021 Jan;97:89-96. doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2020.09.023.
 Epub 2020 Oct 14.

Metabolic syndrome and its components in relation to in vivo brain amyloid and 
neurodegeneration in late middle age.

Palta P(1), Rippon B(2), Tahmi M(2), Sherwood G(2), Soto L(2), Ceballos F(2), 
Laing K(3), He H(3), Reitz C(4), Razlighi Q(5), Teresi JA(6), Moreno H(7), 
Brickman AM(4), Luchsinger JA(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia 
University Irving Medical Center, New York, NY, USA; Department of Epidemiology, 
Joseph P. Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia University Irving Medical 
Center, New York, NY, USA. Electronic address: pp2464@cumc.columbia.edu.
(2)Department of Medicine, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia 
University Irving Medical Center, New York, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia 
University Irving Medical Center, New York, NY, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia 
University Irving Medical Center, New York, NY, USA; Taub Institute for Research 
on Alzheimer's Disease and the Aging Brain, Columbia University Irving Medical 
Center, New York, NY, USA; Gertrude H. Sergievsky Center, Columbia University 
Irving Medical Center, New York, NY, USA.
(5)Department of Radiology, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
(6)Research Division, Hebrew Home in Riverdale, Bronx, NY, USA; Columbia 
University Stroud Center at New York State Psychiatric Center, New York, NY, 
USA.
(7)Department of Neurology and Pharmacology/Physiology, SUNY Downstate Medical 
Center, Brooklyn, NY, USA.
(8)Department of Medicine, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia 
University Irving Medical Center, New York, NY, USA; Department of Epidemiology, 
Joseph P. Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia University Irving Medical 
Center, New York, NY, USA.

Metabolic syndrome (MetS) is associated with dementia, but it is unclear whether 
MetS is related to Alzheimer's disease (AD). We investigated the association of 
MetS with brain amyloid, a key AD feature, and neurodegeneration. A 
community-based sample of 350 middle-aged Hispanics in New York City had 
cerebral amyloid β (Aβ) burden ascertained with 18F-Florbetaben positron 
emission tomography. Neurodegeneration was ascertained as cortical thickness in 
AD signature regions from 3T brain MRI. MetS and its components (glucose, blood 
pressure, triglycerides, high-density lipoprotein, adiposity) were defined using 
the National Institutes of Health criteria. Neither the presence of MetS nor the 
MetS score was associated with Aβ or neurodegeneration. Among the MetS 
components, elevated glucose was associated with lower Aβ burden, and this 
association was not explained by diabetes treatment. Glucose and triglycerides 
were related to smaller cortical thickness. Our findings suggest that MetS as an 
arbitrary measure of aggregate metabolic and vascular risk does not capture the 
risk of AD neuropathology in late middle age and that other approaches to 
measure the aggregate risk should be examined.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2020.09.023
PMCID: PMC7810168
PMID: 33166929 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest/Disclosures JA Luchsinger 
receives a stipend from Wolters Kluwer, N.V. as Editor in Chief of the journal 
Alzheimer’s Disease and Associated Disorders, and has served as a paid 
consultant to vTv therapeutics, Inc. and Recruitment Partners. AM Brickman is a 
paid consultant for Regeneron Pharmaceuticals and Cognition Therapeutics, Inc 
and owns equity in Mars Holding Limited. The other authors have no other 
conflicts of interests to declare.