1. J Inflamm Res. 2020 Nov 2;13:829-845. doi: 10.2147/JIR.S272539. eCollection 
2020.

Active Cousinia thomsonii Extracts Modulate Expression of Crucial 
Proinflammatory Mediators/Cytokines and NFκB Cascade in 
Lipopolysaccharide-Induced Albino Wistar Rat Model.

Dar KB(1), Khan IS(2), Amin S(1), Ganie AH(3), Bhat AH(4), Dar SA(5), Reshi 
BA(6), Ganie SA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry/Biochemistry, University of Kashmir, 
Srinagar, Jammu and Kashmir, India.
(2)Centre of Research for Development, University of Kashmir, Srinagar, Jammu 
and Kashmir, India.
(3)Department of Botany, University of Kashmir, Srinagar, Jammu and Kashmir, 
India.
(4)Cancer Research and Diagnostic Centre, SKIMS, Srinagar, Jammu and Kashmir, 
India.
(5)Regional Research Institute of Unani Medicine, Srinagar, Jammu and Kashmir, 
India.
(6)Department of Biotechnology, University of Kashmir, Srinagar, Jammu and 
Kashmir, India.

INTRODUCTION: Chronic inflammation is implicated in a multitude of diseases, 
including arthritis, neurodegeneration, autoimmune myositis, type 2 diabetes, 
rheumatic disorders, spondylitis, and cancer. Therefore, strategies to explore 
potent anti-inflammatory regimens are pivotal from a human-health perspective. 
Medicinal plants represent a vast unexplored treasure trove of therapeutically 
active constituents with diverse pharmacological activities, including 
anti-inflammatory properties. Herein, we evaluated Cousinia thomsonii, an edible 
medicinal herb, for its anti-inflammatory/immunomodulatory properties.
METHODS: Soxhlet extraction was used to obtain different solvent extracts 
(hexane, ethyl acetate, ethanol, methanol, and aqueous extract) in increasing 
order of polarity. In vitro anti-inflammatory assays were performed to 
investigate the effects of extracts on protein denaturation, proteinase 
activity, nitric oxide surge, and erythrocyte-membrane stabilization. The most 
effective extracts, ie, ethyl acetate (CTEA) and ethanol (CTE) extracts (150-200 
g) were selected for further in vivo analysis using albino Wistar rats. Wistar 
rats received varying concentrations of CTEA and CTE (25, 50, and 100 mg/kg) for 
3 weeks, followed by a single subplantar injection of lipopolysaccharide. 
Dexamethasone served as positive control. Blood was obtained from the 
retro-orbital plexus and serum separated for estimation of proinflammatory 
cytokines (IL6, IL1β, IFNγ and TNFα). Western blotting was performed to study 
expression patterns of crucial proteins implicated in the NFκB pathway, ie, NFκB 
p65, NFκB1 p50, and NFκB2 p52. Histopathological examination was done and gas 
chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) carried out to reveal the identity of 
compounds responsible for ameliorating effects of C. thomsonii.
RESULTS: Among five tested extracts, CTEA and CTE showed marked inhibition of 
protein denaturation, proteinase activity, nitric oxide surge and 
erythrocyte-membrane hemolysis at 600 μg/mL (P<0.001). Both these extracts 
showed no toxic effects up to a dose of 2,500 mg/kg. Extracts exhibited 
concentration-dependent reductions in expression of IL6, IL1β, IFNγ, TNFα, 
NFκB-p65, NFκB1, and NFκB2 (P<0.05). Healing effects of extracts were evident 
from histopathological investigation. GC-MS analysis revealed the presence of 
important anti-inflammatory compounds, notably stigmast-5-en-3-ol, oleate, 
dotriacontane, ascorbic acid, n-hexadecanoic acid, and α-tocopherol, in C. 
thomsonii.
CONCLUSION: C. thomsonii possesses significant 
anti-inflammatory/immunomodulatory potential by virtue of modifying levels of 
proinflammatory cytokines/markers and NFκB proteins.

© 2020 Dar et al.

DOI: 10.2147/JIR.S272539
PMCID: PMC7646511
PMID: 33173324

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.