1. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2021 Feb;28(2):R31-R46. doi: 10.1530/ERC-20-0272.

Overcoming oncogene addiction in breast and prostate cancers: a comparative 
mechanistic overview.

Blatt EB(1), Kopplin N(1), Kumar S(1), Mu P(2), Conzen SD(3), Raj GV(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, Texas, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, Texas, USA.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, Texas, USA.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, Texas, USA.

Prostate cancer (PCa) and breast cancer (BCa) are both hormone-dependent cancers 
that require the androgen receptor (AR) and estrogen receptor (ER, ESR1) for 
growth and proliferation, respectively. Endocrine therapies that target these 
nuclear receptors (NRs) provide significant clinical benefit for metastatic 
patients. However, these therapeutic strategies are seldom curative and therapy 
resistance is prevalent. Because the vast majority of therapy-resistant PCa and 
BCa remain dependent on the augmented activity of their primary NR driver, 
common mechanisms of resistance involve enhanced NR signaling through 
overexpression, mutation, or alternative splicing of the receptor, coregulator 
alterations, and increased intracrine hormonal synthesis. In addition, a 
significant subset of endocrine therapy-resistant tumors become independent of 
their primary NR and switch to alternative NR or transcriptional drivers. While 
these hormone-dependent cancers generally employ similar mechanisms of endocrine 
therapy resistance, distinct differences between the two tumor types have been 
observed. In this review, we compare and contrast the most frequent mechanisms 
of antiandrogen and antiestrogen resistance, and provide potential therapeutic 
strategies for targeting both advanced PCa and BCa.

DOI: 10.1530/ERC-20-0272
PMCID: PMC8218927
PMID: 33263560 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interest G V R is a named 
inventor in a patent for ERX-11.