1. Clin Transl Sci. 2021 Mar;14(2):656-663. doi: 10.1111/cts.12927. Epub 2020 Dec
 6.

G970R-CFTR Mutation (c.2908G>C) Results Predominantly in a Splicing Defect.

Fidler MC(1), Buckley A(1), Sullivan JC(1), Statia M(2), Boj SF(2), Vries 
RGJ(2), Munck A(3), Higgins M(1), Moretto Zita M(1), Negulescu P(1), van Goor 
F(1), De Boeck K(4).

Author information:
(1)Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Foundation Hubrecht Organoid Technology, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(3)Hôpital Universitaire Robert-Debré, AP-HP, Université Paris Diderot, Paris, 
France.
(4)University Hospital Gasthuisberg, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

In previous work, participants with a G970R mutation in cystic fibrosis 
transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) (c.2908G>C) had numerically lower 
sweat chloride responses during ivacaftor treatment than participants with other 
CFTR gating mutations. The objective of this substudy was to characterize the 
molecular defect of the G970R mutation in vitro and assess the benefit of 
ivacaftor in participants with this mutation. This substudy assessed sweat 
chloride, spirometry findings, and nasal potential difference on and off 
ivacaftor treatment in three participants with a G970R/F508del genotype. 
Intestinal organoids derived from rectal biopsy specimens were used to assess 
ivacaftor response ex vivo and conduct messenger RNA splice and protein 
analyses. No consistent or meaningful trends were observed between on-treatment 
and off-treatment clinical assessments. Organoids did not respond to ivacaftor 
in forskolin-induced swelling assays; no mature CFTR protein was detected in 
Western blots. Organoid RNA analysis demonstrated that 3 novel splice variants 
were created by G970R-CFTR: exon 17 truncation, exons 13-15 and 17 skipping, and 
intron 17 retention. Functional and molecular analyses indicated that the 
c.2908G>C mutation caused a cryptic splicing defect. Organoids lacked an ex vivo 
response with ivacaftor and supported identification of the mechanism underlying 
the CFTR defect caused by c.2908G>C. Analysis of CFTR mutations indicated that 
cryptic splicing was a rare cause of mutation misclassification in engineered 
cell lines. This substudy used organoids as an alternative in vitro model for 
mutations, such as cryptic splice mutations that cannot be fully assessed using 
cDNA expressed in recombinant cell systems.

© 2020 The Authors. Clinical and Translational Science published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC on behalf of the American Society for Clinical Pharmacology and 
Therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1111/cts.12927
PMCID: PMC7993255
PMID: 33278322 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: M.C.F., A.B., M.H., M.M.Z., P.N., and F.v.G. are 
employees of Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated and may own stock or options in 
the company. J.C.S. is a former employee of Vertex and may own stock or options 
in the company. M.S., S.F.B., and R.G.J.V. are employees of Hubrecht Organoid 
Technology and report grants from Vertex during the conduct of the study and 
grants from companies involved in cystic fibrosis research and drug development 
outside the submitted work, for which Hubrecht Organoid Technology performs 
contract research organizational work in the area of cystic fibrosis drug 
development. A.M. reports personal fees from Vertex outside the submitted work. 
K.D.B. reports support from Boehringer, Protalix, Raptor, Teva, NovaBiotics, 
Eloxx, Vertex, and Galapagos. All authors received nonfinancial support 
(assistance with manuscript preparation) from ArticulateScience LLC.