1. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 Dec 1;21(23):9175. doi: 10.3390/ijms21239175.

How Far Are We from Prescribing Fasting as Anticancer Medicine?

Deligiorgi MV(1), Liapi C(1), Trafalis DT(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology-Clinical Pharmacology Unit, Faculty of Medicine, 
National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, 115 27 Goudi, Athens, Greece.

(1) Background: the present review provides a comprehensive and up-to date 
overview of the potential exploitation of fasting as an anticancer strategy. The 
rationale for this concept is that fasting elicits a differential stress 
response in the setting of unfavorable conditions, empowering the survival of 
normal cells, while killing cancer cells. (2) Methods: the present narrative 
review presents the basic aspects of the hormonal, molecular, and cellular 
response to fasting, focusing on the interrelationship of fasting with oxidative 
stress. It also presents nonclinical and clinical evidence concerning the 
implementation of fasting as adjuvant to chemotherapy, highlighting current 
challenges and future perspectives. (3) Results: there is ample nonclinical 
evidence indicating that fasting can mitigate the toxicity of chemotherapy 
and/or increase the efficacy of chemotherapy. The relevant clinical research is 
encouraging, albeit still in its infancy. The path forward for implementing 
fasting in oncology is a personalized approach, entailing counteraction of 
current challenges, including: (i) patient selection; (ii) fasting patterns; 
(iii) timeline of fasting and refeeding; (iv) validation of biomarkers for 
assessment of fasting; and (v) establishment of protocols for patients' 
monitoring. (4) Conclusion: prescribing fasting as anticancer medicine may not 
be far away if large randomized clinical trials consolidate its safety and 
efficacy.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21239175
PMCID: PMC7730661
PMID: 33271979 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.