1. Sci Rep. 2020 Dec 8;10(1):21440. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-78574-x.

Network analysis reveals essential proteins that regulate sodium-iodide 
symporter expression in anaplastic thyroid carcinoma.

Rakhsh-Khorshid H(1)(2), Samimi H(3), Torabi S(4), Sajjadi-Jazi SM(3)(5), Samadi 
H(3), Ghafouri F(3)(6), Asgari Y(7), Haghpanah V(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Tarbiat Modares 
University, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Apoptosis Research Centre, National University of Ireland, Galway, Ireland.
(3)Endocrinology and Metabolism Research Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism 
Clinical Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Dr. Shariati 
Hospital, North Kargar Ave, Tehran, 14114, Iran.
(4)Department of Stem Cells and Developmental Biology, Cell Science Research 
Center, Royan Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Technology, Academic Center 
for Education, Culture and Research (ACECR), Tehran, Iran.
(5)Cell Therapy and Regenerative Medicine Research Center, Endocrinology and 
Metabolism Molecular-Cellular Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(6)Department of Biotechnology, Faculty of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, 
Shahid Beheshti University, Tehran, Iran.
(7)Department of Medical Biotechnology, School of Advanced Technologies in 
Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Italia St., Tehran, 1417755469, 
Iran. yasgari@tums.ac.ir.
(8)Endocrinology and Metabolism Research Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism 
Clinical Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Dr. Shariati 
Hospital, North Kargar Ave, Tehran, 14114, Iran. v.haghpanah@gmail.com.
(9)Personalized Medicine Research Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism Clinical 
Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. 
v.haghpanah@gmail.com.

Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma (ATC) is the most rare and lethal form of thyroid 
cancer and requires effective treatment. Efforts have been made to restore 
sodium-iodide symporter (NIS) expression in ATC cells where it has been 
downregulated, yet without complete success. Systems biology approaches have 
been used to simplify complex biological networks. Here, we attempt to find more 
suitable targets in order to restore NIS expression in ATC cells. We have built 
a simplified protein interaction network including transcription factors and 
proteins involved in MAPK, TGFβ/SMAD, PI3K/AKT, and TSHR signaling pathways 
which regulate NIS expression, alongside proteins interacting with them. The 
network was analyzed, and proteins were ranked based on several centrality 
indices. Our results suggest that the protein interaction network of NIS 
expression regulation is modular, and distance-based and information-flow-based 
centrality indices may be better predictors of important proteins in such 
networks. We propose that the high-ranked proteins found in our analysis are 
expected to be more promising targets in attempts to restore NIS expression in 
ATC cells.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-78574-x
PMCID: PMC7722919
PMID: 33293661 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.