1. Am J Cancer Res. 2020 Nov 1;10(11):4005-4015. eCollection 2020.

Acquired rare recurrent EGFR mutations as mechanisms of resistance to 
Osimertinib in lung cancer and in silico structural modelling.

Lin L(1), Lu Q(2), Cao R(3), Ou Q(3), Ma Y(3), Bao H(3), Wu X(3), Shao Y(4)(5), 
Wang Z(6), Shen B(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, National Cancer Center/National Clinical 
Research Center for Cancer/Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences 
and Peking Union Medical College Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Tangdu Hospital, The Air Force Military 
Medical University Xi'an, Shaanxi, China.
(3)Translational Medicine Research Institute, Geneseeq Technology Inc. Toronto, 
ON, Canada.
(4)Nanjing Geneseeq Technology Inc. Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.
(5)School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical University Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.
(6)Department of Oncology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical 
University Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.
(7)Department of Oncology, Jiangsu Cancer Hospital, Jiangsu Institute of Cancer 
Research, Nanjing Medical University Affiliated Cancer Hospital Nanjing, 
Jiangsu, China.

A growing number of progression on Osimertinib among EGFR-mutated lung cancers 
represents a great challenge clinically. Our study aims to gain insights into 
novel mechanisms of acquired resistance to Osimertinib. We performed genomic 
studies on 2 large independent cohorts of lung cancer patients with progressed 
diseases on different tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). In silico modeling was 
used to study the structural mechanism of selected EGFR mutations. Compared with 
the 1st-TKIs-resistant group, EGFR mutations C797S/G, L718Q/V, L792F/H were 
significantly more enriched in the Osimertinib-resistant cohort, whose 
sensitivities to Osimertinib were successfully predicted. Importantly, a total 
of 14 low-frequency EGFR mutations were exclusively or significantly observed in 
the Osimertinib-resistant group, 7 were predicted to dramatically reduce the 
binding affinity of EGFR to Osimertinib (G796S, V802F, T725M, Q791L/H, P794S/R). 
Analysis of pre-Osimertinib treatment samples of two patients supported that 
EGFR V802F and G796S were acquired during the treatment. In addition, EGFR G796S 
was predicted to be susceptible to gefitinib. This study represented the largest 
real-world data so far investigating Osimertinib resistance in EGFR-mutated lung 
cancer. We identified a collection of coexistent EGFR rare mutations and 
provided possible guidance for those patients who progressed on the first-line 
treatment of Osimertinib.

AJCR Copyright © 2020.

PMCID: PMC7716156
PMID: 33294282

Conflict of interest statement: Ran Cao, Qiuxiang Ou, Yutong Ma, Hua Bao, and 
Xue Wu are employees of Geneseeq Technology Inc., Toronto, Canada. Yang Shao is 
an employee of Nanjing Geneseeq Technology Inc., Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.