1. Front Pharmacol. 2020 Oct 29;11:562113. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2020.562113. 
eCollection 2020.

Integration of Cell-Free Expression and Solid-State NMR to Investigate the 
Dynamic Properties of Different Sites of the Growth Hormone Secretagogue 
Receptor.

Pacull EM(1), Sendker F(1), Bernhard F(2)(3), Scheidt HA(1), Schmidt P(1), 
Huster D(1), Krug U(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Medical Physics and Biophysics, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, 
Germany.
(2)Institute of Biophysical Chemistry, Goethe University Frankfurt, Frankfurt am 
Main, Germany.
(3)Center for Biomolecular Magnetic Resonance, Goethe University Frankfurt, 
Frankfurt am Main, Germany.

Cell-free expression represents an attractive method to produce large quantities 
of selectively labeled protein for NMR applications. Here, cell-free expression 
was used to label specific regions of the growth hormone secretagogue receptor 
(GHSR) with NMR-active isotopes. The GHSR is a member of the class A family of G 
protein-coupled receptors. A cell-free expression system was established to 
produce the GHSR in the precipitated form. The solubilized receptor was refolded 
in vitro and reconstituted into DMPC lipid membranes. Methionines, arginines, 
and histidines were chosen for 13C-labeling as they are representative for the 
transmembrane domains, the loops and flanking regions of the transmembrane 
α-helices, and the C-terminus of the receptor, respectively. The dynamics of the 
isotopically labeled residues was characterized by solid-state NMR measuring 
motionally averaged 1H-13C dipolar couplings, which were converted into 
molecular order parameters. Separated local field DIPSHIFT experiments under 
magic-angle spinning conditions using either varying cross polarization contact 
times or direct excitation provided order parameters for these residues showing 
that the C-terminus was the segment with the highest motional amplitude. The 
loop regions and helix ends as well as the transmembrane regions of the GHSR 
represent relatively rigid segments in the overall very flexible receptor 
molecule. Although no site resolution could be achieved in the experiments, the 
previously reported highly dynamic character of the receptor concluded from 
uniformly 13C labeled receptor samples could be further specified by this 
segmental labeling approach, leading to a more diversified understanding of the 
receptor dynamics under equilibrium conditions.

Copyright © 2020 Pacull, Sendker, Bernhard, Scheidt, Schmidt, Huster and Krug.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2020.562113
PMCID: PMC7723455
PMID: 33324203