1. J Immunother Cancer. 2021 Jan;9(1):e001406. doi: 10.1136/jitc-2020-001406.

Use of plasma ctDNA as a potential biomarker for longitudinal monitoring of a 
patient with metastatic high-risk upper tract urothelial carcinoma receiving 
pembrolizumab and personalized neoepitope-derived multipeptide vaccinations: a 
case report.

Blumendeller C(#)(1), Boehme J(#)(1), Frick M(1), Schulze M(1), Rinckleb A(1), 
Kyzirakos C(1), Kayser S(1), Kopp M(2), Kelkenberg S(2), Pieper N(2), Bartsch 
O(1), Hadaschick D(3), Battke F(2), Stenzl A(4), Biskup S(5)(2).

Author information:
(1)Praxis für Humangenetik Tübingen, Tuebingen, Germany.
(2)CeGaT GmbH, Tuebingen, Germany.
(3)CeCaVa GmbH & Co KG, Tuebingen, Germany.
(4)Department of Urology, University Hospital Tübingen, Tubingen, Germany.
(5)Praxis für Humangenetik Tübingen, Tuebingen, Germany 
Saskia.Biskup@humangenetik-tuebingen.de.
(#)Contributed equally

Upper tract urothelial carcinoma (UTUC) is often diagnosed late and exhibits 
poor prognosis. Only limited data are available concerning therapeutic regimes 
and potential biomarkers for disease monitoring. Standard therapies often 
provide only insufficient treatment options. Hence, immunotherapies and 
complementary approaches, such as personalized neoepitope-derived multipeptide 
vaccine (PNMV), come into focus. In this context, genetic analysis of tumor 
tissue by whole exome sequencing represents an essential diagnostic step in 
order to calculate tumor mutational burden (TMB) and to reveal tumor-specific 
neoantigens. Furthermore, disease progression is essential to be monitored. 
Longitudinal screening of individually known mutations in plasma circulating 
tumor DNA (ctDNA) by the use of next-generation sequencing and digital droplet 
PCR (ddPCR) might be a promising method to fill this gap.Here, we present the 
case of a 55-year-old man who was diagnosed with high-risk metastatic UTUC in 
2015. After initial surgery and palliative chemotherapy, he developed recurrence 
of the tumor. Genetic analysis revealed a high TMB of 41.2 mutations per 
megabase suggesting a potential success of immunotherapy. Therefore, in 2016, 
off-label treatment with the checkpoint-inhibitor pembrolizumab was started 
leading to strong regression of the disease. This therapy was then discontinued 
due to side effects and treatment with a previously produced PNMV was started 
that induced strong T cell responses. During both treatments, plasma Liquid 
Biopsies (pLBs) were performed to measure the number of mutated molecules per mL 
plasma (MM/mL) of a known tumor-specific variant in the MLH1 gene by ddPCR for 
longitudinal monitoring. Under treatment, MM/mL was constantly zero. A few 
months after all therapies had been discontinued, an increase of MM/mL was 
detected that persisted in the following pLBs. When MRI scans proved tumor 
recurrence, treatment with pembrolizumab was started again leading to a rapid 
decrease of MM/mL in the pLB to again zero. Treatment response was then also 
confirmed by MRI.This case shows that use of immunotherapy and PNMV might be a 
promising treatment option for patients with high-risk metastatic UTUC. 
Furthermore, measurement of individually known tumor mutations in plasma ctDNA 
by the use of pLB could be a very sensitive biomarker to longitudinally monitor 
disease.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/jitc-2020-001406
PMCID: PMC7802705
PMID: 33431630 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: SB is cofounder and 
managing director of CeGaT GmbH. AS reports grants from Johnson & Johnson, 
grants from Amgen Inc, other from Bayer AG, other from CureVac, other from 
immatics biotechnologies GmbH, grants from immatics biotechnologies GmbH, grants 
from Novartis AG and grants from Karl Storz AG, other from Astellas, during the 
conduct of the study; personal fees from Ipsen Pharma, personal fees from 
Janssen, personal fees from Alere, outside the submitted work.