1. Brain Dev. 2021 Apr;43(4):566-570. doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2020.12.009. Epub 
2021 Jan 13.

Rapid-onset dystonia-parkinsonism with ATP1A3 mutation and left lower limb 
paroxysmal dystonia.

Nomura S(1), Kashiwagi M(2), Tanabe T(3), Oba C(2), Yanagi K(4), Kaname T(4), 
Okamoto N(5), Ashida A(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hirakata Municipal Hospital, Hirakata, Osaka, 
Japan. Electronic address: nomusyo@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Hirakata Municipal Hospital, Hirakata, Osaka, 
Japan.
(3)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Tanabe Children's Clinic, Hirakata, Osaka, 
Japan.
(4)Department of Genome Medicine, National Center for Child Health and 
Development, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Medical Genetics, Osaka Women's and Children's Hospital, Osaka, 
Japan.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Osaka Medical College, Takatsuki, Osaka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Rapid-onset dystonia-parkinsonism (RDP) is a disease characterized 
by an abrupt onset of dystonia accompanied by signs of parkinsonism and 
prominent bulbar symptoms.
CASE REPORT: We describe a case of a female patient, born after normal delivery, 
but diagnosed with mild intellectual disability at age 7. She presented with an 
abrupt onset of upper limb dystonia and bradykinesia without tremor in 
parkinsonism, as well as dysarthria and dysphagia caused by prominent bulbar 
symptoms, at age 9. She had normal findings on brain magnetic resonance imaging, 
electroencephalography, and blood examination but was diagnosed with a 
psychogenic disorder. At age 10, she developed left lower limb paroxysmal 
stiffness with pain, and at 14, she was hospitalized due to lasting paroxysmal 
symptoms. Whole-exome sequencing was performed for this index case and her 
parents, and a de novo missense variant c.829G > A, p.Glu277Lys in ATP1A3 was 
identified.
DISCUSSION: This RDP case highlights a rare clinical feature of paroxysmal 
dystonia that affects the lower left limb and develops after the abrupt onset of 
permanent dystonia. Currently, there are only three reported RDP cases 
associated with the same missense mutation, and we summarized the clinical 
features of all cases including ours, such as onset of age, time for stable, RDP 
score, relapse and exacerbation. Various symptoms owing to ATP1A3 mutation could 
develop as ATP1A3-related neurological disorders beyond classical phenotypes 
such as alternating hemiplegia of childhood (AHC) or RDP. Although RDP is 
extremely rare during childhood, it is important to understand its clinical 
characteristics in children.

Copyright © 2020 The Japanese Society of Child Neurology. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.braindev.2020.12.009
PMID: 33451880 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.