1. Anim Microbiome. 2021 Jan 7;3(1):8. doi: 10.1186/s42523-020-00071-3.

Differential response of digesta- and mucosa-associated intestinal microbiota to 
dietary insect meal during the seawater phase of Atlantic salmon.

Li Y(#)(1), Bruni L(#)(2), Jaramillo-Torres A(3), Gajardo K(3), Kortner TM(3), 
Krogdahl Å(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paraclinical Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, 
Norwegian University of Life Sciences, Oslo, Norway. yanxian.li@nmbu.no.
(2)Department of Agriculture, Food, Environment and Forestry, University of 
Florence, Florence, Italy.
(3)Department of Paraclinical Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, 
Norwegian University of Life Sciences, Oslo, Norway.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Intestinal digesta is commonly used for studying responses of 
microbiota to dietary shifts, yet evidence is accumulating that it represents an 
incomplete view of the intestinal microbiota. The present work aims to 
investigate the differences between digesta- and mucosa-associated intestinal 
microbiota in Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) and how they may respond differently 
to dietary perturbations. In a 16-week seawater feeding trial, Atlantic salmon 
were fed either a commercially-relevant reference diet or an insect meal diet 
containing ~ 15% black soldier fly (Hermetia illucens) larvae meal. The digesta- 
and mucosa-associated distal intestinal microbiota were profiled by 16S rRNA 
gene sequencing.
RESULTS: Regardless of diet, we observed substantial differences between 
digesta- and mucosa-associated intestinal microbiota. Microbial richness and 
diversity were much higher in the digesta than the mucosa. The insect meal diet 
altered the distal intestinal microbiota resulting in higher microbial richness 
and diversity. The diet effect, however, depended on the sample origin. 
Digesta-associated intestinal microbiota showed more pronounced changes than the 
mucosa-associated microbiota. Multivariate association analyses identified two 
mucosa-enriched taxa, Brevinema andersonii and Spirochaetaceae, associated with 
the expression of genes related to immune responses and barrier function in the 
distal intestine, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data show that salmon intestinal digesta and mucosa harbor 
microbial communities with clear differences. While feeding insects increased 
microbial richness and diversity in both digesta- and mucosa-associated 
intestinal microbiota, mucosa-associated intestinal microbiota seems more 
resilient to variations in the diet composition. To fully unveil the response of 
intestinal microbiota to dietary changes, concurrent profiling of digesta- and 
mucosa-associated intestinal microbiota is recommended whenever feasible. 
Specific taxa enriched in the intestinal mucosa are associated to gene 
expression related to immune responses and barrier function. Detailed studies 
are needed on the ecological and functional significance of taxa associated to 
intestinal microbiota dwelling on the mucosa.

DOI: 10.1186/s42523-020-00071-3
PMCID: PMC7934271
PMID: 33500000

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.