1. Clin Transl Sci. 2021 May;14(3):908-918. doi: 10.1111/cts.12956. Epub 2021 Jan
 27.

Evaluation of the performance of a prior tacrolimus population pharmacokinetic 
kidney transplant model among adult allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell 
transplant patients.

Zhu J(1), Campagne O(2)(3), Torrice CD(1), Flynn G(1), Miller JA(4), Patel T(1), 
Suzuki O(1), Ptachcinski JR(4)(5), Armistead PM(6)(7), Wiltshire T(1)(7), Mager 
DE(2), Weiner DL(1), Crona DJ(1)(4)(7).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pharmacotherapy and Experimental Therapeutics, University of 
North Carolina Eshelman School of Pharmacy, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, New 
York, USA.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, 
Memphis, Tennessee, USA.
(4)Department of Pharmacy, University of North Carolina Hospitals and Clinics, 
Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.
(5)Division of Practice Advancement and Clinical Education, University of North 
Carolina Eshelman School of Pharmacy, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.
(6)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, University of North Carolina 
School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.
(7)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel 
Hill, North Carolina, USA.

Tacrolimus is a calcineurin inhibitor used to prevent acute graft versus host 
disease in adult patients receiving allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation (HCT). Previous population pharmacokinetic (PK) models have been 
developed in solid organ transplant, yet none exists for patients receiving HCT. 
The primary objectives of this study were to (1) use a previously published 
population PK model in adult patients who underwent kidney transplant and apply 
it to allogeneic HCT; (2) evaluate model-predicted tacrolimus steady-state 
trough concentrations and simulations in patients receiving HCT; and (3) 
evaluate covariates that affect tacrolimus PK in allogeneic HCT. A total of 252 
adult patients receiving allogeneic HCT were included in the study. They 
received oral tacrolimus twice daily (0.03 mg/kg) starting 3 days prior to 
transplant. Data for these analyses included baseline clinical and demographic 
data, genotype data for single nucleotide polymorphisms in CYP3A4/5 and ABCB1, 
and the first tacrolimus steady-state trough concentration. A dosing simulation 
strategy based on observed trough concentrations (rather than model-based 
predictions) resulted in 12% more patients successfully achieving tacrolimus 
trough concentrations within the institutional target range (5-10 ng/ml). 
Stepwise covariate analyses identified HLA match and conditioning regimen 
(myeloablative vs. reduced intensity) as significant covariates. Ultimately, a 
previously published tacrolimus population PK model in kidney transplant 
provided a platform to help establish a model-based dose adjustment strategy in 
patients receiving allogenic HCT, and identified HCT-specific covariates to be 
considered for future prospective studies. Study Highlights WHAT IS THE CURRENT 
KNOWLEDGE ON THE TOPIC? Tacrolimus is a cornerstone immunosuppressant used in 
patients who undergo organ transplantations. However, because of its narrow 
therapeutic index and wide interpatient pharmacokinetic (PK) variability, 
optimizing its dose is crucial to maximize efficacy and minimize 
tacrolimus-induced toxicities. Prior to this study, no tacrolimus population PK 
models have been developed for adult patients receiving allogeneic hematopoietic 
stem cell transplantation (HCT). Therefore, research effort was warranted to 
develop a population PK model that begins to propose more precision tacrolimus 
dosing and begins to address both a clinical and scientific gap in this patient 
population. WHAT QUESTION DID THIS STUDY ADDRESS? The study addressed whether 
there is value in utilizing the observed tacrolimus steady-state trough 
concentrations from patients receiving allogeneic HCT within the context of a 
pre-existing population PK model developed for kidney transplant. The study also 
addressed whether there are clinically relevant covariates specific to adult 
patients receiving allogeneic HCT. WHAT DOES THIS STUDY ADD TO OUR KNOWLEDGE? 
Inclusion of a single steady-state tacrolimus trough concentration is beneficial 
to model predictions. The dosing simulation strategy based on observed 
tacrolimus concentration, rather than the model-predicted concentration, 
resulted in more patients achieving the target range at first steady-state 
collection. Future studies should evaluate HLA matching and myeloablative 
conditioning versus reduced intensity conditioning regimens as covariates. These 
data and model-informed dose adjustments should be included in future 
prospective studies. This research could also serve as a template as to how to 
assess the utility of prior information for other disease settings. HOW MIGHT 
THIS CHANGE CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY OR TRANSLATIONAL SCIENCE? The M2 model fitting 
method and D2 dosing simulation method can be applied to other clinical 
pharmacology studies where only a single steady-state trough concentration is 
available per patient in the presence of a previously published population PK 
model.

© 2021 The Authors. Clinical and Translational Science published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC on behalf of the American Society for Clinical Pharmacology and 
Therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1111/cts.12956
PMCID: PMC8212733
PMID: 33502111 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declared no competing interests for 
this work.