1. Front Physiol. 2021 Jan 13;11:607860. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2020.607860. 
eCollection 2020.

Adult and Developing Zebrafish as Suitable Models for Cardiac Electrophysiology 
and Pathology in Research and Industry.

Echeazarra L(1), Hortigón-Vinagre MP(2), Casis O(1), Gallego M(1).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Fisiología, Facultad de Farmacia, Universidad del País Vasco 
UPV/EHU, Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain.
(2)Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular y Genética>, Facultad de 
Ciencias, Universidad de Extremadura, Badajoz, Spain.

The electrophysiological behavior of the zebrafish heart is very similar to that 
of the human heart. In fact, most of the genes that codify the channels and 
regulatory proteins required for human cardiac function have their orthologs in 
the zebrafish. The high fecundity, small size, and easy handling make the 
zebrafish embryos/larvae an interesting candidate to perform whole animal 
experiments within a plate, offering a reliable and low-cost alternative to 
replace rodents and larger mammals for the study of cardiac physiology and 
pathology. The employment of zebrafish embryos/larvae has widened from basic 
science to industry, being of particular interest for pharmacology studies, 
since the zebrafish embryo/larva is able to recapitulate a complete and 
integrated view of cardiac physiology, missed in cell culture. As in the human 
heart, I Kr is the dominant repolarizing current and it is functional as early 
as 48 h post fertilization. Finally, genome editing techniques such as 
CRISPR/Cas9 facilitate the humanization of zebrafish embryos/larvae. These 
techniques allow one to replace zebrafish genes by their human orthologs, making 
humanized zebrafish embryos/larvae the most promising in vitro model, since it 
allows the recreation of human-organ-like environment, which is especially 
necessary in cardiac studies due to the implication of dynamic factors, 
electrical communication, and the paracrine signals in cardiac function.

Copyright © 2021 Echeazarra, Hortigón-Vinagre, Casis and Gallego.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2020.607860
PMCID: PMC7838705
PMID: 33519514

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.