1. Front Oncol. 2021 Jan 18;10:567529. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2020.567529. eCollection
 2020.

Feasibility and Safety of Perioperative Chemotherapy With Fluorouracil Plus 
Leucovorin, Oxaliplatin, and Docetaxel for Locally Advanced Gastric Cancer 
Patients in China.

Sah BK(1), Xu W(1), Zhang B(2), Zhang H(3), Yuan F(2), Li J(4), Liu W(1), Yan 
C(1), Li C(1), Yan M(1), Zhu Z(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Surgery, Gastrointestinal Surgery Unit, Ruijin Hospital 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Pathology, Ruijin Hospital Shanghai Jiao Tong University School 
of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(3)Department of Radiology, Ruijin Hospital Shanghai Jiao Tong University School 
of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(4)Clinical Research Center, Ruijin Hospital Shanghai Jiao Tong University 
School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(5)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Gastric Neoplasms, Shanghai Institute of Digestive 
Surgery, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: Neoadjuvant fluorouracil plus leucovorin, oxaliplatin, and docetaxel 
(FLOT) has shown significant benefits for gastric cancer patients. However, it 
has not been well accepted in Asian countries. We conducted a prospective study 
on the safety and feasibility of the FLOT regimen in Chinese patients.
METHODS: Patients with adenocarcinoma of the stomach or esophagogastric junction 
received four cycles of neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC) and four cycles of 
adjuvant chemotherapy (AC) with the FLOT regimen. The completion status of 
chemotherapy, adverse events, postoperative morbidities, and pathological tumor 
regression were analyzed. The 2-year overall survival (OS) and relapse-free 
survival are presented.
RESULTS: Altogether, 10 patients were enrolled, and all patients completed four 
cycles of neoadjuvant chemotherapy. There were no severe hematological adverse 
events (grade 3 or above), except for a case of grade 3 anemia. All 10 patients 
underwent radical gastrectomy. Nine patients had R0 resection, and three 
patients had complete or subtotal pathological tumor regression. Nine patients 
completed four cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy, but only one patient completed 
the full dose of adjuvant chemotherapy. The dose of adjuvant chemotherapy was 
reduced by 25% or less in the other patients. The median follow-up time was 
23.13 months, eight patients achieved the overall survival endpoint, and seven 
patients had relapse-free survival for this period. Two patients died of disease 
progression.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study demonstrates that the neoadjuvant FLOT regimen is safe 
and effective for Chinese patients. Dose adjustment is necessary for adjuvant 
chemotherapy. The pathological regression and survival rates need reevaluation 
in a larger cohort. The trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov (number 
NCT03646591).

Copyright © 2021 Sah, Xu, Zhang, Zhang, Yuan, Li, Liu, Yan, Li, Yan and Zhu.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2020.567529
PMCID: PMC7848150
PMID: 33537232

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.