1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2021 Aug;148(2):486-494. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaci.2021.01.023. Epub 2021 Feb 6.

A unique esophageal extracellular matrix proteome alters normal fibroblast 
function in severe eosinophilic esophagitis.

Hsieh LY(1), Chiang AWT(2), Duong LD(1), Kuo CC(3), Dong SX(1), Dohil R(4), 
Kurten R(5), Lewis NE(2), Aceves SS(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
Calif; Division of Allergy Immunology, University of California, San Diego, La 
Jolla, Calif.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
Calif; Department of Bioengineering, University of California, San Diego, La 
Jolla, Calif.
(3)Department of Bioengineering, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
Calif.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
Calif; Division of Gastroenterology, University of California, San Diego, La 
Jolla, Calif; Rady Children's Hospital San Diego, Calif, San Diego, Calif.
(5)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Arkansas for Medical 
Sciences, Arkansas Children's Hospital Research Institute, Little Rock, Ark.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
Calif; Division of Allergy Immunology, University of California, San Diego, La 
Jolla, Calif; Rady Children's Hospital San Diego, Calif, San Diego, Calif; 
Department of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, Calif. 
Electronic address: saceves@health.ucsd.edu.

BACKGROUND: Eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE) is a chronic TH2 disorder complicated 
by tissue fibrosis and loss of esophageal luminal patency. The fibrostenotic 
esophagus does not respond well to therapy, but profibrotic therapeutic targets 
are largely unclear.
OBJECTIVE: Our aim was to utilize proteomics and primary cells as a novel 
approach to determine relevant profibrotic factors.
METHODS: We utilized primary esophageal EoE and normal fibroblasts, their 
derivative extracellular matrixes (ECMs), an approach of fibroblast culture on 
autologous versus nonautologous ECM, and proteomics to elucidate EoE ECM 
proteins that dysregulate cellular function.
RESULTS: We cultured esophageal fibroblasts from normal esophagi and esophagi 
from patients with severe EoE on autologous versus nonautologous ECM. The EoE 
ECM proteome shifted normal esophageal fibroblast protein expression. Proteomic 
analysis demonstrated that thrombospondin-1 is detected only in the EoE ECM, is 
central in the EoE ECM protein-protein interactome, is found at significantly 
elevated levels in biopsy specimens from patients with active EoE, and induces 
fibroblast collagen I production.
CONCLUSION: Fibroblasts from patients with EoE secrete a unique ECM proteome 
that reflects their in vivo state and induces collagen I and α-smooth muscle 
actin protein expression from normal fibroblasts. Thrombospondin-1 
is a previously unappreciated profibrotic molecule in EoE.

Copyright © 2021 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2021.01.023
PMCID: PMC8342625
PMID: 33556465 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: SSA and RD are 
co-inventors of oral viscous budesonide patented by the University of 
California, San Diego and licensed by Takeda. S.S.A. has consulting agreements 
with AstraZeneca, Astellas, AImmune, and Gossamer Bio. The other authors declare 
no relevant conflicts of interest.