1. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2021;20:100022. doi: 10.1074/mcp.R120.002309. Epub 2021
Feb  8.

The Peptide Vaccine of the Future.

Nelde A(1), Rammensee HG(2), Walz JS(3).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Collaboration Unit Translational Immunology, German Cancer 
Consortium (DKTK), University Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany; Department 
of Immunology, Institute for Cell Biology, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, 
Germany; Cluster of Excellence iFIT (EXC2180) "Image-Guided and Functionally 
Instructed Tumor Therapies", University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(2)Department of Immunology, Institute for Cell Biology, University of Tübingen, 
Tübingen, Germany; Cluster of Excellence iFIT (EXC2180) "Image-Guided and 
Functionally Instructed Tumor Therapies", University of Tübingen, Tübingen, 
Germany; German Cancer Consortium (DKTK) and German Cancer Research Center 
(DKFZ), Partner Site Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(3)Clinical Collaboration Unit Translational Immunology, German Cancer 
Consortium (DKTK), University Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany; Cluster of 
Excellence iFIT (EXC2180) "Image-Guided and Functionally Instructed Tumor 
Therapies", University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. Electronic address: 
juliane.walz@med.uni-tuebingen.de.

The approach of peptide-based anticancer vaccination has proven the ability to 
induce cancer-specific immune responses in multiple studies for various cancer 
entities. However, clinical responses remain so far limited to single patients 
and broad clinical applicability was not achieved. Therefore, further efforts 
are required to improve peptide vaccination in order to integrate this 
low-side-effect therapy into the clinical routine of cancer therapy. To design 
clinically effective peptide vaccines in the future, different issues have to be 
addressed and optimized comprising antigen target selection as well as choice of 
optimal adjuvants and vaccination schedules. Furthermore, the combination of 
peptide-based vaccines with other immuno- and molecular targeted therapies as 
well as the development of predictive biomarkers could further improve efficacy. 
In this review, current approaches in the development of peptide-based vaccines 
and critical implications for optimal vaccine design are discussed.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1074/mcp.R120.002309
PMCID: PMC7950068
PMID: 33583769 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest A. N. and J. S. W. hold 
patents on peptides. H.-G. R. holds patents on peptides and adjuvants.