1. PLoS One. 2021 Mar 5;16(3):e0247756. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0247756. 
eCollection 2021.

How varying parameters impact insecticide resistance bioassay: An example on the 
worldwide invasive pest Drosophila suzukii.

Blouquy L(1)(2), Mottet C(1), Olivares J(2), Plantamp C(1), Siegwart M(2), 
Barrès B(1).

Author information:
(1)Université de Lyon, Anses, INRAE, USC CASPER, Lyon, France.
(2)PSH - Unité de recherche Plantes et Systèmes de Culture Horticoles, INRAE, 
Avignon, France.

Monitoring pesticide resistance is essential for effective and sustainable 
agricultural practices. Bioassays are the basis for pesticide-resistance 
testing, but devising a reliable and reproducible method can be challenging 
because these tests are carried out on living organisms. Here, we investigated 
five critical parameters and how they affected the evaluation of resistance to 
the organophosphate phosmet or the pyrethroid lambda-cyhalothrin using a 
tarsal-contact protocol on Drosophila suzukii, a worldwide invasive pest. Three 
of the parameters were related to insect biology: (i) sex, (ii) age of the imago 
(adult stage) and (iii) genetic diversity of the tested population. The two 
remaining parameters were linked to the experimental setup: (iv) the number of 
individuals tested per dose and (v) the duration of exposure to the active 
ingredient. Results showed that response to insecticide differed depending on 
sex, males being twice as susceptible to phosmet as females. Age principally 
affected young females' susceptibility to phosmet, because 0-24 hour-old flies 
were twice as susceptible as 24-48 hour-old and 72-96 hour-old females. Genetic 
diversity had no observable effect on resistance levels. The precision and 
accuracy of the median lethal dose (LD50) were greatly affected by the number of 
individuals tested per dose with a threshold effect. Finally, optimal duration 
of exposure to the active ingredient was 24 h, as we found an underestimation of 
mortality when assessed between 1 and 5 h after exposure to lambda-cyhalothrin. 
None of the main known point mutations on the para sodium channel gene 
associated with a knockdown effect were observed. Our study demonstrates the 
importance of calibrating the various parameters of a bioassay to develop a 
reliable method. It also provides a valuable and transferable protocol for 
monitoring D. suzukii resistance worldwide.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0247756
PMCID: PMC7935283
PMID: 33667239 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.