1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2021 Aug;148(2):599-611. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaci.2020.12.656. Epub 2021 Mar 1.

Loss of DIAPH1 causes SCBMS, combined immunodeficiency, and mitochondrial 
dysfunction.

Kaustio M(1), Nayebzadeh N(2), Hinttala R(2), Tapiainen T(3), Åström P(4), Mamia 
K(5), Pernaa N(4), Lehtonen J(6), Glumoff V(4), Rahikkala E(7), Honkila M(8), 
Olsén P(8), Hassinen A(1), Polso M(1), Al Sukaiti N(9), Al Shekaili J(10), Al 
Kindi M(10), Al Hashmi N(11), Almusa H(1), Bulanova D(12), Haapaniemi E(13), 
Chen P(1), Suo-Palosaari M(14), Vieira P(8), Tuominen H(15), Kokkonen H(16), Al 
Macki N(17), Al Habsi H(18), Löppönen T(19), Rantala H(20), Pietiäinen V(1), 
Zhang SY(21), Renko M(22), Hautala T(23), Al Farsi T(9), Uusimaa J(8), Saarela 
J(24).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM), HiLIFE, University of 
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(2)PEDEGO Research Unit, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland; Medical Research 
Center Oulu, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland; Biocenter Oulu, Oulu, Finland.
(3)PEDEGO Research Unit, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland; Medical Research 
Center Oulu, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland; Biocenter Oulu, Oulu, Finland; 
Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Oulu University Hospital, 
Oulu, Finland.
(4)Research Unit of Biomedicine, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland.
(5)Centre for Molecular Medicine Norway (NCMM), University of Oslo, Oslo, 
Norway.
(6)Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM), HiLIFE, University of 
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland; Centre for Molecular Medicine Norway (NCMM), 
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway; Folkhälsan Research Center, Helsinki, Finland.
(7)PEDEGO Research Unit, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland; Medical Research 
Center Oulu, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland; Department of Clinical Genetics, 
Oulu University Hospital, Oulu, Finland.
(8)PEDEGO Research Unit, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland; Medical Research 
Center Oulu, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland; Department of Pediatrics and 
Adolescent Medicine, Oulu University Hospital, Oulu, Finland.
(9)Department of Pediatric Allergy and Clinical Immunology, The Royal Hospital, 
Muscat, Oman.
(10)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Sultan Qaboos University 
Hospital, Muscat, Oman.
(11)Department of Clinical and Biochemical Genetics, The Royal Hospital, Muscat, 
Oman.
(12)Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM), HiLIFE, University of 
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland; Biotech Research and Innovation Centre (BRIC), 
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(13)Centre for Molecular Medicine Norway (NCMM), University of Oslo, Oslo, 
Norway; Department of Pediatric Research, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, 
Norway; Research Programs Unit, Molecular Neurology and Biomedicum Stem Cell 
Centre, Faculty of Medicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(14)Medical Research Center Oulu, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland; Department 
of Diagnostic Radiology, Oulu University Hospital and University of Oulu, Oulu, 
Finland; Research Unit of Medical Imaging, Physics and Technology, Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland.
(15)Department of Pathology, Oulu University Hospital, Oulu, Finland.
(16)Medical Research Center Oulu, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland; Department 
of Clinical Genetics, Northern Finland Laboratory Centre, Oulu University 
Hospital, Oulu, Finland.
(17)Department of Pediatric Neurology, The Royal Hospital, Muscat, Oman.
(18)Department of General Pediatrics, The Royal Hospital, Muscat, Oman.
(19)Department of Pediatrics, University of Eastern Finland and Kuopio 
University Hospital, Kuopio, Finland.
(20)PEDEGO Research Unit, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland.
(21)St. Giles Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Rockefeller 
Branch, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY; Paris Descartes University, 
Imagine Institute, Paris, France; Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious 
Diseases, Necker Branch, INSERM UMR 1163, Necker Hospital for Sick Children, 
Paris, France.
(22)PEDEGO Research Unit, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland; Department of 
Pediatrics, University of Eastern Finland and Kuopio University Hospital, 
Kuopio, Finland.
(23)Research Unit of Biomedicine, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland; Department 
of Internal Medicine, Oulu University Hospital, Oulu, Finland.
(24)Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM), HiLIFE, University of 
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland; Centre for Molecular Medicine Norway (NCMM), 
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway; Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo 
University Hospital, Oslo, Norway; Department of Clinical Genetics, Helsinki 
University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland. Electronic address: 
janna.saarela@helsinki.fi.

Erratum in
    J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2021 Dec;148(6):1603. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaci.2021.09.002.

BACKGROUND: Homozygous loss of DIAPH1 results in seizures, cortical blindness, 
and microcephaly syndrome (SCBMS). We studied 5 Finnish and 2 Omani patients 
with loss of DIAPH1 presenting with SCBMS, mitochondrial dysfunction, and 
immunodeficiency.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to further characterize phenotypes and disease mechanisms 
associated with loss of DIAPH1.
METHODS: Exome sequencing, genotyping and haplotype analysis, B- and T-cell 
phenotyping, in vitro lymphocyte stimulation assays, analyses of mitochondrial 
function, immunofluorescence staining for cytoskeletal proteins and 
mitochondria, and CRISPR-Cas9 DIAPH1 knockout in heathy donor PBMCs were used.
RESULTS: Genetic analyses found all Finnish patients homozygous for a rare 
DIAPH1 splice-variant (NM_005219:c.684+1G>A) enriched in the Finnish population, 
and Omani patients homozygous for a previously described pathogenic DIAPH1 
frameshift-variant (NM_005219:c.2769delT;p.F923fs). In addition to microcephaly, 
epilepsy, and cortical blindness characteristic to SCBMS, the patients presented 
with infection susceptibility due to defective lymphocyte maturation and 3 
patients developed B-cell lymphoma. Patients' immunophenotype was characterized 
by poor lymphocyte activation and proliferation, defective B-cell maturation, 
and lack of naive T cells. CRISPR-Cas9 knockout of DIAPH1 in PBMCs from healthy 
donors replicated the T-cell activation defect. Patient-derived peripheral blood 
T cells exhibited impaired adhesion and inefficient microtubule-organizing 
center repositioning to the immunologic synapse. The clinical symptoms and 
laboratory tests also suggested mitochondrial dysfunction. Experiments with 
immortalized, patient-derived fibroblasts indicated that DIAPH1 affects the 
amount of complex IV of the mitochondrial respiratory chain.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data demonstrate that individuals with SCBMS can have combined 
immune deficiency and implicate defective cytoskeletal organization and 
mitochondrial dysfunction in SCBMS pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2020.12.656
PMID: 33662367 [Indexed for MEDLINE]