1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2021 Mar 10;15(3):e0009172. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pntd.0009172. eCollection 2021 Mar.

Insights into the molecular basis of tick-borne encephalitis from multiplatform 
metabolomics.

Du Y(1), Mi Z(2), Xie Y(3), Lu D(1), Zheng H(1), Sun H(1), Zhang M(2), Niu Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Inner Mongolia Forestry General Hospital 
(The second Clinical Medical School of Inner Mongolia, University for the 
Nationalities), Hulunbuir, Inner Mongolia, China.
(2)Inner Mongolia Di An Feng Xin Medical Technology Co., LTD, Huhhot, Inner 
Mongolia, China.
(3)SCIEX China Technology Co., Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Tick-borne encephalitis virus (TBEV) is the most prevalent 
arbovirus, with a tentative estimate of 10,000 to 10,500 infections occurring in 
Europe and Asia every year. Endemic in Northeast China, tick-borne encephalitis 
(TBE) is emerging as a major threat to public health, local economies and 
tourism. The complicated array of host physiological changes has hampered 
elucidation of the molecular mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis of this 
disease.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPLE FINDINGS: System-level characterization of the serum 
metabolome and lipidome of adult TBEV patients and a healthy control group was 
performed using liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry. By tracking 
metabolic and lipid changes during disease progression, crucial physiological 
changes that coincided with disease stages could be identified. Twenty-eight 
metabolites were significantly altered in the sera of TBE patients in our 
metabolomic analysis, and 14 lipids were significantly altered in our lipidomics 
study. Among these metabolites, alpha-linolenic acid, azelaic acid, D-glutamine, 
glucose-1-phosphate, L-glutamic acid, and mannose-6-phosphate were altered 
compared to the control group, and PC(38:7), PC(28:3;1), TAG(52:6), etc. were 
altered based on lipidomics. Major perturbed metabolic pathways included amino 
acid metabolism, lipid and oxidative stress metabolism (lipoprotein 
biosynthesis, arachidonic acid biosynthesis, leukotriene biosynthesis and 
sphingolipid metabolism), phospholipid metabolism and triglyceride metabolism. 
These metabolites were significantly perturbed during disease progression, 
implying their latent utility as prognostic markers.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: TBEV infection causes distinct temporal changes in the 
serum metabolome and lipidome, and many metabolites are potentially involved in 
the acute inflammatory response and immune regulation. Our global analysis 
revealed anti- and pro-inflammatory processes in the host and changes to the 
entire metabolic profile. Relationships between metabolites and pathologies were 
established. This study provides important insight into the pathology of TBE, 
including its pathology, and lays the foundation for further research into 
putative markers of TBE disease.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0009172
PMCID: PMC7984639
PMID: 33690602 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.