1. Front Immunol. 2021 Feb 23;12:595722. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.595722. 
eCollection 2021.

Dynamic Immune/Inflammation Precision Medicine: The Good and the Bad 
Inflammation in Infection and Cancer.

Rossi JF(1)(2), Lu ZY(3), Massart C(4), Levon K(5).

Author information:
(1)Hématologie-Immunothérapie, Institut du Cancer Avignon-Provence, Sainte 
Catherine, Avignon, France.
(2)Faculté de médecine Montpellier, Université de Montpellier, Montpellier, 
France.
(3)Unité de Thérapie Cellulaire, CHU Montpellier Saint-Eloi, Montpellier, 
France.
(4)E-SANA, Orsay, France.
(5)New York University (NYU) Tandon School of Engineering, Six Metrotech Center, 
Brooklyn, NY, United States.

Normal or "good" inflammation process starts from a local cellular response 
against injury or any infectious agent, with the activation of neutrophils, 
macrophages, Langerhans cells, dendritic cells, and innate immune cells. 
Cytokines and chemokines are produced to amplify the local inflammatory process 
followed by the migration of immune cells to the regional lymph nodes where 
adaptive immune response is initiated. Systemic inflammation enhances the 
biological response to mobilize additional cells from central and peripheral 
immune/hematopoietic system. Local mechanisms to limit inflammation are 
initiated and lead to healing. During the normal inflammatory process, there is 
a balance between the production of inflammatory chemokines/cytokines such as 
Tumor Necrosis Factor (TNF)-α, interleukin (IL)-6 and IL-1 and the production of 
compounds that limit inflammation and have an immune suppressive effect, such as 
IL-10 and Transforming Factor (TGF) β. IL-6 and IL-6/soluble IL-6 Receptor (R) 
complex stimulate liver cells to produce inflammatory proteins, which represents 
the systemic inflammation response. The magnitude and the duration of the 
systemic inflammatory response are linked to the cause, under genetic and 
epigenetic control. Significant inflammation as seen in septic shock, in severe 
forms of infections or in certain active cancers, represents the "bad 
inflammation", correlated with a poor prognosis. In addition, the persistence of 
a chronic smoldering inflammation may lead to pathological situations which are 
observed in the majority of inflammatory, degenerative, dysmetabolic, or 
dysimmune diseases and cancer. Chronic smoldering inflammation is a cross 
between different pathological situations possibly linked. In addition, within 
the tumor microenvironment, inflammatory process results from different cellular 
mechanisms modulated by metabolic and vascular changes. On the contrary, a 
limited and balanced inflammation initiates the normal immune response, 
including the adaptive response which amplifies any immunotherapy, including 
vaccines. Immune checkpoint inhibitors and chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) 
T-cells are associated with cytokine release syndrome, a clinical risk leading 
to the use of anti-cytokine drugs. Nowadays, it is time to monitor the dynamic 
inflammatory process for a better immune precision medicine in both infections 
and cancer.

Copyright © 2021 Rossi, Lu, Massart and Levon.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.595722
PMCID: PMC7940508
PMID: 33708198 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: J-FR, KL, and CM are co-founders of E-Sana. J-FR 
is consultant for Leo Pharma, NPO Petrovax and Eusapharma. The remaining author 
declares that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or 
financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of 
interest.