1. Front Cell Neurosci. 2021 Feb 25;15:638686. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2021.638686. 
eCollection 2021.

Inflammation Spreading: Negative Spiral Linking Systemic Inflammatory Disorders 
and Alzheimer's Disease.

Ni J(1), Wu Z(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine and Biotherapy, Department of Biology, 
School of Life Science, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Aging Science and Pharmacology, Faculty of Dental Science, 
Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(3)OBT Research Center, Faculty of Dental Science, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, 
Japan.

As a physiological response to injury in the internal body organs, inflammation 
is responsible for removing dangerous stimuli and initiating healing. However, 
persistent and exaggerative chronic inflammation causes undesirable negative 
effects in the organs. Inflammation occurring in the brain and spinal cord is 
known as neuroinflammation, with microglia acting as the central cellular 
player. There is increasing evidence suggesting that chronic neuroinflammation 
is the most relevant pathological feature of Alzheimer's disease (AD), 
regulating other pathological features, such as the accumulation of amyloid-β 
(Aβ) and hyperphosphorylation of Tau. Systemic inflammatory signals caused by 
systemic disorders are known to strongly influence neuroinflammation as a 
consequence of microglial activation, inflammatory mediator production, and the 
recruitment of peripheral immune cells to the brain, resulting in neuronal 
dysfunction. However, the neuroinflammation-accelerated neuronal dysfunction in 
AD also influences the functions of peripheral organs. In the present review, we 
highlight the link between systemic inflammatory disorders and AD, with 
inflammation serving as the common explosion. We discuss the molecular 
mechanisms that govern the crosstalk between systemic inflammation and 
neuroinflammation. In our view, inflammation spreading indicates a negative 
spiral between systemic diseases and AD. Therefore, "dampening inflammation" 
through the inhibition of cathepsin (Cat)B or CatS may be a novel therapeutic 
approach for delaying the onset of and enacting early intervention for AD.

Copyright © 2021 Ni and Wu.

DOI: 10.3389/fncel.2021.638686
PMCID: PMC7947253
PMID: 33716675

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.