1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Mar 15;22(6):2983. doi: 10.3390/ijms22062983.

Response Criteria in Advanced Systemic Mastocytosis: Evolution in the Era of KIT 
Inhibitors.

Shomali W(1), Gotlib J(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology, School of Medicine, Stanford Cancer 
Institute/Stanford University, 875 Blake Wilbur Drive, Stanford, CA 94305-6555, 
USA.

Systemic mastocytosis (SM) is a rare clonal hematologic neoplasm, driven, in 
almost all cases, by the activating KIT D816V mutation that leads to the growth 
and accumulation of neoplastic mast cells. While patients with advanced forms of 
SM have a poor prognosis, the introduction of KIT inhibitors (e.g., midostaurin, 
and avapritinib) has changed their outlook. Because of the heterogenous nature 
of advanced SM (advSM), successive iterations of response criteria have tried to 
capture different dimensions of the disease, including measures of mast cell 
burden (percentage of bone marrow mast cells and serum tryptase level), and mast 
cell-related organ damage (referred to as C findings). Historically, response 
criteria have been anchored to reversion of one or more organ damage finding(s) 
as a minimal criterion for response. This is a central principle of the Valent 
criteria, Mayo criteria, and International Working Group-Myeloproliferative 
Neoplasms Research and Treatment and European Competence Network on Mastocytosis 
(IWG-MRT-ECNM) consensus criteria. Irrespective of the response criteria, an 
ever-present challenge is how to apply response criteria in patients with SM and 
an associated hematologic neoplasm, where the presence of both diseases 
complicates assignment of organ damage and adjudication of response. In the 
context of trials with the selective KIT D816V inhibitor avapritinib, pure 
pathologic response (PPR) criteria, which rely solely on measures of mast cell 
burden and exclude consideration of organ damage findings, are being explored as 
more robust surrogate of overall survival. In addition, the finding that 
avapritinib can elicit complete molecular responses of KIT D816V allele burden, 
establishes a new benchmark for advSM and motivates the inclusion of definitions 
for molecular response in future criteria. Herein, we also outline how the 
concept of PPR can inform a proposal for new response criteria which use a 
tiered evaluation of pathologic, molecular, and clinical responses.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms22062983
PMCID: PMC8001403
PMID: 33804174 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: J.G. has served as a Chair of the Study Steering 
Committee (SSC) for the global trial of midostaurin in advSM (Novartis), for the 
phase II study of avapritinib in advSM (Blueprint Medicines), and SSC Co-Chair 
for the phase II trial of ripretinib in advSM (Deciphera Pharmaceuticals). He 
has received funding for the conduct of these trials and has received honoraria 
and reimbursement of travel expenses from Novartis, Blueprint Medicines, and 
Deciphera Pharmaceuticals.