1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2021 Sep;148(3):876-888. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaci.2021.03.025. Epub 2021 Apr 2.

Cytokine-specific autoantibodies shape the gut microbiome in autoimmune 
polyendocrine syndrome type 1.

Petersen AØ(1), Jokinen M(2), Plichta DR(3), Liebisch G(4), Gronwald W(5), 
Dettmer K(5), Oefner PJ(5), Vlamakis H(3), Chung DC(6), Ranki A(7), Xavier 
RJ(8).

Author information:
(1)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Mass; Center for Microbiome 
Informatics and Therapeutics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 
Mass; Department of Health Technology, Technical University of Denmark, Kongens 
Lyngby, Denmark.
(2)Department of Dermatology and Allergology, University of Helsinki and 
Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.
(3)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Mass; Center for Microbiome 
Informatics and Therapeutics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 
Mass.
(4)Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, University Hospital 
Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany.
(5)Institute of Functional Genomics, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, 
Germany.
(6)Division of Gastroenterology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Mass.
(7)Department of Dermatology and Allergology, University of Helsinki and 
Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland. Electronic address: 
Annamari.Ranki@hus.fi.
(8)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Mass; Center for Microbiome 
Informatics and Therapeutics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 
Mass; Division of Gastroenterology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Mass; Center for Computational and Integrative Biology 
and Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Mass. Electronic address: xavier@molbio.mgh.harvard.edu.

BACKGROUND: Gastrointestinal dysfunction is a frequent and disabling 
manifestation of autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1 (APS-1), a rare 
monogenic multiorgan autoimmune disease caused by the loss of central 
AIRE-controlled immune tolerance.
OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to understand the role of the gut microbiome in 
APS-1 symptoms and potentially alleviate common gastrointestinal symptoms by 
probiotic intervention.
METHODS: This study characterized the fecal microbiomes of 28 patients with 
APS-1 and searched for associations with gastrointestinal symptoms, circulating 
anti-cytokine autoantibodies, and tryptophan-related metabolites. Additionally, 
daily doses of the probiotic Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG were administered for 3 
months.
RESULTS: Of 581 metagenomic operational taxonomic units (mOTUs) characterized in 
total, 14 were significantly associated with patients with APS-1 compared with 
healthy controls, with 6 mOTUs depleted and 8 enriched in patients with APS-1. 
Four overabundant mOTUs were significantly associated with severity of 
constipation. Phylogenetically conserved microbial associations with 
autoantibodies against cytokines were observed. After the 3-month intervention 
with the probiotic L rhamnosus GG, a subset of gastrointestinal symptoms were 
alleviated. L rhamnosus GG abundance was increased postintervention and 
corresponded with decreased abundances of Alistipes onderdonkii and Collinsella 
aerofaciens, 2 species positively associated with severity of diarrhea in 
patients with APS-1.
CONCLUSIONS: The APS-1 microbiome correlates with several APS-1 symptoms, some 
of which are alleviated after a 3-month L rhamnosus GG intervention. 
Autoantibodies against cytokines appear to shape the gut microbiome by 
positively correlating with a taxonomically consistent group of bacteria.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2021.03.025
PMCID: PMC8429070
PMID: 33819509 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.