1. J Bacteriol. 2021 May 20;203(12):e0012721. doi: 10.1128/JB.00127-21. Epub 2021
 Apr 5.

An Extracytoplasmic Function Sigma/Anti-Sigma Factor System Regulates 
Hypochlorous Acid Resistance and Impacts Expression of the Type IV Secretion 
System in Brucella melitensis.

Li H(#)(1), Hu S(#)(1), Yan X(1), Yang Y(1), Liu W(1), Bu Z(1)(2), Li G(1), Cai 
W(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Veterinary Public Health of Ministry of Agriculture, State 
Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research 
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Harbin, China.
(2)Jiangsu Co-innovation Center for Prevention and Control of Important Animal 
Infectious Disease and Zoonoses, Yangzhou, China.
(#)Contributed equally

The intracellular bacterial pathogen Brucella causes persistent infections in 
various mammalian species. To survive and replicate within macrophages, these 
bacteria must be able to withstand oxidative stresses and express the type IV 
secretion system (T4SS) to evade host immune responses. The extracytoplasmic 
function (ECF) sigma factor system is a major signal transduction mechanism in 
bacteria that senses environmental cues and responds by regulating gene 
expression. In this study, we defined an ECF σ bcrS and its cognate anti-σ 
factor abcS in Brucella melitensis M28 by conserved domain analysis and a 
protein interaction assay. BcrS directly activates an adjacent operon, bcrXQP, 
that encodes a methionine-rich peptide and a putative methionine sulfoxide 
reductase system, whereas AbcS is a negative regulator of bcrS and bcrXQP. The 
bcrS-abcS and bcrXQP operons can be induced by hypochlorous acid and contribute 
to hypochlorous acid resistance in vitro. Next, RNA sequencing analysis and 
genome-wide recognition sequence search identified the regulons of BcrS and 
AbcS. Interestingly, we found that BcrS positively influences T4SS expression in 
an AbcS-dependent manner and that AbcS also affects T4SS expression 
independently of BcrS. Last, we demonstrate that abcS is required for the 
maintenance of persistent infection, while bcrS is dispensable in a mouse 
infection model. Collectively, we conclude that BcrS and AbcS influence 
expression of multiple genes responsible for Brucella virulence traits. 
IMPORTANCEBrucella is a notorious intracellular pathogen that induces chronic 
infections in animals and humans. To survive and replicate within macrophages, 
these bacteria require a capacity to withstand oxidative stresses and to express 
the type IV secretion system (T4SS) to combat host immune responses. In this 
study, we characterized an extracytoplasmic function sigma/anti-sigma factor 
system that regulates resistance to reactive chlorine species and T4SS 
expression, thereby establishing a potential link between two crucial virulence 
traits of Brucella. Furthermore, the anti-sigma factor AbcS contributes to 
Brucella persistent infection of mice. Thus, this work provides novel insights 
into Brucella virulence regulation as well as a potential drug target for 
fighting Brucella infections.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00127-21
PMCID: PMC8315932
PMID: 33820796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]