1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2021 Apr 21;16(1):185. doi: 10.1186/s13023-021-01813-5.

Guidelines on the diagnosis, clinical assessments, treatment and management for 
CLN2 disease patients.

Mole SE(#)(1), Schulz A(#)(2), Badoe E(3), Berkovic SF(4), de Los Reyes EC(5), 
Dulz S(2), Gissen P(6)(7), Guelbert N(8), Lourenco CM(9), Mason HL(10), Mink 
JW(11), Murphy N(12), Nickel M(2), Olaya JE(13), Scarpa M(14), Scheffer 
IE(4)(15), Simonati A(16), Specchio N(17), Von Löbbecke I(18), Wang RY(13), 
Williams RE(19).

Author information:
(1)University College London, London, UK. s.mole@ucl.ac.uk.
(2)Universitätsklinikum Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(3)Korle Bu Teaching Hospital, University of Ghana Medical School, Accra, Ghana.
(4)Austin Health Victoria, University of Melbourne, Heidelberg, VIC, Australia.
(5)Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA.
(6)University College London, London, UK.
(7)NIHR Great Ormond Street Hospital Biomedical Research Centre, London, UK.
(8)Hospital de Niños de La Santísima Trinidad, Cordoba, Argentina.
(9)Universidade de São Paulo Faculdade de Medicina de Ribeirão Preto, Riberirao 
Preto, Brazil.
(10)Coufetery Comms, Lapenne, France.
(11)Golisano Childrens' Hospital, University of Rochester Medical Center, 
Rochester, NY, USA.
(12)Batten Disease Support and Research Association (BDSRA), Columbus, OH, USA.
(13)Children's Hospital of Orange County, Orange County, CA, USA.
(14)Regional Coordinating Center for Rare Diseases, University Hospital Udine, 
Udine, Italy.
(15)Royal Children's Hospital, Florey and Murdoch Children's Research 
Institutes, Melbourne, Australia.
(16)Department of Surgery, Dentistry, Paediatrics and Gynaecology, University of 
Verona School of Medicine, Verona, Italy.
(17)Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, Rome, Italy.
(18)Practice for Child Physiotherapy, Hamburg, Germany.
(19)Evelina, London Children's Hospital, London, UK.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: CLN2 disease (Neuronal Ceroid Lipofuscinosis Type 2) is an 
ultra-rare, neurodegenerative lysosomal storage disease, caused by an enzyme 
deficiency of tripeptidyl peptidase 1 (TPP1). Lack of disease awareness and the 
non-specificity of presenting symptoms often leads to delayed diagnosis. These 
guidelines provide robust evidence-based, expert-agreed recommendations on the 
risks/benefits of disease-modifying treatments and the medical interventions 
used to manage this condition.
METHODS: An expert mapping tool process was developed ranking multidisciplinary 
professionals, with knowledge of CLN2 disease, diagnostic or management 
experience of CLN2 disease, or family support professionals. Individuals were 
sequentially approached to identify two chairs, ensuring that the process was 
transparent and unbiased. A systematic literature review of published evidence 
using Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses 
(PRISMA) guidance was independently and simultaneously conducted to develop key 
statements based upon the strength of the publications. Clinical care statements 
formed the basis of an international modified Delphi consensus determination 
process using the virtual meeting (Within3) online platform which requested 
experts to agree or disagree with any changes. Statements reaching the consensus 
mark became the guiding statements within this manuscript, which were 
subsequently assessed against the Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and 
Evaluation (AGREEII) criteria.
RESULTS: Twenty-one international experts from 7 different specialities, 
including a patient advocate, were identified. Fifty-three guideline statements 
were developed covering 13 domains: General Description and Statements, 
Diagnostics, Clinical Recommendations and Management, Assessments, Interventions 
and Treatment, Additional Care Considerations, Social Care Considerations, Pain 
Management, Epilepsy / Seizures, Nutritional Care Interventions, Respiratory 
Health, Sleep and Rest, and End of Life Care. Consensus was reached after a 
single round of voting, with one exception which was revised, and agreed by 100% 
of the SC and achieved 80% consensus in the second voting round. The overall 
AGREE II assessment score obtained for the development of the guidelines was 5.7 
(where 1 represents the lowest quality, and 7 represents the highest quality).
CONCLUSION: This program provides robust evidence- and consensus-driven 
guidelines that can be used by all healthcare professionals involved in the 
management of patients with CLN2 disease and other neurodegenerative disorders. 
This addresses the clinical need to complement other information available.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-021-01813-5
PMCID: PMC8059011
PMID: 33882967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Professor Sara Mole: Declares personal fees from 
Care Beyond Diagnosis for professional advice; Grants from BioMarin outside the 
submitted work. Dr Angela Schulz: Declares personal fees from Care Beyond 
Diagnosis for professional advice; Declares a grant and personal fees received 
from BioMarin for honoraria and advisory board attendance. Prof. E. Badoe: 
Declares personal fees from Care Beyond Diagnosis for professional advice. Dr S. 
Berkovic: Declares personal fees from Care Beyond Diagnosis for professional 
advice. Dr. Emily de Los Reyes: Declares personal fees from Care Beyond 
Diagnosis for professional advice; Declares a grant and personal fees received 
from BioMarin for consultation services. Dr. Simon Dulz: Declares personal fees 
from Care Beyond Diagnosis for professional advice. Dr P. Gissen: Declares 
personal fees from Care Beyond Diagnosis for professional advice; Declares a 
grant and personal fees received from BioMarin, during the conduct of the study. 
Dr. N. Guelbert: Declares personal fees from Care Beyond Diagnosis for 
professional advice. Dr. C. Lourenco: Declares personal fees from Care Beyond 
Diagnosis for professional advice. Dr. Heather L. Mason: Declares personal fees 
from Care Beyond Diagnosis for professional medical writing services. Ms N. 
Murphy: Declares personal fees from Care Beyond Diagnosis for professional 
advice. Dr. J. W. Mink: Declares personal fees from Care Beyond Diagnosis for 
professional advice; Reports personal fees from Neurogene, Inc., personal fees 
from Amicus, Inc., grants from Beyond Batten Disease Foundation, grants from 
Abeona Inc., personal fees from Abide Therapeutics, personal fees from Censa 
Inc., personal fees from Cipla, Inc., personal fees from TEVA Inc., outside the 
submitted work. Dr M. Nickel: Declares personal fees from Care Beyond Diagnosis 
for professional advice. Dr. J. Olaya: Declares personal fees from Care Beyond 
Diagnosis for professional advice. Dr. M Scarpa: Declares personal fees from 
Care Beyond Diagnosis for professional advice. Prof. I. Scheffer: Declares 
personal fees from Care Beyond Diagnosis for professional advice; Declares 
receipt of grants from NHMRC, grants from NIH, during the conduct of the study; 
personal fees from GlaxoSmithKline, personal fees from Eisai, personal fees from 
Nutricia, personal fees from GW Pharmaceutical, personal fees from Xeonon, 
personal fees from BioCodex, personal fees from BioMarin, personal fees from 
UCB, outside the submitted work; In addition, Dr. Scheffer has a patent for 
SCN1A testing held by Bionomics Inc and licensed to various diagnostic 
companies; was a consultant to Bionomics and Athena diagnostics previously, and 
holds a patent Molecular diagnostic/theranostic target for benign familial 
infantile epilepsy (BFIE) [PRRT2] 2011904493 & 2012900190 and 
PCT/AU2012/001321Ðu8226• TECH ID:2012-009 with royalties paid. Dr. A. Simonati: 
Declares personal fees from Care Beyond Diagnosis for professional advice; 
Declares personal fees received from BioMarin, Neurogene Inc, UCB SA, for 
honoraria and advisory board attendance. Dr. N. Specchio: Declares personal fees 
from Care Beyond Diagnosis for professional advice; Declares receipt of a grant 
from BioMarin, outside of the submitted work. Dr. I. von Löbbecke: Declares 
personal fees from Care Beyond Diagnosis for professional advice; Declares 
receipt of personal fees from and BioMarin. Dr. R. Wang: Declares personal fees 
from Care Beyond Diagnosis for professional advice; Declares receipt of a grant, 
research funding, honoraria for advisory board attendance, and equity ownership 
from BioMarin and RegenxBio Inc. Dr Ruth E. Williams: Declares personal fees 
from Care Beyond Diagnosis for professional advice.