1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2021 Apr 7;9:657456. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2021.657456. 
eCollection 2021.

Visualization and Identification of Bioorthogonally Labeled Exosome Proteins 
Following Systemic Administration in Mice.

Zhang E(1), Liu Y(1), Han C(1), Fan C(1), Wang L(1), Chen W(1), Du Y(1), Han 
D(1), Arnone B(1), Xu S(1), Wei Y(1), Mobley J(2), Qin G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 
Birmingham, AL, United States.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology and Perioperative Medicine, University of 
Alabama at Birmingham, School of Medicine, Birmingham, AL, United States.

Exosomes transport biologically active cargo (e.g., proteins and microRNA) 
between cells, including many of the paracrine factors that mediate the 
beneficial effects associated with stem-cell therapy. Stem cell derived 
exosomes, in particular mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), have been shown 
previously to largely replicate the therapeutic activity associated with the 
cells themselves, which suggests that exosomes may be a useful cell-free 
alternative for the treatment of cardiovascular disorders. However, the 
mechanisms that govern how exosomes home to damaged cells and tissues or the 
uptake and distribution of exosomal cargo are poorly characterized, because 
techniques for distinguishing between exosomal proteins and proteins in the 
targeted tissues are lacking. Here, we report the development of an in vivo 
model that enabled the visualization, tracking, and quantification of proteins 
from systemically administered MSC exosomes. The model uses bioorthogonal 
chemistry and cell-selective metabolic labeling to incorporate the non-canonical 
amino acid azidonorleucine (ANL) into the MSC proteome. ANL incorporation is 
facilitated via expression of a mutant (L274G) methionyl-tRNA-synthetase 
(MetRS∗) and subsequent incubation with ANL-supplemented media; after which ANL 
can be covalently linked to alkyne-conjugated reagents (e.g., dyes and resins) 
via click chemistry. Our results demonstrate that when the exosomes produced by 
ANL-treated, MetRS∗-expressing MSCs were systemically administered to mice, the 
ANL-labeled exosomal proteins could be accurately and reliably identified, 
isolated, and quantified from a variety of mouse organs, and that myocardial 
infarction (MI) both increased the abundance of exosomal proteins and 
redistributed a number of them from the membrane fraction of intact hearts to 
the cytosol of cells in infarcted hearts. Additionally, we found that 
Desmoglein-1c is enriched in MSC exosomes and taken up by ischemic myocardium. 
Collectively, our results indicate that this newly developed bioorthogonal 
system can provide crucial insights into exosome homing, as well as the uptake 
and biodistribution of exosomal proteins.

Copyright © 2021 Zhang, Liu, Han, Fan, Wang, Chen, Du, Han, Arnone, Xu, Wei, 
Mobley and Qin.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2021.657456
PMCID: PMC8058422
PMID: 33898459

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.