1. Elife. 2021 Apr 27;10:e68068. doi: 10.7554/eLife.68068.

Simple biochemical features underlie transcriptional activation domain diversity 
and dynamic, fuzzy binding to Mediator.

Sanborn AL(1)(2), Yeh BT(2), Feigerle JT(1), Hao CV(1), Townshend RJ(2), 
Lieberman Aiden E(3)(4), Dror RO(2), Kornberg RD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Structural Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
Stanford, United States.
(2)Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, United States.
(3)The Center for Genome Architecture, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, 
United States.
(4)Center for Theoretical Biological Physics, Rice University, Houston, United 
States.

Gene activator proteins comprise distinct DNA-binding and transcriptional 
activation domains (ADs). Because few ADs have been described, we tested domains 
tiling all yeast transcription factors for activation in vivo and identified 150 
ADs. By mRNA display, we showed that 73% of ADs bound the Med15 subunit of 
Mediator, and that binding strength was correlated with activation. AD-Mediator 
interaction in vitro was unaffected by a large excess of free activator protein, 
pointing to a dynamic mechanism of interaction. Structural modeling showed that 
ADs interact with Med15 without shape complementarity ('fuzzy' binding). ADs 
shared no sequence motifs, but mutagenesis revealed biochemical and structural 
constraints. Finally, a neural network trained on AD sequences accurately 
predicted ADs in human proteins and in other yeast proteins, including 
chromosomal proteins and chromatin remodeling complexes. These findings solve 
the longstanding enigma of AD structure and function and provide a rationale for 
their role in biology.

Plain Language Summary: Cells adapt and respond to changes by regulating the 
activity of their genes. To turn genes on or off, they use a family of proteins 
called transcription factors. Transcription factors influence specific but 
overlapping groups of genes, so that each gene is controlled by several 
transcription factors that act together like a dimmer switch to regulate gene 
activity. The presence of transcription factors attracts proteins such as the 
Mediator complex, which activates genes by gathering the protein machines that 
read the genes. The more transcription factors are found near a specific gene, 
the more strongly they attract Mediator and the more active the gene is. A 
specific region on the transcription factor called the activation domain is 
necessary for this process. The biochemical sequences of these domains vary 
greatly between species, yet activation domains from, for example, yeast and 
human proteins are often interchangeable. To understand why this is the case, 
Sanborn et al. analyzed the genome of baker’s yeast and identified 150 
activation domains, each very different in sequence. Three-quarters of them 
bound to a subunit of the Mediator complex called Med15. Sanborn et al. then 
developed a machine learning algorithm to predict activation domains in both 
yeast and humans. This algorithm also showed that negatively charged and greasy 
regions on the activation domains were essential to be activated by the Mediator 
complex. Further analyses revealed that activation domains used different poses 
to bind multiple sites on Med15, a behavior known as ‘fuzzy’ binding. This 
creates a high overall affinity even though the binding strength at each 
individual site is low, enabling the protein complexes to remain dynamic. These 
weak interactions together permit fine control over the activity of several 
genes, allowing cells to respond quickly and precisely to many changes. The 
computer algorithm used here provides a new way to identify activation domains 
across species and could improve our understanding of how living things grow, 
adapt and evolve. It could also give new insights into mechanisms of disease, 
particularly cancer, where transcription factors are often faulty.

© 2021, Sanborn et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.68068
PMCID: PMC8137143
PMID: 33904398 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: AS, BY, JF, CH, RT, EL, RD, RK No competing 
interests declared