1. Mol Vis. 2021 Apr 2;27:179-190. eCollection 2021.

A novel homozygous missense mutation p.P388S in TULP1 causes protein instability 
and retinitis pigmentosa.

Woodard DR(1), Xing C(2)(3)(4), Ganne P(5)(6), Liang H(2), Mahindrakar A(5), 
Sankurathri C(5), Hulleman JD(1)(7), Mootha VV(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, Texas, United States.
(2)McDermott Center for Human Growth and Development/Center for Human Genetics, 
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX.
(3)Department of Bioinformatics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX.
(4)Department of Population and Data Sciences, University of Texas Southwestern 
Medical Center, Dallas, TX.
(5)Srikiran Institute of Ophthalmology, Kakinada, Andhra Pradesh, India.
(6)Department of Ophthalmology, All India Institute Medical Sciences, 
Mangalagiri, Andhra Pradesh, India.
(7)Department of Pharmacology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, TX.

PURPOSE: Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) is an inherited retinal disorder that results 
in the degeneration of photoreceptor cells, ultimately leading to severe visual 
impairment. We characterized a consanguineous family from Southern India wherein 
a 25 year old individual presented with night blindness since childhood. The 
purpose of this study was to identify the causative mutation for RP in this 
individual as well as characterize how the mutation may ultimately affect 
protein function.
METHODS: We performed a complete ophthalmologic examination of the proband 
followed by exome sequencing. The likely causative mutation was identified and 
modeled in cultured cells, evaluating its expression, solubility (both with 
western blotting), subcellular distribution, (confocal microscopy), and testing 
whether this variant induced endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress (quantitative PCR 
[qPCR] and western blotting).
RESULTS: The proband presented with generalized and parafoveal retinal pigmented 
epithelium (RPE) atrophy with bone spicule-like pigmentation in the midperiphery 
and arteriolar attenuation. Optical coherence tomography scans through the 
macula of both eyes showed atrophy of the outer retinal layers with loss of the 
ellipsoid zone, whereas the systemic examination of this individual was normal. 
The proband's parents and sibling were asymptomatic and had normal funduscopic 
examinations. We discovered a novel homozygous p.Pro388Ser mutation in the 
tubby-like protein 1 (TULP1) gene in the individual with RP. In cultured cells, 
the P388S mutation does not alter the subcellular distribution of TULP1 or 
induce ER stress when compared to wild-type TULP1, but instead significantly 
lowers protein stability as indicated with steady-state and cycloheximide-chase 
experiments.
CONCLUSIONS: These results add to the list of known mutations in TULP1 
identified in individuals with RP and suggest a possible unique pathogenic 
mechanism in TULP1-induced RP, which may be shared among select mutations in 
TULP1.

Copyright © 2021 Molecular Vision.

PMCID: PMC8056470
PMID: 33907372 [Indexed for MEDLINE]