1. Cell Stem Cell. 2021 Sep 2;28(9):1533-1548.e6. doi:
10.1016/j.stem.2021.04.004.  Epub 2021 Apr 27.

Age-dependent instability of mature neuronal fate in induced neurons from 
Alzheimer's patients.

Mertens J(1), Herdy JR(2), Traxler L(3), Schafer ST(4), Schlachetzki JCM(5), 
Böhnke L(3), Reid DA(4), Lee H(4), Zangwill D(4), Fernandes DP(4), Agarwal 
RK(4), Lucciola R(4), Zhou-Yang L(6), Karbacher L(6), Edenhofer F(7), Stern 
S(8), Horvath S(9), Paquola ACM(10), Glass CK(5), Yuan SH(11), Ku M(12), Szücs 
A(13), Goldstein LSB(14), Galasko D(15), Gage FH(16).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, 
CA, USA; Neural Aging Laboratory, Institute of Molecular Biology, CMBI, 
Leopold-Franzens-University Innsbruck, Tyrol, Austria. Electronic address: 
jerome.mertens@uibk.ac.at.
(2)Laboratory of Genetics, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, 
CA, USA; Neural Aging Laboratory, Institute of Molecular Biology, CMBI, 
Leopold-Franzens-University Innsbruck, Tyrol, Austria; Department of 
Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(3)Laboratory of Genetics, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, 
CA, USA; Neural Aging Laboratory, Institute of Molecular Biology, CMBI, 
Leopold-Franzens-University Innsbruck, Tyrol, Austria.
(4)Laboratory of Genetics, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, 
CA, USA.
(5)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California, San 
Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(6)Neural Aging Laboratory, Institute of Molecular Biology, CMBI, 
Leopold-Franzens-University Innsbruck, Tyrol, Austria.
(7)Department of Genomics, Stem Cells & Regenerative Medicine, Institute of 
Molecular Biology, CMBI, Institute of Molecular Biology and CMBI, 
Leopold-Franzens-University Innsbruck, Tyrol, Austria.
(8)Laboratory of Genetics, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, 
CA, USA; Sagol Department of Neurobiology, Faculty of Natural Sciences, 
University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel.
(9)Department of Human Genetics, Department of Biostatistics, University of 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(10)Laboratory of Genetics, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, 
CA, USA; Lieber Institute for Brain Development, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(11)Department of Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
CA, USA; University of Minnesota, Twin Cities, Department of Neurology, 
Minneapolis, MN, USA.
(12)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Division of Pediatric 
Hematology and Oncology, Faculty of Medicine, Medical Center - University of 
Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(13)Neuronal Cell Biology Research Group, Eötvös Loránd University, Budapest, 
Hungary.
(14)Department of Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
CA, USA; Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of 
California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA; Sanford Consortium for Regenerative 
Medicine, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(15)Department of Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
CA, USA.
(16)Laboratory of Genetics, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, 
CA, USA. Electronic address: gage@salk.edu.

Sporadic Alzheimer's disease (AD) exclusively affects elderly people. Using 
direct conversion of AD patient fibroblasts into induced neurons (iNs), we 
generated an age-equivalent neuronal model. AD patient-derived iNs exhibit 
strong neuronal transcriptome signatures characterized by downregulation of 
mature neuronal properties and upregulation of immature and progenitor-like 
signaling pathways. Mapping iNs to longitudinal neuronal differentiation 
trajectory data demonstrated that AD iNs reflect a hypo-mature neuronal identity 
characterized by markers of stress, cell cycle, and de-differentiation. 
Epigenetic landscape profiling revealed an underlying aberrant neuronal state 
that shares similarities with malignant transformation and age-dependent 
epigenetic erosion. To probe for the involvement of aging, we generated 
rejuvenated iPSC-derived neurons that showed no significant disease-related 
transcriptome signatures, a feature that is consistent with epigenetic clock and 
brain ontogenesis mapping, which indicate that fibroblast-derived iNs more 
closely reflect old adult brain stages. Our findings identify AD-related 
neuronal changes as age-dependent cellular programs that impair neuronal 
identity.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.stem.2021.04.004
PMCID: PMC8423435
PMID: 33910058 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests F.H.G. is an advisory 
board member of Cell Stem Cell.