1. Stem Cell Res Ther. 2021 May 3;12(1):261. doi: 10.1186/s13287-021-02243-7.

Ultrasound enhances the therapeutic potential of mesenchymal stem cells wrapped 
in greater omentum for aristolochic acid nephropathy.

Yang Y(#)(1), Geng X(#)(1), Chi K(1), Liu C(1), Liu R(1), Chen X(1), Hong Q(2), 
Cai G(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Chinese PLA Institute 
of Nephrology, State Key Laboratory of Kidney Diseases, National Clinical 
Research Center of Kidney Diseases, Beijing, 100853, China.
(2)Department of Nephrology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Chinese PLA Institute 
of Nephrology, State Key Laboratory of Kidney Diseases, National Clinical 
Research Center of Kidney Diseases, Beijing, 100853, China. 
hongquan@301hospital.com.cn.
(3)Department of Nephrology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Chinese PLA Institute 
of Nephrology, State Key Laboratory of Kidney Diseases, National Clinical 
Research Center of Kidney Diseases, Beijing, 100853, China. 
caiguangyan@sina.com.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) have been reported to promote 
regeneration in both subjects with acute kidney injury (AKI) and chronic kidney 
disease (CKD), but their efficacy remains limited, probably because most of the 
cells accumulate in the lungs, liver, and spleen after an intravenous infusion. 
Therefore, ultrasound-guided administration of MSCs represents a possible 
approach to solve this problem. The greater omentum is used to promote cell 
survival due to its rich vasculature. We hypothesized that ultrasound-guided 
administration of MSCs combined with greater omentum might be more curative than 
currently available approaches.
METHODS: In this study, we established an aristolochic acid nephropathy (AAN) 
model by intraperitoneally administering aristolochic acid I sodium salt (AA-I) 
at a dose of 5 mg/kg body weight on alternate days for 4 weeks. Subsequently, a 
laparotomy was performed, and the left kidney from which the capsule had been 
removed was wrapped with the greater omentum. A dose of 2 × 107 MSCs was 
injected into the space between the greater omentum and the left kidney. Equal 
amounts of MSCs were administered under ultrasound guidance every second week 
for a total of 4 treatments. Mice were sacrificed 4 weeks after surgery. Serum 
creatinine and blood urea levels were measured to assess renal function. qPCR, 
Western blot, and histological analyses were conducted to further investigate 
the therapeutic mechanism of MSCs.
RESULTS: Ultrasound-guided injection of MSCs into the greater omentum that 
surrounds the kidney enriched cells in the kidney region for up to 5 days. Renal 
function tests indicated that MSCs improved renal function to a great extent, as 
reflected by decreased blood urea nitrogen and serum creatinine levels. In 
addition, histological analyses showed that MSCs noticeably attenuated kidney 
injury, as evidenced by the amelioration of tubular necrosis and peritubular 
interstitial fibrosis. Mitigation of renal interstitial fibrosis was further 
confirmed by immunohistochemistry, qPCR, and western blotting after MSC 
treatment. Moreover, immunofluorescence staining revealed that MSCs alleviated 
inflammatory responses by increasing the counts of CD206+ cells and decreasing 
the counts of CD68+ cells. MSC migration was initiated in response to 
AA-I-treated renal epithelial cells in an in vitro migration assay.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggested that administration of MSCs into the 
cavity formed by the injured kidney and the greater omentum under ultrasound 
guidance improved renal function, attenuated kidney injury, and mitigated renal 
interstitial fibrosis and inflammatory responses. Thus, this approach might be a 
safe and effective therapy for CKD.

DOI: 10.1186/s13287-021-02243-7
PMCID: PMC8091698
PMID: 33941258 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.