1. J Am Heart Assoc. 2021 May 18;10(10):e018455. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.120.018455.
Epub  2021 May 8.

Protective Functions of Liver X Receptor α in Established Vulnerable Plaques: 
Involvement of Regulating Endoplasmic Reticulum-Mediated Macrophage Apoptosis 
and Efferocytosis.

Che X(1), Xiao Q(1), Song W(2), Zhang H(1), Sun B(3), Geng N(1), Tao Z(1), Shao 
Q(1), Pu J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology Renji Hospital School of Medicine Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University Shanghai China.
(2)Cardiovascular Department of Shuguang Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai 
University of Traditional Chinese Medicine Shanghai China.
(3)Department of Radiology Renji Hospital School of Medicine Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University Shanghai China.

Background Liver X receptor (LXR) belongs to the metabolic nuclear receptor 
superfamily, which plays a critical regulatory role in vascular 
physiology/pathology. However, effects of systemic LXR activation on established 
vulnerable plaques and the potential isotype-specific role involved remain 
unclear. Methods and Results The 8-week-old male apolipoprotein E-/- mice went 
through carotid branch ligation and renal artery constriction, combined with a 
high-fat diet. Plaques in the left carotid artery acquired vulnerable features 
4 weeks later, confirmed by magnetic resonance imaging scans and histological 
analysis. From that time on, mice were injected intraperitoneally daily with PBS 
or GW3965 (10 mg/kg per day) for an additional 4 weeks. Treatment with LXR 
agonists reduced the lesion volume by 52.61%, compared with the vehicle group. 
More important, a profile of less intraplaque hemorrhage detection and necrotic 
core formation was found. These actions collectively attenuated the incidence of 
plaque rupture. Mechanistically, reduced lesional apoptosis, enhanced 
efferocytosis, and alleviated endoplasmic reticulum stress are involved in the 
process. Furthermore, genetic ablation of LXRα, but not LXRβ, blunted the 
protective effects of LXR on the endoplasmic reticulum stress-elicited 
C/EBP-homologous protein pathway in peritoneal macrophages. In concert with the 
LXRα-predominant role in vitro, activated LXR failed to stabilize vulnerable 
plaques and correct the acquired cellular anomalies in LXRα-/- apolipoprotein 
E-/- mice. Conclusions Our results revealed that LXRα mediates the capacity of 
LXR activation to stabilize vulnerable plaques and prevent plaque rupture via 
amelioration of macrophage endoplasmic reticulum stress, lesional apoptosis, and 
defective efferocytosis. These findings might expand the application scenarios 
of LXR therapeutics for atherosclerosis.

DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.120.018455
PMCID: PMC8200716
PMID: 33969692 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None.