1. Curr Protoc. 2021 May;1(5):e129. doi: 10.1002/cpz1.129.

Detection and Analysis of Proteins Modified by O-Linked N-Acetylglucosamine.

Fahie K(1), Narayanan B(1), Zahra F(1), Reeves R(1)(2), Fernandes SM(1), Hart 
GW(3), Zachara NE(1).

Author information:
(1)The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.
(2)Current address: Department of Radiology, Thomas Jefferson University 
Hospital, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(3)Complex Carbohydrate Research Center, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia.

O-GlcNAc is a common post-translational modification of nuclear, mitochondrial, 
and cytoplasmic proteins that regulates normal physiology and the cell stress 
response. Dysregulation of O-GlcNAc cycling is implicated in the etiology of 
type II diabetes, heart failure, hypertension, and Alzheimer's disease, as well 
as cardioprotection. These protocols cover simple and comprehensive techniques 
for detecting proteins modified by O-GlcNAc and studying the enzymes that add or 
remove O-GlcNAc. © 2021 The Authors. Current Protocols published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC. Basic Protocol 1: Increasing the stoichiometry of O-GlcNAc on 
proteins before analysis Basic Protocol 2: Detection of proteins modified by 
O-GlcNAc using antibodies Basic Protocol 3: Detection of proteins modified by 
O-GlcNAc using the lectin sWGA Support Protocol 1: Control for O-linked 
glycosylation Basic Protocol 4: Detection and enrichment of proteins using 
WGA-agarose Support Protocol 2: Digestion of proteins with hexosaminidase 
Alternate Protocol: Detection of proteins modified by O-GlcNAc using 
galactosyltransferase Support Protocol 3: Autogalactosylation of 
galactosyltransferase Support Protocol 4: Assay of galactosyltransferase 
activity Basic Protocol 5: Characterization of labeled glycans by β-elimination 
and chromatography Basic Protocol 6: Detection of O-GlcNAc in 96-well plates 
Basic Protocol 7: Assay for OGT activity Support Protocol 5: Desalting of 
O-GlcNAc transferase Basic Protocol 8: Assay for O-GlcNAcase activity.

© 2021 The Authors. Current Protocols published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/cpz1.129
PMCID: PMC8862748
PMID: 34004049 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The terms of these arrangement are in accordance 
with the conflict of interest policy at The Johns Hopkins University.