1. JCO Precis Oncol. 2021 Feb 19;5:PO.20.00151. doi: 10.1200/PO.20.00151. 
eCollection 2021.

Genome-Wide Epigenetic Landscape of Lung Adenocarcinoma Links HOXB9 DNA 
Methylation to Intrinsic EGFR-TKI Resistance and Heterogeneous Responses.

Su SF(1)(2)(3), Liu CH(1)(4)(5), Cheng CL(6), Ho CC(7), Yang TY(8)(9), Chen 
KC(8)(10), Hsu KH(11)(12), Tseng JS(8)(9)(11), Chen HW(13), Chang 
GC(8)(9)(11)(14)(15)(16), Yu SL(6)(17)(18)(19)(20)(21), Li KC(1)(22).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Statistical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Graduate Institute of Oncology, National Taiwan University, College of 
Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)YongLin Institute of Health, YongLin Scholar, National Taiwan University, 
Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Bioinformatics Program, Taiwan International Graduate Program, Academia 
Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)Institute of Biomedical Informatics, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(6)NTU Centers for Genomic and Precision Medicine, National Taiwan University, 
College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital and 
National Taiwan University, College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.
(8)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Chest Medicine, Taichung 
Veterans General Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan.
(9)School of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(10)Department of Applied Chemistry, National Chi Nan University, Nantou, 
Taiwan.
(11)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung, 
Taiwan.
(12)Internal Medicine, Division of Critical Care and Respiratory Therapy, 
Taichung Veterans General Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan.
(13)Graduate Institute of Toxicology, National Taiwan University, College of 
Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.
(14)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Chung Shan 
Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan.
(15)Institute of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(16)School of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(17)Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences and Medical Biotechnology, 
National Taiwan University, College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.
(18)Department of Laboratory Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, 
Taipei, Taiwan.
(19)Department of Pathology and Graduate Institute of Pathology, National Taiwan 
University, College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.
(20)Institute of Medical Device and Imaging, National Taiwan University, College 
of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.
(21)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Taiwan University, College 
of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.
(22)Department of Statistics, University of California, Los Angeles, Los 
Angeles, CA.

PURPOSE: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-tyrosine kinase inhibitors 
(TKIs) show efficacy in treating patients with lung adenocarcinoma with 
EGFR-activating mutations. However, a significant subset of targeted patients 
fail to respond. Unlike acquired resistance (AR), intrinsic resistance (IR) 
remains poorly understood. We investigated whether epigenomic factors contribute 
to patient-to-patient heterogeneity in the EGFR-TKI response and aimed to 
characterize the IR subpopulation that obtains no benefit from EGFR-TKIs.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We conducted genome-wide DNA methylation profiling of 79 
tumors sampled from patients with advanced lung adenocarcinoma before they 
received EGFR-TKI treatment and analyzed the patient responses. Pyrosequencing 
was performed in a validation cohort of 163 patients with EGFR-activating 
mutations.
RESULTS: A DNA methylation landscape of 216 CpG sites with differential 
methylation was established to elucidate the association of DNA methylation with 
the characteristics and EGFR-TKI response status of the patients. Functional 
analysis of 37 transcription-repressive sites identified the enrichment of 
transcription factors, notably homeobox (HOX) genes. DNA methylation of HOXB9 
(cg13643585) in the enhancer region yielded 88% sensitivity for predicting drug 
response (odds ratio [OR], 6.64; 95% CI, 1.98 to 25.23; P = .0009). 
Pyrosequencing validated that HOXB9 gained methylation in patients with a poor 
EGFR-TKI response (OR, 3.06; 95% CI, 1.13 to 8.19; P = .019).
CONCLUSION: Our data suggest that homeobox DNA methylation could be a novel 
tumor cellular state that can aid the precise categorization of tumor 
heterogeneity in the study of IR to EGFR-TKIs. We identified, for the first 
time, an epigenomic factor that can potentially complement DNA mutation status 
in discriminating patients with lung adenocarcinoma who are less likely to 
benefit from EGFR-TKI treatment, thereby leading to improved patient management 
in precision medicine.

© 2021 by American Society of Clinical Oncology.

DOI: 10.1200/PO.20.00151
PMCID: PMC8140798
PMID: 34036228 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The following represents disclosure information 
provided by authors of this manuscript. All relationships are considered 
compensated unless otherwise noted. Relationships are self-held unless noted. I 
= Immediate Family Member, Inst = My Institution. Relationships may not relate 
to the subject matter of this manuscript. For more information about ASCO's 
conflict of interest policy, please refer to www.asco.org/rwc or 
ascopubs.org/po/author-center. Open Payments is a public database containing 
information reported by companies about payments made to US-licensed physicians 
(Open Payments). Chao-Chi HoConsulting or Advisory Role: Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Eli Lilly, Roche/Genentech/Chugai, BMS, Ono Speakers' Bureau: Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Eli Lilly, Roche/Genentech/Chugai, MSD, Pfizer, Novartis, BMS, Ono 
Research Funding: AstraZeneca No other potential conflicts of interest were 
reported.