1. J Parkinsons Dis. 2021;11(3):1091-1115. doi: 10.3233/JPD-212566.

Effects of Alpha-Synuclein Targeted Antisense Oligonucleotides on Lewy Body-Like 
Pathology and Behavioral Disturbances Induced by Injections of Pre-Formed 
Fibrils in the Mouse Motor Cortex.

Boutros SW(1), Raber J(1)(2)(3), Unni VK(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Behavioral Neuroscience, Oregon Health & Science University, 
Portland, OR, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR, 
USA.
(3)Departments of Psychiatry and Radiation Medicine, Division of Neuroscience, 
ONPRC, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR, USA.
(4)Jungers Center for Neurosciences Research and OHSU Parkinson Center, Oregon 
Health & Science University, Portland, OR, USA.

BACKGROUND: Alpha-synuclein (αsyn) characterizes neurodegenerative diseases 
known as synucleinopathies. The phosphorylated form (psyn) is the primary 
component of protein aggregates known as Lewy bodies (LBs), which are the 
hallmark of diseases such as Parkinson's disease (PD). Synucleinopathies might 
spread in a prion-like fashion, leading to a progressive emergence of symptoms 
over time. αsyn pre-formed fibrils (PFFs) induce LB-like pathology in wild-type 
(WT) mice, but questions remain about their progressive spread and their 
associated effects on behavioral performance.
OBJECTIVE: To characterize the behavioral, cognitive, and pathological long-term 
effects of LB-like pathology induced after bilateral motor cortex PFF injection 
in WT mice and to assess the ability of mouse αsyn-targeted antisense 
oligonucleotides (ASOs) to ameliorate those effects.
METHODS: We induced LB-like pathology in the motor cortex and connected brain 
regions of male WT mice using PFFs. Three months post-PFF injection (mpi), we 
assessed behavioral and cognitive performance. We then delivered a targeted ASO 
via the ventricle and assessed behavioral and cognitive performance 5 weeks 
later, followed by pathological analysis.
RESULTS: At 3 and 6 mpi, PFF-injected mice showed mild, progressive behavioral 
deficits. The ASO reduced total αsyn and psyn protein levels, and LB-like 
pathology, but was also associated with some deleterious off-target effects not 
involving lowering of αsyn, such as a decline in body weight and impairments in 
motor function.
CONCLUSIONS: These results increase understanding of the progressive nature of 
the PFF model and support the therapeutic potential of ASOs, though more 
investigation into effects of ASO-mediated reduction in αsyn on brain function 
is needed.

DOI: 10.3233/JPD-212566
PMCID: PMC8461707
PMID: 34057097 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare. No funding was supplied by Ionis Pharmaceuticals.