1. Medicina (Kaunas). 2021 May 14;57(5):496. doi: 10.3390/medicina57050496.

Guidelines for Reopening a Nation in a SARS-CoV-2 Pandemic: A Path Forward.

Baker TL(1)(2)(3)(4), Greiner JV(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Johns Hopkins Community Physician, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA.
(2)School of Nursing, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD 20742, USA.
(3)School of Nursing, State University of New York at Stony Brook, Brookhaven, 
NY 11794, USA.
(4)Sollay Medical Center, Sollay Kenyan Foundation, Katani Hospital, Katani, 
Kenya.
(5)Eye Research Institute of Massachusetts Eye & Ear, 20 Staniford St., W239, 
Boston, MA 02114, USA.
(6)Department of Ophthalmology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(7)Department of Ophthalmology, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, MA 
02155, USA.

Background and Objectives: Action, not fear, is the path forward in the 
coronavirus infectious disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic. Since early 2020, the 
world's nations have faced conundrums over severe acute respiratory syndrome 
corona virus type 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infections resulting in COVID-19 resulting in 
national closures, and thus, a clear understandable plan that nations can 
implement is required to reopen. The healthcare benefits of reopening a nation 
more likely than not exceed the benefits of continued pandemic-related closure. 
Pandemic-related closures have resulted in countless delayed or avoided urgent 
care evaluations. Furthermore, routine care of acute and chronic illnesses, 
including evaluations, diagnoses, and treatments, has also been delayed. 
Isolation, loss of income, and fear have resulted in mental health conditions or 
exacerbated existing conditions. The magnitude of untoward ramifications is 
unknown and may ultimately represent an inestimable degree of danger and 
morbidity, and even death. The pandemic of SARS-CoV-2 has created an atmosphere 
of fear of COVID-19 that has directly and indirectly injured the world's 
population. Since this has resulted in increasing morbidity and mortality, 
creating economic chaos, and near systemic collapse of educational systems with 
no well described plan forward, it is the purpose of this study to provide 
guidelines that provide a path forward to safely open a nation. Physicians often 
equipped by their education, training, and experiences across disciplines are 
uniquely positioned to comprehend, coordinate, and teach other physicians, 
business owners, and municipal and government leaders from guidelines. As such, 
physicians may take the lead in a path forward to reopening a nation, including 
opening businesses, educational facilities, and religious establishments, while 
minimizing the risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection. Materials and Methods: Reviews of 
the literature among the disciplines of environmental air, sanitation, social 
interaction, medical testing, vaccination, protection, and disease prevention 
and safety allowed for the conceptualization and eventual genesis of 
identifiable interventions which either reduce the viral load in the environment 
or inactivate the virus from replication. Each of the guidelines was selected 
based on the principle that it involved the elimination or inactivation of the 
viral particle. With a reduction in viral load or inactivation of replication, 
the implementation of these guidelines is expected to allow for reopening a 
nation with an increased level of safety. Results: The guidelines identified, 
including air exchange (ventilation), air filtration, personal protective 
filtering devices (masks), hand hygiene, social distancing, screening and 
testing, vaccines, high-risk patient protection, medical management, and 
adjunctive therapies, are described and referenced. Conclusions: In that the 
pandemic is primarily a public health issue, the path forward is best 
coordinated by local, regional, and national physicians. Many physicians with a 
breadth of experiences are uniquely positioned to coordinate the implementation 
of these interdisciplinary guidelines. Using these guidelines as a planned, 
coordinated action, not fear, is a path forward. Nations have a decision to 
make: closuring versus opening.

DOI: 10.3390/medicina57050496
PMCID: PMC8153561
PMID: 34068853 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.