1. Entropy (Basel). 2021 May 13;23(5):601. doi: 10.3390/e23050601.

Information Structures for Causally Explainable Decisions.

Cox LA Jr(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Business Analytics, University of Colorado School of Business, 
and MoirAI, 503 N. Franklin Street, Denver, CO 80218, USA.

For an AI agent to make trustworthy decision recommendations under uncertainty 
on behalf of human principals, it should be able to explain why its recommended 
decisions make preferred outcomes more likely and what risks they entail. Such 
rationales use causal models to link potential courses of action to resulting 
outcome probabilities. They reflect an understanding of possible actions, 
preferred outcomes, the effects of action on outcome probabilities, and 
acceptable risks and trade-offs-the standard ingredients of normative theories 
of decision-making under uncertainty, such as expected utility theory. Competent 
AI advisory systems should also notice changes that might affect a user's plans 
and goals. In response, they should apply both learned patterns for quick 
response (analogous to fast, intuitive "System 1" decision-making in human 
psychology) and also slower causal inference and simulation, decision 
optimization, and planning algorithms (analogous to deliberative "System 2" 
decision-making in human psychology) to decide how best to respond to changing 
conditions. Concepts of conditional independence, conditional probability tables 
(CPTs) or models, causality, heuristic search for optimal plans, uncertainty 
reduction, and value of information (VoI) provide a rich, principled framework 
for recognizing and responding to relevant changes and features of decision 
problems via both learned and calculated responses. This paper reviews how these 
and related concepts can be used to identify probabilistic causal dependencies 
among variables, detect changes that matter for achieving goals, represent them 
efficiently to support responses on multiple time scales, and evaluate and 
update causal models and plans in light of new data. The resulting causally 
explainable decisions make efficient use of available information to achieve 
goals in uncertain environments.

DOI: 10.3390/e23050601
PMCID: PMC8153020
PMID: 34068183

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.