1. Toxins (Basel). 2021 May 26;13(6):378. doi: 10.3390/toxins13060378.

Therapeutic Uses of Bacterial Subunit Toxins.

Lingwood C(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular Medicine, Research Institute, Hospital for Sick 
Children, Toronto, ON M5G 1X8, Canada.
(2)Departments of Laboratory Medicine & Pathobiology, and Biochemistry, 
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 1A8, Canada.

The B subunit pentamer verotoxin (VT aka Shiga toxin-Stx) binding to its 
cellular glycosphingolipid (GSL) receptor, globotriaosyl ceramide (Gb3) mediates 
internalization and the subsequent receptor mediated retrograde intracellular 
traffic of the AB5 subunit holotoxin to the endoplasmic reticulum. Subunit 
separation and cytosolic A subunit transit via the ER retrotranslocon as a 
misfolded protein mimic, then inhibits protein synthesis to kill cells, which 
can cause hemolytic uremic syndrome clinically. This represents one of the most 
studied systems of prokaryotic hijacking of eukaryotic biology. Similarly, the 
interaction of cholera AB5 toxin with its GSL receptor, GM1 ganglioside, is the 
key component of the gastrointestinal pathogenesis of cholera and follows the 
same retrograde transport pathway for A subunit cytosol access. Although both VT 
and CT are the cause of major pathology worldwide, the toxin-receptor 
interaction is itself being manipulated to generate new approaches to control, 
rather than cause, disease. This arena comprises two areas: anti neoplasia, and 
protein misfolding diseases. CT/CTB subunit immunomodulatory function and 
anti-cancer toxin immunoconjugates will not be considered here. In the verotoxin 
case, it is clear that Gb3 (and VT targeting) is upregulated in many human 
cancers and that there is a relationship between GSL expression and cancer drug 
resistance. While both verotoxin and cholera toxin similarly hijack the 
intracellular ERAD quality control system of nascent protein folding, the more 
widespread cell expression of GM1 makes cholera the toxin of choice as the means 
to more widely utilise ERAD targeting to ameliorate genetic diseases of protein 
misfolding. Gb3 is primarily expressed in human renal tissue. Glomerular 
endothelial cells are the primary VT target but Gb3 is expressed in other 
endothelial beds, notably brain endothelial cells which can mediate the 
encephalopathy primarily associated with VT2-producing E. coli infection. The 
Gb3 levels can be regulated by cytokines released during EHEC infection, which 
complicate pathogenesis. Significantly Gb3 is upregulated in the neovasculature 
of many tumours, irrespective of tumour Gb3 status. Gb3 is markedly increased in 
pancreatic, ovarian, breast, testicular, renal, astrocytic, gastric, colorectal, 
cervical, sarcoma and meningeal cancer relative to the normal tissue. VT has 
been shown to be effective in mouse xenograft models of renal, astrocytoma, 
ovarian, colorectal, meningioma, and breast cancer. These studies are herein 
reviewed. Both CT and VT (and several other bacterial toxins) access the cell 
cytosol via cell surface ->ER transport. Once in the ER they interface with the 
protein folding homeostatic quality control pathway of the cell -ERAD, (ER 
associated degradation), which ensures that only correctly folded nascent 
proteins are allowed to progress to their cellular destinations. Misfolded 
proteins are translocated through the ER membrane and degraded by cytosolic 
proteosome. VT and CT A subunits have a C terminal misfolded protein mimic 
sequence to hijack this transporter to enter the cytosol. This interface between 
exogenous toxin and genetically encoded endogenous mutant misfolded proteins, 
provides a new therapeutic basis for the treatment of such genetic diseases, 
e.g., Cystic fibrosis, Gaucher disease, Krabbe disease, Fabry disease, Tay-Sachs 
disease and many more. Studies showing the efficacy of this approach in animal 
models of such diseases are presented.

DOI: 10.3390/toxins13060378
PMCID: PMC8226680
PMID: 34073185 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Lingwood is a founder of ERAD Therapeutics 
(eradtx.cpm) and has received travel support to present the new data reported 
herein.