1. PLoS One. 2021 Jun 10;16(6):e0252457. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0252457. 
eCollection 2021.

Lack of parent-of-origin effects in Nasonia jewel wasp: A replication and 
extension study.

Olney KC(1)(2), Gibson JD(3), Natri HM(2), Underwood A(1)(2), Gadau J(4), Wilson 
MA(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, United States 
of America.
(2)Center for Evolution and Medicine, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, 
United States of America.
(3)Department of Biology, Georgia Southern University, Statesboro, GA, United 
States of America.
(4)Institut fuer Evolution and Biodiversity, University of Muenster, Muenster, 
Germany.
(5)Center for Mechanisms of Evolution, The Biodesign Institute, Arizona State 
University, Tempe, AZ, United States of America.

In diploid cells, the paternal and maternal alleles are, on average, equally 
expressed. There are exceptions from this: a small number of genes express the 
maternal or paternal allele copy exclusively. This phenomenon, known as genomic 
imprinting, is common among eutherian mammals and some plant species; however, 
genomic imprinting in species with haplodiploid sex determination is not well 
characterized. Previous work reported no parent-of-origin effects in the hybrids 
of closely related haplodiploid Nasonia vitripennis and Nasonia giraulti jewel 
wasps, suggesting a lack of epigenetic reprogramming during embryogenesis in 
these species. Here, we replicate the gene expression dataset and observations 
using different individuals and sequencing technology, as well as reproduce 
these findings using the previously published RNA sequence data following our 
data analysis strategy. The major difference from the previous dataset is that 
they used an introgression strain as one of the parents and we found several 
loci that resisted introgression in that strain. Our results from both datasets 
demonstrate a species-of-origin effect, rather than a parent-of-origin effect. 
We present a reproducible workflow that others may use for replicating the 
results. Overall, we reproduced the original report of no parent-of-origin 
effects in the haplodiploid Nasonia using the original data with our new 
processing and analysis pipeline and replicated these results with our newly 
generated data.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0252457
PMCID: PMC8191985
PMID: 34111141 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.