1. Pharmacogenomics J. 2021 Dec;21(6):625-637. doi: 10.1038/s41397-021-00243-7. 
Epub 2021 Jun 15.

Genetic-guided pharmacotherapy for venous thromboembolism: a systematic and 
critical review of economic evaluations.

Lim KK(#)(1)(2), Koleva-Kolarova R(#)(3), Chowienczyk P(4), Wolfe CDA(1)(2)(5), 
Fox-Rushby J(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)School of Population Health and Environmental Sciences, Faculty of Life 
Sciences and Medicine, King's College London, London, UK.
(2)National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Biomedical Research Centre, 
Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust and King's College London, London, UK.
(3)Health Economics Research Centre, Nuffield Department of Population Health, 
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(4)Cardiovascular Division, Department of Clinical Pharmacology, King's College 
London School of Medicine, St Thomas' Hospital, London, UK.
(5)National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Collaboration for Leadership in 
Applied Health Research and Care (ARC) South London, London, UK.
(6)School of Population Health and Environmental Sciences, Faculty of Life 
Sciences and Medicine, King's College London, London, UK. 
julia.fox-rushby@kcl.ac.uk.
(7)National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Biomedical Research Centre, 
Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust and King's College London, London, UK. 
julia.fox-rushby@kcl.ac.uk.
(#)Contributed equally

Despite the known contributions of genes, genetic-guided pharmacotherapy has not 
been routinely implemented for venous thromboembolism (VTE). To examine evidence 
on cost-effectiveness of genetic-guided pharmacotherapy for VTE, we searched six 
databases, websites of four HTA agencies and citations, with independent 
double-reviewers in screening, data extraction, and quality rating. The ten 
eligible studies, all model-based, examined heterogeneous interventions and 
comparators. Findings varied widely; testing was cost-saving in two base-cases, 
cost-effective in four, not cost-effective in three, dominated in one. Of 22 
model variables that changed decisions about cost-effectiveness, 
effectiveness/relative effectiveness of the intervention was the most frequent, 
albeit of poor quality. Studies consistently lacked details on the provision of 
interventions and comparators as well as on model development and validation. 
Besides improving the reporting of interventions, comparators, and 
methodological details, future economic evaluations should examine strategies 
recommended in guidelines and testing key model variables for decision 
uncertainty, to advise clinical implementations.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41397-021-00243-7
PMCID: PMC8602036
PMID: 34131314 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.