1. Front Immunol. 2021 Jun 10;12:684879. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.684879. 
eCollection 2021.

A Muscle-Invasive Bladder Cancer Patient With High Tumor Mutational Burden and 
RB1 Mutation Achieved Bladder Preservation Following Chemotherapy Combined With 
Immunotherapy: A Case Report.

Cao C(1), Fu Z(2), Liu Y(3), Zhou A(4), Wang J(2), Shou J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, National Cancer Center/National Clinical Research 
Center for Cancer/Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and 
Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.
(2)Research Institute, GloriousMed Clinical Laboratory (Shanghai) Co., Ltd., 
Shanghai, China.
(3)Department of Radiology, National Cancer Center/National Clinical Research 
Center for Cancer/Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and 
Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology, National Cancer Center/National Clinical 
Research Center for Cancer/Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences 
and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.

Neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by radical cystectomy is the standard of care 
for patients diagnosed with muscle-invasive bladder cancer (MIBC). However, 
urinary diversion following radical cystectomy significantly reduces patient 
quality of life. In addition, patients who significantly respond to neoadjuvant 
chemotherapy have a strong will to preserve the bladder. Bladder-sparing therapy 
has become a research focus worldwide. Although the bladder-sparing regimen, 
referred to as trimodality therapy (TMT), has been accepted, the efficacy of 
immunotherapy combined with chemotherapy for bladder preservation in patients 
with MIBC has not yet been published. We describe the case of a 50-year-old male 
presented intermittent macrohematuria and was diagnosed with bladder urothelial 
carcinoma by diagnostic transurethral resection of bladder tumor (TURBt) with 
clinical stage IIIA (cT3bN0M0). A complete response was achieved after four 
courses of neoadjuvant chemotherapy combined with pembrolizumab. Then, we 
performed a second TURBt plus randomized biopsy by cystoscopy. The pathology 
indicated no tumor in the bladder. Adjuvant chemoradiotherapy and immunotherapy 
were subsequently performed. Imaging examinations, cystoscopy and urine tumor 
DNA (utDNA) levels were used for surveillance after treatment. Finally, the 
patient achieved bladder preservation and had remained cancer-free for 19 months 
at the last follow-up on February 20, 2021. This is the first published case 
study to describe neoadjuvant chemotherapy plus pembrolizumab followed by 
concurrent chemoradiotherapy as a novel bladder-sparing regimen and successfully 
achieved a promising outcome.

Copyright © 2021 Cao, Fu, Liu, Zhou, Wang and Shou.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.684879
PMCID: PMC8222973
PMID: 34177933 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors ZF and JW were employed by GloriousMed 
Clinical Laboratory (Shanghai) Co. Ltd. The remaining authors declare that the 
research was conducted in theabsence of any commercial or financial 
relationships that could be construed as apotential conflict of interest.