1. Environ Res. 2021 Oct;201:111555. doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2021.111555. Epub 2021
 Jun 28.

From the environment to the cells: An overview on pivotal factors which affect 
spreading and infection in COVID-19 pandemic.

Zarei M(1), Rahimi K(2), Hassanzadeh K(3), Abdi M(4), Hosseini V(5), Fathi A(6), 
Kakaei K(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Food Science and Technology, School of Industrial Technology, 
Faculty of Applied Sciences, Universiti Teknologi MARA, 40450, Shah Alam, 
Selangor, Malaysia.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Gene Expression and Gene 
Medicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.
(3)Laboratory of Neuronal Cell Signaling, EBRI Rita Levi-Montalcini Foundation, 
Rome, 00161, Italy; Department of Biotechnology and Applied Clinical Sciences, 
University of L'Aquila, 67100, L'Aquila, Italy.
(4)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Kurdistan 
University of Medical Sciences, Sanandaj, Iran.
(5)Department of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Kurdistan 
University of Medical Sciences, Sanandaj, Iran.
(6)FUJIFILM Cellular Dynamics, Inc., Madison, WI, USA. Electronic address: 
ali.fathi@fujifilm.com.
(7)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, University of Maragheh, 
Maragheh, Iran. Electronic address: kakaei@maragheh.ac.ir.

Several factors ranging from environmental risks to the genetics of the virus 
and that of the hosts, affect the spread of COVID-19. The impact of 
physicochemical variables on virus vitality and spread should be taken into 
account in experimental and clinical studies. Another avenue to explore is the 
effect of diet and its interaction with the immune system on SARS-CoV-2 
infection and mortality rate. Past year have witnessed extensive studies on 
virus and pathophysiology of the COVID-19 disease and the cellular mechanisms of 
virus spreading. However, our knowledge has not reached a level where we plan an 
efficient therapeutic approach to prevent the virus entry to the cells or 
decreasing the spreading and morbidity in severe cases of disease. The risk of 
infection directly correlates with the control of virus spreading via droplets 
and aerosol transmission, as well as patient immune system response. A key goal 
in virus restriction and transmission rate is to understand the physicochemical 
structure of aerosol and droplet formation, and the parameters that affect the 
droplet-borne and airborne in different environmental conditions. The lifetime 
of droplets on different surfaces is described based on the contact angle. 
Hereby, we recommend regular use of high-quality face masks in high temperature 
and low humidity conditions. However, in humid and cold weather conditions, 
wearing gloves and frequently hand washing, gain a higher priority. 
Additionally, social distancing rules should be respected in all aforementioned 
conditions. We will also discuss different routes of SARS-CoV-2 entry into the 
cells and how multiple genetic factors play a role in the spread of the virus. 
Given the role of environmental and nutritional factors, we discuss and 
recommend some strategies to prevent the disease and protect the population 
against COVID-19. Since an effective vaccine can prevent the transmission of 
communicable diseases and abolish pandemics, we added a brief review of 
candidate SARS-CoV-2 vaccines.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envres.2021.111555
PMCID: PMC8236413
PMID: 34197816 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.