1. Mar Drugs. 2021 Jun 23;19(7):358. doi: 10.3390/md19070358.

Seaweed Components as Potential Modulators of the Gut Microbiota.

Shannon E(1)(2), Conlon M(2), Hayes M(1).

Author information:
(1)Food Biosciences, Teagasc Food Research Centre, Ashtown, D15 KN3K Dublin, 
Ireland.
(2)CSIRO Health and Biosecurity, Kintore Avenue, Adelaide, SA 5000, Australia.

Macroalgae, or seaweeds, are a rich source of components which may exert 
beneficial effects on the mammalian gut microbiota through the enhancement of 
bacterial diversity and abundance. An imbalance of gut bacteria has been linked 
to the development of disorders such as inflammatory bowel disease, 
immunodeficiency, hypertension, type-2-diabetes, obesity, and cancer. This 
review outlines current knowledge from in vitro and in vivo studies concerning 
the potential therapeutic application of seaweed-derived polysaccharides, 
polyphenols and peptides to modulate the gut microbiota through diet. 
Polysaccharides such as fucoidan, laminarin, alginate, ulvan and porphyran are 
unique to seaweeds. Several studies have shown their potential to act as 
prebiotics and to positively modulate the gut microbiota. Prebiotics enhance 
bacterial populations and often their production of short chain fatty acids, 
which are the energy source for gastrointestinal epithelial cells, provide 
protection against pathogens, influence immunomodulation, and induce apoptosis 
of colon cancer cells. The oral bioaccessibility and bioavailability of seaweed 
components is also discussed, including the advantages and limitations of static 
and dynamic in vitro gastrointestinal models versus ex vivo and in vivo methods. 
Seaweed bioactives show potential for use in prevention and, in some instances, 
treatment of human disease. However, it is also necessary to confirm these 
potential, therapeutic effects in large-scale clinical trials. Where possible, 
we have cited information concerning these trials.

DOI: 10.3390/md19070358
PMCID: PMC8303941
PMID: 34201794 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.