1. Magn Reson Imaging. 2021 Nov;83:1-13. doi: 10.1016/j.mri.2021.06.022. Epub
2021  Jul 3.

Diffusion MRI detects basal forebrain cholinergic abnormalities in the 3xTg-AD 
mouse model of Alzheimer's disease.

Falangola MF(1), Nie X(2), Ward R(3), Dhiman S(4), Voltin J(4), Nietert PJ(3), 
Jensen JH(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, 
SC, USA; Center for Biomedical Imaging, Medical University of South Carolina, 
Charleston, SC, USA. Electronic address: falangol@musc.edu.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, 
SC, USA; Center for Biomedical Imaging, Medical University of South Carolina, 
Charleston, SC, USA.
(3)Department of Public Health Sciences, Medical University of South Carolina, 
Charleston, SC, USA.
(4)Department of Neuroscience, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, 
SC, USA.
(5)Department of Neuroscience, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, 
SC, USA; Center for Biomedical Imaging, Medical University of South Carolina, 
Charleston, SC, USA; Department of Radiology and Radiological Science, Medical 
University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC, USA.

Degeneration of the basal forebrain (BF) is detected early in the course of 
Alzheimer's disease (AD). Reduction in the number of BF cholinergic (ChAT) 
neurons associated with age-related hippocampal cholinergic neuritic dystrophy 
is described in the 3xTg-AD mouse model; however, no prior diffusion MRI (dMRI) 
study has explored the presence of BF alterations in this model. Here we 
investigated the ability of diffusion MRI (dMRI) to detect abnormalities in BF 
microstructure for the 3xTg-AD mouse model, along with related pathology in the 
hippocampus (HP) and white matter (WM) tracks comprising the septo-hippocampal 
pathway. 3xTg-AD and normal control (NC) mice were imaged in vivo using the 
specific dMRI technique known as diffusional kurtosis imaging (DKI) at 2, 8, and 
15 months of age, and 8 dMRI parameters were measured at each time point. Our 
results revealed significant lower dMRI values in the BF of 2 months-old 3xTg-AD 
mice compared with NC mice, most likely related to the increased number of ChAT 
neurons seen in this AD mouse model at this age. They also showed significant 
age-related dMRI changes in the BF of both groups between 2 and 8 months of age, 
mainly a decrease in fractional anisotropy and axial diffusivity, and an 
increase in radial kurtosis. These dMRI changes in the BF may be reflecting the 
complex aging and pathological microstructural changes described in this region. 
Group differences and age-related changes were also observed in the HP, fimbria 
(Fi) and fornix (Fx). In the HP, diffusivity values were significantly higher in 
the 2 months-old 3xTg-AD mice, and the HP of NC mice showed a significant 
increase in axial kurtosis after 8 months, reflecting a normal pattern of 
increased fiber density complexity, which was not seen in the 3xTg-AD mice. In 
the Fi, mean and radial diffusivity values were significantly higher, and 
fractional anisotropy, radial kurtosis and kurtosis fractional anisotropy were 
significantly lower in the 2 months-old 3xTg-AD mice. The age trajectories for 
both NC and TG mice in the Fi and Fx were similar between 2 and 8 months, but 
after 8 months there was a significant decrease in diffusivity metrics 
associated with an increase in kurtosis metrics in the 3xTg-AD mice. These later 
HP, Fi and Fx dMRI changes probably reflect the growing number of dystrophic 
neurites and AD pathology progression in the HP, accompanied by WM disruption in 
the septo-hippocampal pathway. Our results demonstrate that dMRI can detect 
early cytoarchitectural abnormalities in the BF, as well as related aging and 
neurodegenerative changes in the HP, Fi and Fx of the 3xTg-AD mice. Since DKI is 
widely available on clinical scanners, these results also support the potential 
of the considered dMRI parameters as in vivo biomarkers for AD disease 
progression.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mri.2021.06.022
PMCID: PMC8449815
PMID: 34229088 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations of interest: none