1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2021 Jun 29;11:662714. doi: 
10.3389/fcimb.2021.662714. eCollection 2021.

Induction of Protective Immunity by a Single Low Dose of a Master Cell Bank 
cGMP-rBCG-P Vaccine Against the Human Metapneumovirus in Mice.

Soto JA(1), Gálvez NMS(1), Pacheco GA(1), Canedo-Marroquín G(1), Bueno SM(1), 
Kalergis AM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Millennium Institute on Immunology and Immunotherapy, Departamento de 
Genética Molecular y Microbiología, Facultad de Ciencias Biológicas, Pontificia 
Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile.
(2)Departamento de Endocrinología, Facultad de Medicina, Pontificia Universidad 
Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile.

Human metapneumovirus (hMPV) is an emergent virus, which mainly infects the 
upper and lower respiratory tract epithelium. This pathogen is responsible for a 
significant portion of hospitalizations due to bronchitis and pneumonia in 
infants and the elderly worldwide. hMPV infection induces a pro-inflammatory 
immune response upon infection of the host, which is not adequate for the 
clearance of this pathogen. The lack of knowledge regarding the different 
molecular mechanisms of infection of this virus has delayed the licensing of 
effective treatments or vaccines. As part of this work, we evaluated whether a 
single and low dose of a recombinant Mycobacterium bovis Bacillus 
Calmette-Guérin (BCG) expressing the phosphoprotein of hMPV (rBCG-P) can induce 
a protective immune response in mice. Immunization with the rBCG-P significantly 
decreased neutrophil counts and viral loads in the lungs of infected mice at 
different time points. This immune response was also associated with a modulated 
infiltration of innate cells into the lungs, such as interstitial macrophages 
(IM) and alveolar macrophages (AM), activated CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, and changes 
in the population of differentiated subsets of B cells, such as marginal zone B 
cells and plasma cells. The humoral immune response induced by the rBCG-P led to 
an early and robust IgA response and a late and constant IgG response. Finally, 
we determined that the transfer of cells or sera from immunized and infected 
mice to naïve mice promoted an efficient viral clearance. Therefore, a single 
and low dose of rBCG-P can protect mice from the disease caused by hMPV, and 
this vaccine could be a promising candidate for future clinical trials.

Copyright © 2021 Soto, Gálvez, Pacheco, Canedo-Marroquín, Bueno and Kalergis.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2021.662714
PMCID: PMC8276701
PMID: 34268134 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: A patent has been issued to SB and AK for the 
rBCG-P vaccine in several countries [Number 201302829, Chile]. The authors 
declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or 
financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of 
interest.