1. Front Immunol. 2021 Jul 12;12:696491. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.696491. 
eCollection 2021.

Mycobacterium tuberculosis Protein PE6 (Rv0335c), a Novel TLR4 Agonist, Evokes 
an Inflammatory Response and Modulates the Cell Death Pathways in Macrophages to 
Enhance Intracellular Survival.

Sharma N(1)(2), Shariq M(1), Quadir N(1)(2), Singh J(2), Sheikh JA(3), Hasnain 
SE(4)(5), Ehtesham NZ(1).

Author information:
(1)Indian Council of Medical Research-National Institute of Pathology, 
New Delhi, India.
(2)Jamia Hamdard Institute of Molecular Medicine, Jamia Hamdard, New Delhi, 
India.
(3)Department of Biotechnology, School of Chemical and Life Science, Jamia 
Hamdard, New Delhi, India.
(4)Department of Biochemical Engineering and Biotechnology, Indian Institute of 
Technology-Delhi, New Delhi, India.
(5)Department of Life Science, School of Basic Science and Research, Sharda 
University, Greater Noida, India.

Mycobacterium tuberculosis (M. tb) is an intracellular pathogen that exploits 
moonlighting functions of its proteins to interfere with host cell functions. 
PE/PPE proteins utilize host inflammatory signaling and cell death pathways to 
promote pathogenesis. We report that M. tb PE6 protein (Rv0335c) is a secretory 
protein effector that interacts with innate immune toll-like receptor TLR4 on 
the macrophage cell surface and promotes activation of the canonical NFĸB 
signaling pathway to stimulate secretion of proinflammatory cytokines TNF-α, 
IL-12, and IL-6. Using mouse macrophage TLRs knockout cell lines, we demonstrate 
that PE6 induced secretion of proinflammatory cytokines dependent on TLR4 and 
adaptor Myd88. PE6 possesses nuclear and mitochondrial targeting sequences and 
displayed time-dependent differential localization into nucleus/nucleolus and 
mitochondria, and exhibited strong Nucleolin activation. PE6 strongly induces 
apoptosis via increased production of pro-apoptotic molecules Bax, Cytochrome C, 
and pcMyc. Mechanistic details revealed that PE6 activates Caspases 3 and 9 and 
induces endoplasmic reticulum-associated unfolded protein response pathways to 
induce apoptosis through increased production of ATF6, Chop, BIP, eIF2α, IRE1α, 
and Calnexin. Despite being a potent inducer of apoptosis, PE6 suppresses innate 
immune defense strategy autophagy by inducing inhibitory phosphorylation of 
autophagy initiating kinase ULK1. Inversely, PE6 induces activatory 
phosphorylation of autophagy master regulator MtorC1, which is reflected by 
lower conversion of autophagy markers LC3BI to LC3BII and increased accumulation 
of autophagy substrate p62 which is also dependent on innate immune receptor 
TLR4. The use of pharmacological agents, rapamycin and bafilomycin A1, confirms 
the inhibitory effect of PE6 on autophagy, evidenced by the reduced conversion 
of LC3BI to LC3BII and increased accumulation of p62 in the presence of 
rapamycin and bafilomycin A1. We also observed that PE6 binds DNA, which could 
have significant implications in virulence. Furthermore, our analyses reveal 
that PE6 efficiently binds iron to likely aid in intracellular survival. 
Recombinant Mycobacterium smegmatis (M. smegmatis) containing pe6 displayed 
robust growth in iron chelated media compared to vector alone transformed cells, 
which suggests a role of PE6 in iron acquisition. These findings unravel novel 
mechanisms exploited by PE6 protein to subdue host immunity, thereby providing 
insights relevant to a better understanding of host-pathogen interaction during 
M. tb infection.

Copyright © 2021 Sharma, Shariq, Quadir, Singh, Sheikh, Hasnain and Ehtesham.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.696491
PMCID: PMC8311496
PMID: 34322125 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.