1. Biomolecules. 2021 Jul 16;11(7):1042. doi: 10.3390/biom11071042.

Computational Probing the Methylation Sites Related to EGFR Inhibitor-Responsive 
Genes.

Yuan R(1)(2), Chen S(1)(3), Wang Y(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Plateau Biological Adaptation and Evolution, Northwest 
Institute of Plateau Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xining 810008, China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China.
(3)Institute of Sanjiangyuan National Park, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xining 
810008, China.
(4)Qinghai Provincial Key Laboratory of Crop Molecular Breeding, Northwest 
Institute of Plateau Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xining 810008, China.

The emergence of drug resistance is one of the main obstacles to the treatment 
of lung cancer patients with EGFR inhibitors. Here, to further understand the 
mechanism of EGFR inhibitors in lung cancer and offer novel therapeutic targets 
for anti-EGFR-inhibitor resistance via the deep mining of pharmacogenomics data, 
we associated DNA methylation with drug sensitivities for uncovering the 
methylation sites related to EGFR inhibitor sensitivity genes. Specifically, we 
first introduced a grouped regularized regression model (Group Least Absolute 
Shrinkage and Selection Operator, group lasso) to detect the genes that were 
closely related to EGFR inhibitor effectiveness. Then, we applied the classical 
regression model (lasso) to identify the methylation sites associated with the 
above drug sensitivity genes. The new model was validated on the well-known 
cancer genomics resource: CTRP. GeneHancer and Encyclopedia of DNA Elements 
(ENCODE) database searches indicated that the predicted methylation sites 
related to EGFR inhibitor sensitivity genes were related to regulatory elements. 
Moreover, the correlation analysis on sensitivity genes and predicted 
methylation sites suggested that the methylation sites located in the promoter 
region were more correlated with the expression of EGFR inhibitor sensitivity 
genes than those located in the enhancer region and the TFBS. Meanwhile, we 
performed differential expression analysis of genes and predicted methylation 
sites and found that changes in the methylation level of some sites may affect 
the expression of the corresponding EGFR inhibitor-responsive genes. Therefore, 
we supposed that the effectiveness of EGFR inhibitors in lung cancer may be 
improved by methylation modification in their sensitivity genes.

DOI: 10.3390/biom11071042
PMCID: PMC8302001
PMID: 34356665 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.