1. Front Physiol. 2021 Jul 23;12:639149. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2021.639149. 
eCollection 2021.

Electrophysiological Characterization of Human Atria: The Understated Role of 
Temperature.

Majumder R(1)(2), Mohamed Nazer AN(3), Panfilov AV(4)(5)(6), Bodenschatz 
E(1)(2)(7), Wang Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Fluid Physics, Pattern Formation and Biocomplexity, Max Planck 
Institute for Dynamics and Self-Organization, Göttingen, Germany.
(2)DZHK (German Center for Cardiovascular Research), Partner Site Göttingen, 
Göttingen, Germany.
(3)Cardiovascular Science, University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen, 
Germany.
(4)World-Class Research Center "Digital Biodesign and Personalized Healthcare", 
Sechenov University, Moscow, Russia.
(5)Department of Physics and Astronomy, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.
(6)Laboratory of Computational Biology and Medicine, Ural Federal University, 
Yekaterinburg, Russia.
(7)Laboratory of Atomic and Solid-State Physics and Sibley School of Mechanical 
and Aerospace Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, United States.

Ambient temperature has a profound influence on cellular electrophysiology 
through direct control over the gating mechanisms of different ion channels. In 
the heart, low temperature is known to favor prolongation of the action 
potential. However, not much is known about the influence of temperature on 
other important characterization parameters such as the resting membrane 
potential (RMP), excitability, morphology and characteristics of the action 
potential (AP), restitution properties, conduction velocity (CV) of signal 
propagation, etc. Here we present the first, detailed, systematic in silico 
study of the electrophysiological characterization of cardiomyocytes from 
different regions of the normal human atria, based on the effects of ambient 
temperature (5-50°C). We observe that RMP decreases with increasing temperature. 
At ~ 48°C, the cells lose their excitability. Our studies show that different 
parts of the atria react differently to the same changes in temperature. In 
tissue simulations a drop in temperature correlated positively with a decrease 
in CV, but the decrease was region-dependent, as expected. In this article we 
show how this heterogeneous response can provide an explanation for the 
development of a proarrhythmic substrate during mild hypothermia. We use the 
above concept to propose a treatment strategy for atrial fibrillation that 
involves severe hypothermia in specific regions of the heart for a duration of 
only ~ 200 ms.

Copyright © 2021 Majumder, Mohamed Nazer, Panfilov, Bodenschatz and Wang.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2021.639149
PMCID: PMC8346027
PMID: 34366877

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.