1. J Biol Chem. 2021 Sep;297(3):101099. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.101099. Epub 2021
 Aug 19.

Cannabinoid receptor interacting protein 1a interacts with myristoylated Gα(i) N 
terminus via a unique gapped β-barrel structure.

Booth WT(1), Clodfelter JE(1), Leone-Kabler S(2), Hughes EK(3), Eldeeb K(2), 
Howlett AC(4), Lowther WT(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Center for Structural Biology, Wake Forest 
School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina, USA.
(2)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology and Center for Research on 
Substance Use and Addiction, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, 
North Carolina, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Center for Structural Biology, Wake Forest 
School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina, USA; Department of Physiology 
and Pharmacology and Center for Research on Substance Use and Addiction, Wake 
Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina, USA.
(4)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology and Center for Research on 
Substance Use and Addiction, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, 
North Carolina, USA; Center for Molecular Signaling, Wake Forest University, 
Winston-Salem, North Carolina, USA. Electronic address: ahowlett@wakehealth.edu.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Center for Structural Biology, Wake Forest 
School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina, USA; Center for Molecular 
Signaling, Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina, USA. 
Electronic address: tlowther@wakehealth.edu.

Cannabinoid receptor interacting protein 1a (CRIP1a) modulates CB1 cannabinoid 
receptor G-protein coupling in part by altering the selectivity for Gαi subtype 
activation, but the molecular basis for this function of CRIP1a is not known. We 
report herein the first structure of CRIP1a at a resolution of 1.55 Å. CRIP1a 
exhibits a 10-stranded and antiparallel β-barrel with an interior comprised of 
conserved hydrophobic residues and loops at the bottom and a short helical cap 
at the top to exclude solvent. The β-barrel has a gap between strands β8 and 
β10, which deviates from β-sandwich fatty acid-binding proteins that carry 
endocannabinoid compounds and the Rho-guanine nucleotide dissociation inhibitor 
predicted by computational threading algorithms. The structural homology search 
program DALI identified CRIP1a as homologous to a family of lipidated-protein 
carriers that includes phosphodiesterase 6 delta subunit and Unc119. Comparison 
with these proteins suggests that CRIP1a may carry two possible types of cargo: 
either (i) like phosphodiesterase 6 delta subunit, cargo with a farnesyl moiety 
that enters from the top of the β-barrel to occupy the hydrophobic interior or 
(ii) like Unc119, cargo with a palmitoyl or a myristoyl moiety that enters from 
the side where the missing β-strand creates an opening to the hydrophobic 
pocket. Fluorescence polarization analysis demonstrated CRIP1a binding of an 
N-terminally myristoylated 9-mer peptide mimicking the Gαi N terminus. However, 
CRIP1a could not bind the nonmyristolyated Gαi peptide or cargo of homologs. 
Thus, binding of CRIP1a to Gαi proteins represents a novel mechanism to regulate 
cell signaling initiated by the CB1 receptor.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2021.101099
PMCID: PMC8446797
PMID: 34418434 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.