1. Cell Mol Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2022;13(1):233-256. doi: 
10.1016/j.jcmgh.2021.08.014. Epub 2021 Aug 25.

Aryl Hydrocarbon Receptor Deficiency in Intestinal Epithelial Cells Aggravates 
Alcohol-Related Liver Disease.

Qian M(1), Liu J(2), Zhao D(2), Cai P(3), Pan C(2), Jia W(2), Gao Y(2), Zhang 
Y(2), Zhang N(4), Zhang Y(4), Zhang Q(5), Wu D(6), Shan C(7), Zhang M(7), 
Schnabl B(8), Yang S(9), Shen X(10), Wang L(11).

Author information:
(1)School of Basic Medicine and Clinical Pharmacy, State Key Laboratory of 
Natural Medicines, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing, China; Institute of 
Modern Biology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China; School of Medicine and 
Holistic Integrative Medicine, Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine, Nanjing, 
China.
(2)School of Basic Medicine and Clinical Pharmacy, State Key Laboratory of 
Natural Medicines, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing, China; Institute of 
Modern Biology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology, Sir Run Run Hospital, Nanjing Medical 
University, Nanjing, China.
(4)Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Functional Substances of Chinese Medicine, School 
of Pharmacy, Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine, Nanjing, China.
(5)Institute of Comparative Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, Yangzhou 
University, Yangzhou, China.
(6)Helmholtz International Lab, State Key Laboratory of Microbial Technology, 
Shandong University, Qingdao, China.
(7)School of Life Sciences, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China.
(8)Department of Medicine, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, 
California.
(9)Department of Hepatology, Beijing Ditan Hospital, Capital Medical University, 
Beijing, China.
(10)School of Medicine and Holistic Integrative Medicine, Nanjing University of 
Chinese Medicine, Nanjing, China.
(11)School of Basic Medicine and Clinical Pharmacy, State Key Laboratory of 
Natural Medicines, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing, China; Institute of 
Modern Biology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China. Electronic address: 
wanglirui@nju.edu.cn.

Comment in
    Cell Mol Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2022;13(1):343-345. doi: 
10.1016/j.jcmgh.2021.10.001.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The ligand-activated transcription factor, aryl hydrocarbon 
receptor (AHR) can sense xenobiotics, dietary, microbial, and metabolic cues. 
Roles of Ahr in intestinal epithelial cells (IECs) have been much less 
elucidated compared with those in intestinal innate immune cells. Here, we 
explored whether the IEC intrinsic Ahr could modulate the development of 
alcohol-related liver disease (ALD) via the gut-liver axis.
METHODS: Mice with IEC specific Ahr deficiency (AhrΔIEC) were generated and fed 
with a control or ethanol diet. Alterations of intestinal microbiota and 
metabolites were investigated by 16S ribosomal RNA sequencing, metagenomics, and 
untargeted metabolomics. AHR agonists were used to evaluate the therapeutic 
potentials of intestinal Ahr activation for ALD treatment.
RESULTS: AhrΔIEC mice showed more severe liver injury after ethanol feeding than 
control mice. Ahr deficiency in IECs altered the intestinal metabolite 
composition, creating an environment that promoted the overgrowth of 
Helicobacter hepaticus and Helicobacter ganmani in the gut, enhancing their 
translocation to mesenteric lymph nodes and liver. Among the altered 
metabolites, isobutyric acid was increased in the cecum of ethanol-fed AhrΔIEC 
mice relative to control mice. Furthermore, both H.hepaticus and isobutyric acid 
administration aggravated ethanol-induced liver injury in vivo and in vitro. 
Supplementation with AHR agonists, 6-formylindolo[3,2-b]carbazole and 
indole-3-carbinol, protected mice from ALD development by specifically 
activating intestinal Ahr without affecting liver Ahr function. Alcoholic 
patients showed lower intestinal AHR expression and higher H.hepaticus levels 
compared with healthy individuals.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that targeted restoration of IEC intrinsic Ahr 
function may present as a novel approach for ALD treatment.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcmgh.2021.08.014
PMCID: PMC8599170
PMID: 34454169 [Indexed for MEDLINE]