1. BMC Med Genomics. 2021 Aug 31;14(1):214. doi: 10.1186/s12920-021-01059-x.

Detecting copy number variation in next generation sequencing data from 
diagnostic gene panels.

Singh AK(1)(2), Olsen MF(3), Lavik LAS(3), Vold T(3), Drabløs F(4), Sjursen 
W(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, St. Olavs Hospital, Trondheim, Norway. 
ashish.kumar.singh3@stolav.no.
(2)Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Health 
Sciences, NTNU - Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, 
Norway. ashish.kumar.singh3@stolav.no.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, St. Olavs Hospital, Trondheim, Norway.
(4)Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Health 
Sciences, NTNU - Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, 
Norway.

BACKGROUND: Detection of copy number variation (CNV) in genes associated with 
disease is important in genetic diagnostics, and next generation sequencing 
(NGS) technology provides data that can be used for CNV detection. However, CNV 
detection based on NGS data is in general not often used in diagnostic labs as 
the data analysis is challenging, especially with data from targeted gene 
panels. Wet lab methods like MLPA (MRC Holland) are widely used, but are 
expensive, time consuming and have gene-specific limitations. Our aim has been 
to develop a bioinformatic tool for CNV detection from NGS data in medical 
genetic diagnostic samples.
RESULTS: Our computational pipeline for detection of CNVs in NGS data from 
targeted gene panels utilizes coverage depth of the captured regions and 
calculates a copy number ratio score for each region. This is computed by 
comparing the mean coverage of the sample with the mean coverage of the same 
region in other samples, defined as a pool. The pipeline selects pools for 
comparison dynamically from previously sequenced samples, using the pool with an 
average coverage depth that is nearest to the one of the samples. A sliding 
window-based approach is used to analyze each region, where length of sliding 
window and sliding distance can be chosen dynamically to increase or decrease 
the resolution. This helps in detecting CNVs in small or partial exons. With 
this pipeline we have correctly identified the CNVs in 36 positive control 
samples, with sensitivity of 100% and specificity of 91%. We have detected whole 
gene level deletion/duplication, single/multi exonic level deletion/duplication, 
partial exonic deletion and mosaic deletion. Since its implementation in 
mid-2018 it has proven its diagnostic value with more than 45 CNV findings in 
routine tests.
CONCLUSIONS: With this pipeline as part of our diagnostic practices it is now 
possible to detect partial, single or multi-exonic, and intragenic CNVs in all 
genes in our target panel. This has helped our diagnostic lab to expand the 
portfolio of genes where we offer CNV detection, which previously was limited by 
the availability of MLPA kits.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12920-021-01059-x
PMCID: PMC8406611
PMID: 34465341 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.