1. Endocrinol Diabetes Metab. 2021 Oct;4(4):e00296. doi: 10.1002/edm2.296. Epub 
2021 Aug 31.

Oxy210, a novel inhibitor of hedgehog and TGF-β signalling, ameliorates hepatic 
fibrosis and hypercholesterolemia in mice.

Hui ST(1), Wang F(2), Stappenbeck F(2), French SW(3), Magyar CE(3), Parhami 
F(2), Lusis AJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, David Geffen School of 
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(2)MAX BioPharma, Inc, Santa Monica, California, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, David Geffen School of 
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, California, USA.

AIMS: Non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) is associated with increased overall 
morbidity and mortality in non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) patients. 
Liver fibrosis is the strongest prognostic factor for clinical outcomes, 
liver-related mortality and liver transplantation. Currently, no single therapy 
or medication for NASH has been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA). Oxy210, an oxysterol derivative, displays the unique 
property of antagonizing both Hedgehog (Hh) and transforming growth factor-beta 
(TGF-β) signalling in primary human hepatic stellate cells (HSC). We 
hypothesized that inhibition of both Hh and TGF-β signalling by Oxy210 could 
reduce hepatic fibrosis in NASH. In this study, we examined the therapeutic 
potential of Oxy210 on NASH in vivo.
METHODS: We examined the effect of Oxy210 treatment on Hh and TGF-β pathways in 
HSC. The efficacy of Oxy210 on liver fibrosis was tested in a 'humanized' 
hyperlipidemic mouse model of NASH that has high relevance to human pathology.
APPROACH AND RESULTS: We show that Oxy210 inhibits both Hh and TGF-β pathways in 
human HSC and attenuates baseline and TGF-β-induced expression of pro-fibrotic 
genes in vitro. Oral delivery of Oxy210 in food resulted in significant liver 
exposure and significantly reduced hepatic fibrosis in mice over the course of 
the 16-week study with no apparent safety issues. Additionally, we observed 
several benefits related to NASH phenotype: (a) reduced plasma pro-inflammatory 
cytokine and the corresponding hepatic gene expression; (b) reduced pro-fibrotic 
cytokine and inflammasome gene expression in the liver; (c) reduced apoptosis in 
the liver; (d) reduced hepatic unesterified cholesterol accumulation; and (e) 
reduced plasma total and unesterified cholesterol levels.
CONCLUSIONS: Oxy210 effectively ameliorated hepatic fibrosis and inflammation 
and improved hypercholesterolemia in mice. Our findings suggest that Oxy210 and 
related analogues are a new class of drug candidates that may serve as potential 
therapeutics candidates for NASH.

© 2021 The Authors. Endocrinology, Diabetes & Metabolism published by John Wiley 
& Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/edm2.296
PMCID: PMC8502222
PMID: 34505423 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: F.W, F.S. and F.P. have financial interest in 
MAX BioPharma and its intellectual property.