1. Front Physiol. 2021 Aug 27;12:696852. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2021.696852. 
eCollection 2021.

B-arrestin-2 Signaling Is Important to Preserve Cardiac Function During Aging.

Capote AE(1), Batra A(1), Warren CM(1), Chowdhury SAK(1), Wolska BM(1)(2), 
Solaro RJ(1), Rosas PC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology & Biophysics, Center for Cardiovascular Research, 
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, United States.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Center for Cardiovascular 
Research, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, United States.

Experiments reported here tested the hypothesis that β-arrestin-2 is an 
important element in the preservation of cardiac function during aging. We 
tested this hypothesis by aging β-arrestin-2 knock-out (KO) mice, and wild-type 
equivalent (WT) to 12-16months. We developed the rationale for these experiments 
on the basis that angiotensin II (ang II) signaling at ang II receptor type 1 
(AT1R), which is a G-protein coupled receptor (GPCR) promotes both G-protein 
signaling as well as β-arrestin-2 signaling. β-arrestin-2 participates in GPCR 
desensitization, internalization, but also acts as a scaffold for adaptive 
signal transduction that may occur independently or in parallel to G-protein 
signaling. We have previously reported that biased ligands acting at the AT1R 
promote β-arrestin-2 signaling increasing cardiac contractility and reducing 
maladaptations in a mouse model of dilated cardiomyopathy. Although there is 
evidence that ang II induces maladaptive senescence in the cardiovascular 
system, a role for β-arrestin-2 signaling has not been studied in aging. By 
echocardiography, we found that compared to controls aged KO mice exhibited 
enlarged left atria and left ventricular diameters as well as depressed 
contractility parameters with preserved ejection fraction. Aged KO also 
exhibited depressed relaxation parameters when compared to WT controls at the 
same age. Moreover, cardiac dysfunction in aged KO mice was correlated with 
alterations in the phosphorylation of myofilament proteins, such as cardiac 
myosin binding protein-C, and myosin regulatory light chain. Our evidence 
provides novel insights into a role for β-arrestin-2 as an important signaling 
mechanism that preserves cardiac function during aging.

Copyright © 2021 Capote, Batra, Warren, Chowdhury, Wolska, Solaro and Rosas.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2021.696852
PMCID: PMC8430342
PMID: 34512376

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. RS is a member of the 
Scientist Advisory Board of Cytokinetics, Inc., a consultant for Pfizer, Inc., 
Myokardia Inc., and a consultant to Amgen as a member of their Heart Failure 
Advisory Board.