1. Mol Med. 2021 Sep 16;27(1):111. doi: 10.1186/s10020-021-00327-x.

Circuit imaging biomarkers in preclinical and prodromal Parkinson's disease.

Meles SK(1), Oertel WH(2)(3), Leenders KL(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of 
Groningen, Hanzeplein 1, PO Box 30.001, 9700 RB, Groningen, The Netherlands. 
s.k.meles@umcg.nl.
(2)Department of Neurology, Philipps-Universität Marburg, Marburg, Germany.
(3)Institute for Neurogenomics, Helmholtz Center for Health and Environment, 
Munich, Germany.
(4)Department of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging, University Medical 
Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.

Parkinson's disease (PD) commences several years before the onset of motor 
features. Pathophysiological understanding of the pre-clinical or early 
prodromal stages of PD are essential for the development of new therapeutic 
strategies. Two categories of patients are ideal to study the early disease 
stages. Idiopathic rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder (iRBD) represents 
a well-known prodromal stage of PD in which pathology is presumed to have 
reached the lower brainstem. The majority of patients with iRBD will develop 
manifest PD within years to decades. Another category encompasses non-manifest 
mutation carriers, i.e. subjects without symptoms, but with a known mutation or 
genetic variant which gives an increased risk of developing PD. The speed of 
progression from preclinical or prodromal to full clinical stages varies among 
patients and cannot be reliably predicted on the individual level. Clinical 
trials will require inclusion of patients with a predictable conversion within a 
limited time window. Biomarkers are necessary that can confirm pre-motor PD 
status and can provide information regarding lead time and speed of progression. 
Neuroimaging changes occur early in the disease process and may provide such a 
biomarker. Studies have focused on radiotracer imaging of the dopaminergic 
nigrostriatal system, which can be assessed with dopamine transporter (DAT) 
single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT). Loss of DAT binding 
represents an effect of irreversible structural damage to the nigrostriatal 
system. This marker can be used to monitor disease progression and identify 
individuals at specific risk for phenoconversion. However, it is known that 
changes in neuronal activity precede structural changes. Functional 
neuro-imaging techniques, such as 18F-2-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose Positron 
Emission Tomography (18F-FDG PET) and functional magnetic resonance imaging 
(fMRI), can be used to model the effects of disease on brain networks when 
combined with advanced analytical methods. Because these changes occur early in 
the disease process, functional imaging studies are of particular interest in 
prodromal PD diagnosis. In addition, fMRI and 18F-FDG PET may be able to predict 
a specific future phenotype in prodromal cohorts, which is not possible with DAT 
SPECT. The goal of the current review is to discuss the network-level brain 
changes in pre-motor PD.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s10020-021-00327-x
PMCID: PMC8447708
PMID: 34530732 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Not applicable.