1. Hepatol Commun. 2021 Dec;5(12):2121-2138. doi: 10.1002/hep4.1785. Epub 2021
Aug  24.

RORα Enhances Lysosomal Acidification and Autophagic Flux in the Hepatocytes.

Kim HJ(1), Han YH(2), Kim JY(1), Lee MO(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)College of Pharmacy, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Laboratory of Pathology and Physiology, College of Pharmacy, Kangwon National 
University, Chuncheon, South Korea.
(3)Bio-MAX Institute, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea.
(4)Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Seoul, Korea.

Lysosomes are intracellular acidic organelles with catabolic functions that 
contribute to the activation of autophagy. Although autophagy abnormality is 
associated with defects in lysosomal acidification during the progression of 
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), the mechanisms of control of lysosomal 
acidification are not well understood at the molecular level. Thus, we aimed to 
elucidate the role of the orphan nuclear receptor retinoic acid-related orphan 
receptor α (RORα) in lysosomal acidification and autophagic flux, particularly 
in nutrition-enriched hepatocytes. First, lysosomal acidity was much lower in 
the hepatocytes obtained from hepatocyte-specific RORα-deleted (RORα-LKO) mice, 
whereas the infusion of an adenovirus encoding RORα in wild-type hepatocytes 
increased lysosomal acidity, as determined by LysoSensor. Second, the lysosomal 
translocation of the mechanistic target of rapamycin was increased and immature 
cathepsin D was accumulated in the liver of RORα-LKO mice. Third, the 
accumulation of LC3-II, p62/sequestosome 1 (SQSTM1), and neighbor of BRCA1 gene 
1 (NBR1) was increased in the livers of RORα-LKO mice, indicating an impaired 
autophagic flux in the livers. Consistently, the number of autolysosomes 
containing mitochondria and lipid droplets was dramatically reduced in the 
RORα-deleted hepatocytes. Finally, we found that RORα induced the transcription 
of genes involved in lysosomal function, such as Atp6v1g1, a vacuolar H+ -ATPase 
(v-ATPase) subunit, which were largely down-regulated in the livers of mice with 
high-fat diet-induced NAFLD and patients with hepatitis. Conclusion: Targeting 
RORα may be a potential therapeutic strategy to restore lysosomal acidification, 
which inhibits the progression of NAFLD.

© 2021 The Authors. Hepatology Communications published by Wiley Periodicals LLC 
on behalf of American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/hep4.1785
PMCID: PMC8631090
PMID: 34558854 [Indexed for MEDLINE]