1. Insects. 2021 Sep 3;12(9):789. doi: 10.3390/insects12090789.

Effect of Defatting and Extraction Solvent on the Antioxidant and Pancreatic 
Lipase Inhibitory Activities of Extracts from Hermetia illucens and Tenebrio 
molitor.

Navarro Del Hierro J(1)(2), Cantero-Bahillo E(1)(2), Fornari T(1)(2), Martin 
D(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Producción y Caracterización de Nuevos Alimentos, Instituto 
de Investigación en Ciencias de la Alimentación (CIAL) (CSIC-UAM), 28049 Madrid, 
Spain.
(2)Sección Departamental de Ciencias de la Alimentación, Facultad de Ciencias, 
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, 28049 Madrid, Spain.

The production of specific insect extracts with bioactive properties for human 
health is an emerging and innovative field for the edible insects industry, but 
there are unexplored extraction factors that might modulate the bioactivity of 
the extracts. Ultrasound-assisted extracts from T. molitor and H. illucens were 
produced. Effects of defatting pre-treatment and extraction solvent were 
evaluated on extraction yield, antioxidant activity and pancreatic lipase 
inhibitory effect. Chemical characterisation of defatted extracts from H. 
illucens was performed by GC-MS-FID. Non-defatted extracts showed higher 
extraction yields. Defatted extracts had similar extraction yields (around 3%). 
Defatted extracts had higher antioxidant activity, T. molitor being stronger 
than H. illucens. Antioxidant activity of T. molitor methanol extract was higher 
than the rest of solvents. Aqueous ethanol improved the antioxidant activity of 
H. illucens extracts. All extracts inhibited lipase, but no significant effect 
of defatting and solvent was observed for T. molitor. A significant higher 
inhibitory activity was observed for H. illucens, the strongest being defatted 
100% and 70% ethanol H. illucens extracts. H. illucens extracts contained free 
amino acids and disaccharides, together with minor fractions of lipids, sterols 
and organic acids. These results evidence the potential of extracts obtained 
from edible insects as antioxidants and inhibitors of the pancreatic lipase, a 
simultaneous multibioactivity that might be favoured by the defatting 
pre-treatment of the samples and the solvent of extraction.

DOI: 10.3390/insects12090789
PMCID: PMC8472067
PMID: 34564229

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.