1. Pharmaceuticals (Basel). 2021 Sep 2;14(9):895. doi: 10.3390/ph14090895.

Manufacturing Bacteriophages (Part 2 of 2): Formulation, Analytics and Quality 
Control Considerations.

Moraes de Souza C(1), Tanir T(1), Orellana M(1), Escalante A(1), Koeris MS(1).

Author information:
(1)Amgen Bioprocessing Center, Department of Biological Engineering and 
Management, Henry E. Riggs School of Applied Life Sciences, Keck Graduate 
Institute, Claremont, CA 91711, USA.

Within this second piece of the two-part series of phage manufacturing 
considerations, we are examining the creation of a drug product from a drug 
substance in the form of formulation, through to fill-finish. Formulation of a 
drug product, in the case of bacteriophage products, is often considered only 
after many choices have been made in the development and manufacture of a drug 
substance, increasing the final product development timeline and difficulty of 
achieving necessary performance parameters. As with the preceding review in this 
sequence, we aim to provide the reader with a framework to be able to consider 
pharmaceutical development choices for the formulation of a bacteriophage-based 
drug product. The intent is to sensitize and highlight the tradeoffs that are 
necessary in the development of a finished drug product, and to be able to take 
the entire spectrum of tradeoffs into account, starting with early-stage R&D 
efforts. Furthermore, we are arming the reader with an overview of historical 
and current analytical methods with a special emphasis on most relevant and most 
widely available methods. Bacteriophages pose some challenges that are related 
to but also separate from eukaryotic viruses. Last, but not least, we close this 
two-part series by briefly discussing quality control (QC) aspects of a 
bacteriophage-based product, taking into consideration the opportunities and 
challenges that engineered bacteriophages uniquely present and offer.

DOI: 10.3390/ph14090895
PMCID: PMC8467454
PMID: 34577595

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.