1. Cells. 2021 Aug 28;10(9):2235. doi: 10.3390/cells10092235.

The Structure of the Spinal Cord Ependymal Region in Adult Humans Is a 
Distinctive Trait among Mammals.

Torrillas de la Cal A(1), Paniagua-Torija B(1), Arevalo-Martin A(1), Faulkes 
CG(2), Jiménez AJ(3)(4), Ferrer I(5), Molina-Holgado E(1), Garcia-Ovejero D(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neuroinflammation, Hospital Nacional de Paraplejicos, 45071 
Toledo, Spain.
(2)School of Biological & Chemical Sciences, Queen Mary University of London, 
London E1 4NS, UK.
(3)Departamento de Biología Celular, Genética y Fisiología, Universidad de 
Málaga, Campus de Teatinos, 29071 Malaga, Spain.
(4)Instituto de Investigación Biomédica de Málaga (IBIMA), 29010 Malaga, Spain.
(5)Institut de Neuropatologia, Servei d'Anatomia Patològica, IDIBELL-Hospital 
Universitari de Bellvitge, Universitat de Barcelona, 08908 L'Hospitalet de 
Llobregat, Spain.

In species that regenerate the injured spinal cord, the ependymal region is a 
source of new cells and a prominent coordinator of regeneration. In mammals, 
cells at the ependymal region proliferate in normal conditions and react after 
injury, but in humans, the central canal is lost in the majority of individuals 
from early childhood. It is replaced by a structure that does not proliferate 
after damage and is formed by large accumulations of ependymal cells, strong 
astrogliosis and perivascular pseudo-rosettes. We inform here of two additional 
mammals that lose the central canal during their lifetime: the Naked Mole-Rat 
(NMR, Heterocephalus glaber) and the mutant hyh (hydrocephalus with hop gait) 
mice. The morphological study of their spinal cords shows that the tissue 
substituting the central canal is not similar to that found in humans. In both 
NMR and hyh mice, the central canal is replaced by tissue reminiscent of normal 
lamina X and may include small groups of ependymal cells in the midline, 
partially resembling specific domains of the former canal. However, no features 
of the adult human ependymal remnant are found, suggesting that this structure 
is a specific human trait. In order to shed some more light on the mechanism of 
human central canal closure, we provide new data suggesting that canal patency 
is lost by delamination of the ependymal epithelium, in a process that includes 
apical polarity loss and the expression of signaling mediators involved in 
epithelial to mesenchymal transitions.

DOI: 10.3390/cells10092235
PMCID: PMC8469235
PMID: 34571884 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.