1. RMD Open. 2021 Sep;7(3):e001737. doi: 10.1136/rmdopen-2021-001737.

In vitro evaluation of disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs against rheumatoid 
arthritis associated pathogens of the oral microflora.

Kussmann M(1), Obermueller M(1), Spettel K(2), Winkler S(1), Aletaha D(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine I, Division of Infectious Diseases and 
Tropical Medicine, Medical University of Vienna, Wien, Austria.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Division of Clinical Microbiology, Medical 
University of Vienna, Wien, Austria.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine III, Division of Rheumatology, Medical 
University of Vienna, Wien, Austria daniel.aletaha@meduniwien.ac.at.

OBJECTIVES: In the past, the human microbiome has consistently been associated 
with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and disease activity. Here, we investigate the 
antimicrobial activity of disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs) against 
typical representatives of the oral microflora that have been associated with 
RA.
METHODS: DMARDs were screened for antimicrobial activity against bacteria that 
are associated with the pathogenesis of the disease and/or frequently isolated 
from the oral microflora of patients with RA. Screening was done by an agar 
diffusion assay and minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of antimicrobial 
active substances were then determined by broth dilution.
RESULTS: Aurothiomalate and sulfasalazine demonstrated broad-spectrum 
antimicrobial activity, but with MICs ranging from 18 to >280 µg/mL and 150 to 
>600 µg/mL, respectively, only at supratherapeutic concentrations. Methotrexate 
showed antimicrobial activity only against Fusobacterium nucleatum and Viridans 
streptococci. The corresponding MICs were 3.75 to >30 µg/mL and 0.5-15 µg/mL, 
respectively, thus at least for streptococci, within the therapeutically 
achievable range. No other DMARD tested showed antimicrobial activity in the 
agar diffusion screening assay.
CONCLUSION: Methotrexate, sulfasalazine and aurothiomalate showed antimicrobial 
activity against a broad spectrum of RA associated pathogens of the oral 
microflora. While methotrexate showed relevant antimicrobial activity, and to a 
more limited extent aurothiomalate, sulfasalazine was active only at far 
supratherapeutic systemic concentrations. Nevertheless, given the highly 
species-dependent antimicrobial activity and the multiple ways it can affect the 
human microbiome, our results suggest a link between antimicrobially active 
antirheumatic drugs and their potential effect in the treatment of RA.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/rmdopen-2021-001737
PMCID: PMC8483044
PMID: 34588273 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.