1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Sep 17;12:702015. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.702015. 
eCollection 2021.

Potential Activities and Long Lifetimes of Organic Carbon-Degrading 
Extracellular Enzymes in Deep Subsurface Sediments of the Baltic Sea.

Schmidt JM(1), Royalty TM(2), Lloyd KG(2), Steen AD(2)(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences, College of Arts and Sciences, The 
University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN, United States.
(2)Department of Microbiology, University of Tennessee - Knoxville, Knoxville, 
TN, United States.

Heterotrophic microorganisms in marine sediments produce extracellular enzymes 
to hydrolyze organic macromolecules, so their products can be transported inside 
the cell and used for energy and growth. Therefore, extracellular enzymes may 
mediate the fate of organic carbon in sediments. The Baltic Sea Basin is a 
primarily depositional environment with high potential for organic matter 
preservation. The potential activities of multiple organic carbon-degrading 
enzymes were measured in samples obtained by the International Ocean Discovery 
Program Expedition 347 from the Little Belt Strait, Denmark, core M0059C. 
Potential maximum hydrolysis rates (Vmax) were measured at depths down to 
77.9mbsf for the following enzymes: alkaline phosphatase, β-d-xylosidase, 
β-d-cellobiohydrolase, N-acetyl-β-d-glucosaminidase, β-glucosidase, 
α-glucosidase, leucyl aminopeptidase, arginyl aminopeptidase, prolyl 
aminopeptidase, gingipain, and clostripain. Extracellular peptidase activities 
were detectable at depths shallower than 54.95mbsf, and alkaline phosphatase 
activity was detectable throughout the core, albeit against a relatively high 
activity in autoclaved sediments. β-glucosidase activities were detected above 
30mbsf; however, activities of other glycosyl hydrolases (β-xylosidase, 
β-cellobiohydrolase, N-acetyl-β-glucosaminidase, and α-glucosidase) were 
generally indistinguishable from zero at all depths. These extracellular enzymes 
appear to be extremely stable: Among all enzymes, a median of 51.3% of enzyme 
activity was retained after autoclaving for an hour. We show that enzyme 
turnover times scale with the inverse of community metabolic rates, such that 
enzyme lifetimes in subsurface sediments, in which metabolic rates are very 
slow, are likely to be extraordinarily long. A back-of-the-envelope calculation 
suggests enzyme lifetimes are, at minimum, on the order of 230days, and may be 
substantially longer. These results lend empirical support to the hypothesis 
that a population of subsurface microbes persist by using extracellular enzymes 
to slowly metabolize old, highly degraded organic carbon.

Copyright © 2021 Schmidt, Royalty, Lloyd and Steen.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.702015
PMCID: PMC8485070
PMID: 34603228

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.