1. Transl Psychiatry. 2021 Oct 7;11(1):513. doi: 10.1038/s41398-021-01632-z.

Multi-omics driven predictions of response to acute phase combination 
antidepressant therapy: a machine learning approach with cross-trial 
replication.

Joyce JB(#)(1), Grant CW(#)(2), Liu D(2), MahmoudianDehkordi S(3), 
Kaddurah-Daouk R(3), Skime M(1), Biernacka J(4), Frye MA(1), Mayes T(5), Carmody 
T(6), Croarkin PE(1), Wang L(2), Weinshilboum R(2), Bobo WV(7), Trivedi MH(5), 
Athreya AP(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Mayo 
Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Department of Medicine, 
Duke Institute for Brain Sciences, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA.
(4)Department of Quantitative Health Sciences, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(5)Peter O'Donnell Jr. Brain Institute and The Department of Psychiatry at the 
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA.
(6)Department of Population and Data Sciences at the University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas, Dallas, TX, USA.
(7)Department of Psychiatry and Psychology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, USA.
(8)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Mayo 
Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. athreya.arjun@mayo.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Combination antidepressant pharmacotherapies are frequently used to treat major 
depressive disorder (MDD). However, there is no evidence that machine learning 
approaches combining multi-omics measures (e.g., genomics and plasma 
metabolomics) can achieve clinically meaningful predictions of outcomes to 
combination pharmacotherapy. This study examined data from 264 MDD outpatients 
treated with citalopram or escitalopram in the Mayo Clinic Pharmacogenomics 
Research Network Antidepressant Medication Pharmacogenomic Study (PGRN-AMPS) and 
111 MDD outpatients treated with combination pharmacotherapies in the Combined 
Medications to Enhance Outcomes of Antidepressant Therapy (CO-MED) study to 
predict response to combination antidepressant therapies. To assess whether 
metabolomics with functionally validated single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
improves predictability over metabolomics alone, models were trained/tested with 
and without SNPs. Models trained with PGRN-AMPS' and CO-MED's 
escitalopram/citalopram patients predicted response in CO-MED's combination 
pharmacotherapy patients with accuracies of 76.6% (p < 0.01; AUC: 0.85) without 
and 77.5% (p < 0.01; AUC: 0.86) with SNPs. Then, models trained solely with 
PGRN-AMPS' escitalopram/citalopram patients predicted response in CO-MED's 
combination pharmacotherapy patients with accuracies of 75.3% (p < 0.05; AUC: 
0.84) without and 77.5% (p < 0.01; AUC: 0.86) with SNPs, demonstrating 
cross-trial replication of predictions. Plasma hydroxylated sphingomyelins were 
prominent predictors of treatment outcomes. To explore the relationship between 
SNPs and hydroxylated sphingomyelins, we conducted multi-omics integration 
network analysis. Sphingomyelins clustered with SNPs and metabolites related to 
monoamine neurotransmission, suggesting a potential functional relationship. 
These results suggest that integrating specific metabolites and SNPs achieves 
accurate predictions of treatment response across classes of antidepressants. 
Finally, these results motivate functional investigation into how sphingomyelins 
might influence MDD pathophysiology, antidepressant response, or both.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41398-021-01632-z
PMCID: PMC8497535
PMID: 34620827 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Drs L Wang and RM Weinshilboum are co-founders 
and stockholders in OneOme. Dr. WV Bobo’s research has been supported by the 
National Institute of Mental Health, the Agency for Healthcare Quality and 
Research, the National Science Foundation, the Myocarditis Foundation, and the 
Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research. He has contributed chapters 
to UpToDate concerning the pharmacological treatment of adults with bipolar 
major depression. Dr. PE Croarkin has received research grant support from 
Neuronetics, Inc., NeoSync, Inc., and Pfizer, Inc. He has received grant in-kind 
(equipment and supply support for research studies) from Assurex Health, 
Neuronetics, Inc., and MagVenture, Inc. Dr. PE Croarkin has served as a 
consultant for Engrail Therapeutics, Myriad Neuroscience, Procter & Gamble, and 
Sunovion. Dr. MH Trivedi has provided consulting services to Acadia 
Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Alkermes, Inc., Alto Neuroscience, Inc., Axsome 
Therapeutics, GH Research Limited, GreenLight VitalSign6, Inc., Janssen, Merck 
Sharp & Dohme Corp., Neurocrine Biosciences, Inc., Orexo US, Inc., Otsuka, SAGE 
Therapeutics, Signant Health, Titan Pharmaceuticals, Inc. He has received 
grant/research funding from NIMH, NIDA, Patient-Centered Outcomes Research 
Institute (PCORI), and Cancer Prevention Research Institute of Texas (CPRIT). In 
addition, he has received editorial compensation from Oxford University Press. 
Dr. T Carmody has provided consulting services to Alkermes, Inc. Dr. R 
Kaddurah-Daouk is an inventor on key patents in the field of metabolomics in the 
study of CNS diseases and holds equity in Metabolon, Inc., a biotechnology 
company that provides metabolic profiling capabilities. Dr. MA Frye has received 
research support from Assurex Health, Myriad, Mayo Foundation, and Medibio; he 
has served as a consultant for Actify Neurotherapies, Allergan, Intra-Cellular 
Therapies, Inc., Janssen, Myriad, Neuralstem, Inc., Sanofi, Takeda, Teva 
Pharmaceuticals; he has received CME Travel/Honoraria from American Physician 
Institute, CME Outfitters, Global Academy for Medical Education. All other 
authors declared no competing interests for this work.