1. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2021 Sep 30;8:730810. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2021.730810. 
eCollection 2021.

Reduced Microvascular Blood Volume as a Driver of Coronary Microvascular Disease 
in Patients With Non-obstructive Coronary Artery Disease: Rationale and Design 
of the MICORDIS Study.

Vink CEM(1), van de Hoef TP(1), Götte MJW(1), Eringa EC(2), Appelman Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Cardiology, Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam Cardiovascular Sciences 
(ACS), Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(2)Departments of Physiology, Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam Cardiovascular Sciences 
(ACS), Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands.

Background: Ischemia with non-obstructive coronary arteries (INOCA) is part of 
the ischemic heart disease spectrum, and is particularly observed in women. 
INOCA has various mechanisms, such as coronary vasospasm and coronary 
microvascular dysfunction (CMD). A decreased coronary flow reserve (CFR) and-or 
increased myocardial resistance (MR) are commonly used to diagnose CMD. However, 
CFR and MR do not describe all pathophysiological mechanisms underlying CMD. 
Increased myocardial oxygen consumption (MVO2) normally increases myocardial 
blood volume (MBV), independently from myocardial blood flow (MBF). In addition 
insulin enhances MBV in healthy skeletal muscle, and this effect is impaired in 
INOCA-related conditions such as diabetes and obesity. Therefore, we propose 
that MBV is reduced in INOCA patients. Aim: To assess whether myocardial blood 
volume (MBV) is decreased in INOCA patients, at baseline, during 
hyperinsulinemia and during stress. Design: The MICORDIS-study is a 
single-center observational cross-sectional cohort study (identifier NTR7515). 
The primary outcome is MBV, compared between INOCA patients and matched healthy 
controls. The patient group will undergo coronary function testing using a 
Doppler guidewire, intracoronary adenosine and acetylcholine to measure CFR and 
coronary vasospasm. Both the patient- and the control group will undergo 
myocardial contrast echocardiography (MCE) to determine MBV at baseline, during 
hyperinsulinemia and during stress. Subsequently, cardiac magnetic resonance 
(CMR) will be evaluated as a new and noninvasive diagnostic tool for CMD in 
INOCA patients. Microvascular endothelial function is a determinant of MBV and 
will be evaluated by non-invasive microvascular function testing using EndoPAT 
and by measuring NO production in circulating endothelial cells (ECFCs).

Copyright © 2021 Vink, van de Hoef, Götte, Eringa and Appelman.

DOI: 10.3389/fcvm.2021.730810
PMCID: PMC8514690
PMID: 34660730

Conflict of interest statement: MG is consultant for Circle CVI (42). The 
remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any 
commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential 
conflict of interest.