1. Cardiovasc Res. 2022 Nov 10;118(14):2903-2918. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvab328.

Titin (TTN): from molecule to modifications, mechanics, and medical 
significance.

Loescher CM(1), Hobbach AJ(2), Linke WA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology I, Coronary, Peripheral Vascular Disease and Heart 
Failure, University Hospital Münster, Albert-Schweitzer-Campus 1, Building A1, 
48149 Münster, Germany.
(2)Department of Cardiology I, Coronary, Peripheral Vascular Disease and Heart 
Failure, University Hospital Münster, Münster, Germany.

The giant sarcomere protein titin is a major determinant of cardiomyocyte 
stiffness and contributor to cardiac strain sensing. Titin-based forces are 
highly regulated in health and disease, which aids in the regulation of 
myocardial function, including cardiac filling and output. Due to the enormous 
size, complexity, and malleability of the titin molecule, titin properties are 
also vulnerable to dysregulation, as observed in various cardiac disorders. This 
review provides an overview of how cardiac titin properties can be changed at a 
molecular level, including the role isoform diversity and post-translational 
modifications (acetylation, oxidation, and phosphorylation) play in regulating 
myocardial stiffness and contractility. We then consider how this regulation 
becomes unbalanced in heart disease, with an emphasis on changes in titin 
stiffness and protein quality control. In this context, new insights into the 
key pathomechanisms of human cardiomyopathy due to a truncation in the titin 
gene (TTN) are discussed. Along the way, we touch on the potential for titin to 
be therapeutically targeted to treat acquired or inherited cardiac conditions, 
such as HFpEF or TTN-truncation cardiomyopathy.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
European Society of Cardiology.

DOI: 10.1093/cvr/cvab328
PMCID: PMC9648829
PMID: 34662387 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: none declared.