1. Am J Case Rep. 2021 Oct 22;22:e932073. doi: 10.12659/AJCR.932073.

A 37-Year-Old Woman with Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy with a Dual-Chamber 
Implantable Cardioverter-Defibrillator Requiring Percutaneous Transvenous Lead 
Extraction and Multidisciplinary Management.

Dhawan R(1), Khan F(1), Samant S(1), Asawaeer M(1), Merritt Genore H(2), 
Erickson CC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, 
University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA.
(2)Department of Surgery, Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, University of 
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA.

BACKGROUND Percutaneous transvenous lead extraction (TLE) of cardiac implantable 
electronic devices can be performed with a high success rate. However, TLE has 
its limitations and challenges. Recognizing the challenges at an early stage 
during the procedure is vital for appropriate patient management. We present a 
challenging case of implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) lead extraction 
in which we aborted TLE in favor of elective surgical extraction (SE). This 
potentially prevented a major catastrophic complication of vascular tear, which 
would have required an emergent thoracotomy. CASE REPORT A 37-year-old woman 
with history of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy had a primary prevention 
dual-chamber ICD implant in 2001 and underwent right ventricular ICD lead 
revision in 2009 due to lead fracture. In 2019, she was again found to have 
right ventricular ICD lead malfunction. TLE was attempted, but no meaningful 
progression could be made despite using multiple extraction tools. Therefore, 
TLE was aborted in favor of SE. During elective SE, significant adhesions were 
noted, and the innominate vein was completely avulsed during removal of the 
leads, requiring venous reconstruction by the vascular surgery team. After SE 
and vascular reconstruction, an epicardial ICD system was placed, and the 
patient had an uneventful postoperative recovery. CONCLUSIONS This case report 
highlights the limitations of TLE and the importance of recognizing them in a 
timely manner. In all challenging cases, conversion to elective SE should be 
considered to avoid potential injuries warranting emergent surgical repair.

DOI: 10.12659/AJCR.932073
PMCID: PMC8546269
PMID: 34675166 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: Dr. Christopher C. 
Erickson is a consultant for Medtronic, Inc.; Dr. HelenMari Merritt Genore 
proctors for AtriCure. All other authors have no conflict of interest to 
disclose