1. Mol Genet Genomic Med. 2021 Dec;9(12):e1831. doi: 10.1002/mgg3.1831. Epub 2021
 Oct 26.

Filling the gap: A thorough investigation for the genetic diagnosis of unsolved 
polyposis patients with monoallelic MUTYH pathogenic variants.

Dell'Elice A(1), Cini G(1), Fornasarig M(2), Armelao F(3), Barana D(4), Bianchi 
F(5), Casalis Cavalchini GC(6), Maffè A(7), Mammi I(8), Pedroni M(9), Percesepe 
A(10), Sorrentini I(11), Tibiletti M(12)(13), Maestro R(1), Quaia M(1), Viel 
A(1).

Author information:
(1)Unit of Functional Oncogenomics and Genetics, Centro di Riferimento 
Oncologico di Aviano (CRO) IRCCS, Aviano, Italy.
(2)Unit of Oncologic Gastroenterology, Centro di Riferimento Oncologico di 
Aviano (CRO), IRCCS, Aviano, Italy.
(3)U.O. Multizonale Gastroenterologia ed Endoscopia Digestiva, Ospedale Santa 
Chiara, Azienda Provinciale per i Servizi sanitari, Trento, Italy.
(4)Oncology Unit, Local Health and Social Care Unit, ULSS8 Berica, Montecchio 
Maggiore, Italy.
(5)Clinica Oncologica e Centro Regionale di Genetica Oncologica, Università 
Politecnica delle Marche, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Ospedali Riuniti, 
Ancona, Italy.
(6)SC Genetica Medica U, AOU Città della Salute e della Scienza di Torino, 
Torino, Italy.
(7)S.S. Genetica e Biologia Molecolare, S.C. Interaziendale Laboratorio Analisi 
Chimico Cliniche e Microbiologia, ASO S Croce e Carle, Cuneo, Italy.
(8)Medical Genetics Unit, Dolo General Hospital, Venezia, Italy.
(9)Dipartimento di Scienze Mediche e Chirurgiche Materno-Infantili e 
dell'Adulto, Università di Modena e Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy.
(10)UO Genetica Medica, AOU Parma, Parma, Italy.
(11)Ospedale San Rocco, Sessa Aurunca, Italy.
(12)Department of Pathology, Circolo Hospital ASST Settelaghi, Varese, Italy.
(13)Research Center for the Study of Hereditary and Familial Tumors, Department 
of Medicine and Surgery, University of Insubria, Varese, Italy.

BACKGROUNDS: MUTYH-associated polyposis (MAP) is an autosomal recessive disease 
caused by biallelic pathogenic variants (PV) of the MUTYH gene. The aim of this 
study was to investigate the genetic causes of unexplained polyposis patients 
with monoallelic MUTYH PV. The analysis focused on 26 patients with suspected 
MAP, belonging to 23 families. Ten probands carried also one or more additional 
MUTYH variants of unknown significance.
METHODS: Based on variant type and on the collected clinical and molecular data, 
these variants were reinterpreted by applying the ACMG/AMP rules. Moreover, 
supplementary analyses were carried out to investigate the presence of other 
variants and copy number variations in the coding and promoter regions of MUTYH, 
as well as other polyposis genes (APC, NTHL1, POLE, POLD1, MSH3, RNF43, and 
MCM9).
RESULTS: We reclassified 4 out of 10 MUTYH variants as pathogenic or likely 
pathogenic, thus supporting the diagnosis of MAP in only four cases. Two other 
patients belonging to the same family showed a previously undetected deletion of 
the APC gene promoter. No PVs were found in the other investigated genes. 
However, 6 out of the 18 remaining families are still interesting MAP 
candidates, due to the co-presence of a class 3 MUTYH variant that could be 
reinterpreted in the next future.
CONCLUSION: Several efforts are necessary to fully elucidate the genetic 
etiology of suspected MAP patients, especially those with the most severe 
polyposis/tumor phenotype. Clinical data, tumor molecular profile, family 
history, and polyposis inheritance mode may guide variant interpretation and 
address supplementary studies.

© 2021 The Authors. Molecular Genetics & Genomic Medicine published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/mgg3.1831
PMCID: PMC8683633
PMID: 34704405 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.