1. PLoS One. 2021 Oct 28;16(10):e0259141. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259141. 
eCollection 2021.

Long-read sequencing to interrogate strain-level variation among 
adherent-invasive Escherichia coli isolated from human intestinal tissue.

Wang J(1), Bleich RM(2), Zarmer S(3), Zhang S(4), Dogan B(4), Simpson KW(4), 
Arthur JC(2)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel 
Hill, NC, United States of America.
(2)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, United States of America.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 
Chapel Hill, NC, United States of America.
(4)Department of Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell 
University, Ithaca, New York, United States of America.
(5)Center for Gastrointestinal Biology & Disease, University of North Carolina 
at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, United States of America.
(6)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, United States of America.

Adherent-invasive Escherichia coli (AIEC) is a pathovar linked to inflammatory 
bowel diseases (IBD), especially Crohn's disease, and colorectal cancer. AIEC 
are genetically diverse, and in the absence of a universal molecular signature, 
are defined by in vitro functional attributes. The relative ability of 
difference AIEC strains to colonize, persist, and induce inflammation in an 
IBD-susceptible host is unresolved. To evaluate strain-level variation among 
tissue-associated E. coli in the intestines, we develop a long-read sequencing 
approach to identify AIEC by strain that excludes host DNA. We use this approach 
to distinguish genetically similar strains and assess their fitness in 
colonizing the intestine. Here we have assembled complete genomes using 
long-read nanopore sequencing for a model AIEC strain, NC101, and seven strains 
isolated from the intestinal mucosa of Crohn's disease and non-Crohn's tissues. 
We show these strains can colonize the intestine of IBD susceptible mice and 
induce inflammatory cytokines from cultured macrophages. We demonstrate that 
these strains can be quantified and distinguished in the presence of 99.5% 
mammalian DNA and from within a fecal population. Analysis of global genomic 
structure and specific sequence variation within the ribosomal RNA operon 
provides a framework for efficiently tracking strain-level variation of 
closely-related E. coli and likely other commensal/pathogenic bacteria impacting 
intestinal inflammation in experimental settings and IBD patients.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259141
PMCID: PMC8553045
PMID: 34710159 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.