1. PLoS One. 2021 Nov 3;16(11):e0259241. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259241. 
eCollection 2021.

The glutaminase inhibitor telaglenastat enhances the antitumor activity of 
signal transduction inhibitors everolimus and cabozantinib in models of renal 
cell carcinoma.

Emberley E(1), Pan A(1), Chen J(1), Dang R(1), Gross M(1), Huang T(1), Li W(1), 
MacKinnon A(1), Singh D(1), Sotirovska N(1), Steggerda SM(1), Wang T(1), Parlati 
F(1).

Author information:
(1)Calithera Biosciences, Inc., South San Francisco, CA, United States of 
America.

Dysregulated metabolism is a hallmark of cancer that manifests through 
alterations in bioenergetic and biosynthetic pathways to enable tumor cell 
proliferation and survival. Tumor cells exhibit high rates of glycolysis, a 
phenomenon known as the Warburg effect, and an increase in glutamine consumption 
to support the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle. Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) tumors 
express high levels of glutaminase (GLS), the enzyme required for the first step 
in metabolic conversion of glutamine to glutamate and the entry of glutamine 
into the TCA cycle. We found that RCC cells are highly dependent on glutamine 
for proliferation, and this dependence strongly correlated with sensitivity to 
telaglenstat (CB-839), an investigational, first-in-class, selective, orally 
bioavailable GLS inhibitor. Metabolic profiling of RCC cell lines treated with 
telaglenastat revealed a decrease in glutamine consumption, which was 
concomitant with a decrease in the production of glutamate and other 
glutamine-derived metabolites, consistent with GLS inhibition. Treatment of RCC 
cells with signal transduction inhibitors everolimus (mTOR inhibitor) or 
cabozantinib (VEGFR/MET/AXL inhibitor) in combination with telaglenastat 
resulted in decreased consumption of both glucose and glutamine and synergistic 
anti-proliferative effects. Treatment of mice bearing Caki-1 RCC xenograft 
tumors with cabozantinib plus telaglenastat resulted in reduced tumor growth 
compared to either agent alone. Enhanced anti-tumor activity was also observed 
with the combination of everolimus plus telaglenastat. Collectively, our results 
demonstrate potent, synergistic, anti-tumor activity of telaglenastat plus 
signal transduction inhibitors cabozantinib or everolimus via a mechanism 
involving dual inhibition of glucose and glutamine consumption.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0259241
PMCID: PMC8565744
PMID: 34731180 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors would like to declare the following 
patents/patent applications associated with this research. Calithera 
Biosciences, Inc., has patent rights in several issued and pending applications 
related to telaglenastat and its use. Telaglenastat is in clinical development 
in a number of cancer indications (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT04265534). 
This does not alter the authors adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data 
and materials.