1. Eur J Med Genet. 2021 Dec;64(12):104373. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2021.104373. Epub
 2021 Oct 29.

Further insights into the spectrum phenotype of TRAPPC9 and CDK5RAP2 genes, 
segregating independently in a large Tunisian family with intellectual 
disability and microcephaly.

Ben Ayed I(1), Bouchaala W(2), Bouzid A(3), Feki W(4), Souissi A(5), Ben Nsir 
S(2), Ben Said M(5), Sammouda T(6), Majdoub F(7), Kharrat I(8), Kamoun F(2), 
Elloumi I(5), Kamoun H(9), Tlili A(10), Masmoudi S(5), Triki C(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Screening Processes (LPCMC), Center of 
Biotechnology of Sfax, University of Sfax, Tunisia; Medical Genetics Department, 
University Hedi Chaker Hospital of Sfax, Tunisia. Electronic address: 
ikhlas.benayed17@gmail.com.
(2)Child Neurology Department, University Hedi Chaker Hospital of Sfax, Tunisia; 
Research Laboratory "Neuropédiatrie" LR19ES15, Sfax University, Tunisia.
(3)Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Screening Processes (LPCMC), Center of 
Biotechnology of Sfax, University of Sfax, Tunisia; Medical Research, College of 
Medicine, University of Sharjah, Sharjah, United Arab Emirates.
(4)Radiology Department, Hedi Chaker University Hospital, University of Sfax, 
Sfax, Tunisia.
(5)Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Screening Processes (LPCMC), Center of 
Biotechnology of Sfax, University of Sfax, Tunisia.
(6)Department of Ophthalmology, Habib Bourguiba Hospital, Sfax, Tunisia.
(7)Medical Genetics Department, University Hedi Chaker Hospital of Sfax, 
Tunisia.
(8)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, University Habib Bourguiba Hospital of 
Sfax, Tunisia.
(9)Medical Genetics Department, University Hedi Chaker Hospital of Sfax, 
Tunisia; Laboratory of Human Molecular Genetics, LR33ES99, Faculty of Medicine 
of Sfax, University of Sfax, Sfax, Tunisia.
(10)Department of Applied Biology, College of Sciences, University of Sharjah, 
Sharjah, United Arab Emirates; Human Genetics and Stem Cell Laboratory, Research 
Institute of Sciences and Engineering, University of Sharjah, Sharjah, United 
Arab Emirates.

Intellectual disability (ID) often co-occurs with other neurologic phenotypes 
making molecular diagnosis more challenging particularly in consanguineous 
populations with the co-segregation of more than one ID-related gene in some 
cases. In this study, we investigated the phenotype of three patients from a 
large Tunisian family with significant ID phenotypic variability and 
microcephaly and performed a clinical exome sequencing in two cases. We 
identified, within the first branch, a homozygous variant in the TRAPPC9 gene 
(p.Arg472Ter) in two cases presenting severe ID, absent speech, 
congenital/secondary microcephaly in addition to autistic features, supporting 
the implication of TRAPPC9 in the "secondary" autism spectrum disorders and 
congenital microcephaly. In the second branch, we identified a homozygous 
variant (p.Lys189ArgfsTer15) in the CDK5RAP2 gene associated with an 
heterozygous TRAPPC9 variant (p.Arg472Ter) in one case harbouring primary 
hereditary microcephaly (MCPH) associated with an inter-hypothalamic adhesion, 
mixed hearing loss, selective thinning in the retinal nerve fiber layer and 
parafoveal ganglion cell complex, and short stature. Our findings expand the 
spectrum of the recently reported neurosensorial abnormalities and revealed the 
variable phenotype expressivity of CDK5RAP2 defect. Our study highlights the 
complexity of the genetic background of microcephaly/ID and the efficiency of 
the exome sequencing to provide an accurate diagnosis and to improve the 
management and follow-up of such patients.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2021.104373
PMID: 34737153 [Indexed for MEDLINE]