1. J Neuroinflammation. 2021 Nov 5;18(1):255. doi: 10.1186/s12974-021-02306-9.

Carnosine quenches the reactive carbonyl acrolein in the central nervous system 
and attenuates autoimmune neuroinflammation.

Spaas J(1)(2)(3), Franssen WMA(4)(5), Keytsman C(6)(4)(5), Blancquaert L(7), 
Vanmierlo T(6)(8)(9), Bogie J(6)(4), Broux B(6)(8)(10), Hellings N(6)(8), van 
Horssen J(6)(4)(11), Posa DK(12), Hoetker D(12), Baba SP(12), Derave W(#)(7), 
Eijnde BO(#)(6)(4).

Author information:
(1)University MS Center (UMSC) Hasselt - Pelt, Hasselt, Belgium. 
jan.spaas@uhasselt.be.
(2)BIOMED Biomedical Research Institute, Faculty of Medicine and Life Sciences, 
Hasselt University, Hasselt, Belgium. jan.spaas@uhasselt.be.
(3)Department of Movement and Sports Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health 
Sciences, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium. jan.spaas@uhasselt.be.
(4)BIOMED Biomedical Research Institute, Faculty of Medicine and Life Sciences, 
Hasselt University, Hasselt, Belgium.
(5)REVAL Rehabilitation Research Center, Faculty of Rehabilitation Sciences, 
Hasselt University, Hasselt, Belgium.
(6)University MS Center (UMSC) Hasselt - Pelt, Hasselt, Belgium.
(7)Department of Movement and Sports Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health 
Sciences, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.
(8)Neuro-Immune Connections and Repair Lab, Department of Immunology and 
Infection, Biomedical Research Institute, Hasselt University, Diepenbeek, 
Belgium.
(9)Division of Translational Neuroscience, Department Psychiatry and 
Neuropsychology, European Graduate School of Neuroscience, School for Mental 
Health and Neuroscience, Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(10)Department of Internal Medicine, Cardiovascular Research Institute 
Maastricht, Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(11)Department of Molecular Cell Biology and Immunology, Amsterdam Neuroscience, 
MS Center Amsterdam, Amsterdam University Medical Center, Location VUmc, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(12)Diabetes and Obesity Center, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic autoimmune disease driven by 
sustained inflammation in the central nervous system. One of the pathological 
hallmarks of MS is extensive free radical production. However, the subsequent 
generation, potential pathological role, and detoxification of different lipid 
peroxidation-derived reactive carbonyl species during neuroinflammation are 
unclear, as are the therapeutic benefits of carbonyl quenchers. Here, we 
investigated the reactive carbonyl acrolein and (the therapeutic effect of) 
acrolein quenching by carnosine during neuroinflammation.
METHODS: The abundance and localization of acrolein was investigated in 
inflammatory lesions of MS patients and experimental autoimmune 
encephalomyelitis (EAE) mice. In addition, we analysed carnosine levels and 
acrolein quenching by endogenous and exogenous carnosine in EAE. Finally, the 
therapeutic effect of exogenous carnosine was assessed in vivo (EAE) and in 
vitro (primary mouse microglia, macrophages, astrocytes).
RESULTS: Acrolein was substantially increased in inflammatory lesions of MS 
patients and EAE mice. Levels of the dipeptide carnosine (β-alanyl-L-histidine), 
an endogenous carbonyl quencher particularly reactive towards acrolein, and the 
carnosine-acrolein adduct (carnosine-propanal) were ~ twofold lower within EAE 
spinal cord tissue. Oral carnosine treatment augmented spinal cord carnosine 
levels (up to > tenfold), increased carnosine-acrolein quenching, reduced 
acrolein-protein adduct formation, suppressed inflammatory activity, and 
alleviated clinical disease severity in EAE. In vivo and in vitro studies 
indicate that pro-inflammatory microglia/macrophages generate acrolein, which 
can be efficiently quenched by increasing carnosine availability, resulting in 
suppressed inflammatory activity. Other properties of carnosine (antioxidant, 
nitric oxide scavenging) may also contribute to the therapeutic effects.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results identify carbonyl (particularly acrolein) quenching by 
carnosine as a therapeutic strategy to counter inflammation and macromolecular 
damage in MS.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12974-021-02306-9
PMCID: PMC8571880
PMID: 34740381 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.