1. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2022 Jan 1;322(1):F27-F41. doi: 
10.1152/ajprenal.00298.2021. Epub 2021 Nov 22.

Metformin improves relevant disease parameters in an autosomal dominant 
polycystic kidney disease mouse model.

Pastor-Soler NM(1), Li H(1), Pham J(1), Rivera D(1), Ho PY(1), Mancino V(1), 
Saitta B(1), Hallows KR(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Department of Medicine and USC/UKRO 
Kidney Research Center, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern 
California, Los Angeles, California.

Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD), caused by mutations in the 
polycystin 1 (PKD1) or polycystin 2 genes, presents with progressive development 
of kidney cysts and eventual end-stage kidney disease with limited treatment 
options. Previous work has shown that metformin reduces cyst growth in rapid 
ADPKD mouse models via inhibition of cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance 
regulator-mediated fluid secretion, mammalian target of rapamycin, and cAMP 
pathways. The present study importantly tested the effectiveness of metformin as 
a therapy for ADPKD in a more clinically relevant Pkd1RC/RC mouse model, 
homozygous for the R3277C knockin point mutation in the Pkd1 gene. This mutation 
causes ADPKD in humans. Pkd1RC/RC male and female mice, which have a slow 
progression to end-stage kidney disease, received metformin (300 mg/kg/day in 
drinking water vs. water alone) from 3 to 9 or 12 mo of age. As previously 
reported, Pkd1RC/RC females had a more severe disease phenotype as compared with 
males. Metformin treatment reduced the ratio of total kidney weight-to-body 
weight relative to age-matched and sex-matched untreated controls at both 9 and 
12 mo and reduced the cystic index in females at 9 mo. Metformin also increased 
glomerular filtration rate, lowered systolic blood pressure, improved anemia, 
and lowered blood urea nitrogen levels relative to controls in both sexes. 
Moreover, metformin reduced gene expression of key inflammatory markers and both 
gene and protein expression of kidney injury marker-1 and cyclin-dependent 
kinase-1 versus untreated controls. Altogether, these findings suggest several 
beneficial effects of metformin in this highly relevant slowly progressive ADPKD 
mouse model, which may help inform new ADPKD therapies in patients.NEW & 
NOTEWORTHY Metformin treatment improved ADPKD disease severity in a relevant, 
slowly progressive ADPKD mouse model that recapitulates a PKD-associated PKD1 
mutation. Relative to controls, metformin reduced kidney weight/body weight, 
cystic index and BUN levels, while improving GFR, blood pressure and anemia. 
Metformin also reduced key inflammatory and injury markers, along with cell 
proliferation markers. These findings suggest several beneficial effects of 
metformin in this ADPKD mouse model, which may help inform new ADPKD therapies 
in patients.

DOI: 10.1152/ajprenal.00298.2021
PMID: 34806449 [Indexed for MEDLINE]