1. J Invest Dermatol. 2022 Jun;142(6):1725-1736.e10. doi: 
10.1016/j.jid.2021.10.026. Epub 2021 Nov 20.

Angiogenin Released from ABCB5(+) Stromal Precursors Improves Healing of 
Diabetic Wounds by Promoting Angiogenesis.

Singh K(1), Maity P(1), Koroma AK(1), Basu A(1), Pandey RK(2), Vander Beken 
S(3), Haas P(1), Krug L(1), Hainzl A(1), Sindrilaru A(1), Pfeiffer C(1), 
Wlaschek M(1), Frank NY(4), Frank MH(5), Ganss C(6), Bánvölgyi A(7), Wikonkál 
N(7), Eming S(8), Pastar I(9), Tomic-Canic M(9), Kluth MA(6), 
Scharffetter-Kochanek K(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology and Allergic Diseases, Ulm University, Ulm, 
Germany.
(2)Department of Dermatology and Allergic Diseases, Ulm University, Ulm, 
Germany; Department of Oncology, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, 
Maryland, USA.
(3)Department of Dermatology and Allergic Diseases, Ulm University, Ulm, 
Germany; Bredent medical GmbH & Co KG, Senden, Germany.
(4)Transplant Research Program, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA; Department of Medicine, VA Boston Healthcare System, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA; Division of Genetics, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(5)Transplant Research Program, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA; Harvard Skin Disease Research Center, Department of 
Dermatology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA; Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Harvard University, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, USA; School of Medical and Health Sciences, Edith Cowan 
University, Perth, Australia.
(6)TICEBA GmbH, Heidelberg, Germany; RHEACELL GmbH & Co KG, Heidelberg, Germany.
(7)Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Dermatooncology, Faculty of 
Medicine, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.
(8)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, University of Cologne, Cologne, 
Germany.
(9)Wound Healing and Regenerative Medicine Research Program, Dr Phillip Frost 
Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Surgery, Miller School of Medicine, 
University of Miami, Miami, Florida, USA.
(10)Department of Dermatology and Allergic Diseases, Ulm University, Ulm, 
Germany. Electronic address: karin.scharffetter-kochanek@uniklinik-ulm.de.

Severe angiopathy is a major driver for diabetes-associated secondary 
complications. Knowledge on the underlying mechanisms essential for advanced 
therapies to attenuate these pathologies is limited. Injection of ABCB5+ stromal 
precursors at the edge of nonhealing diabetic wounds in a murine db/db model, 
closely mirroring human type 2 diabetes, profoundly accelerates wound closure. 
Strikingly, enhanced angiogenesis was substantially enforced by the release of 
the ribonuclease angiogenin from ABCB5+ stromal precursors. This compensates for 
the profoundly reduced angiogenin expression in nontreated murine chronic 
diabetic wounds. Silencing of angiogenin in ABCB5+ stromal precursors before 
injection significantly reduced angiogenesis and delayed wound closure in 
diabetic db/db mice, implying an unprecedented key role for angiogenin in tissue 
regeneration in diabetes. These data hold significant promise for further 
refining stromal precursors-based therapies of nonhealing diabetic foot ulcers 
and other pathologies with impaired angiogenesis.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jid.2021.10.026
PMCID: PMC9676024
PMID: 34808236 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Professor Markus H. Frank 
holds an US patent on ABCB5+ SPs with the number US 2013/0315880 A1. Dr. 
Christoph Ganss is the Chief Executive Officer of TICEBA GmbH, registered at the 
Amtsgericht Heidelberg und the registration number HRB 337564. MHF and NYF are 
inventors of issued or pending ABCB5-related US patents assigned to Boston 
Children’s Hospital and/or Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA, and 
licensed to TICEBA GmbH (Heidelberg, Germany) and RHEACELL GmbH & Co. KG 
(Heidelberg, Germany). MHF serves as a scientific advisor to TICEBA GmbH and 
RHEACELL GmbH & Co. KG and has participated in corporate sponsored research 
collaborations with RHEACELL GmbH & Co. KG. The other authors declare that they 
have no competing interests.