1. Front Aging Neurosci. 2021 Nov 19;13:744872. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2021.744872. 
eCollection 2021.

Higher Coffee Consumption Is Associated With Slower Cognitive Decline and Less 
Cerebral Aβ-Amyloid Accumulation Over 126 Months: Data From the Australian 
Imaging, Biomarkers, and Lifestyle Study.

Gardener SL(1)(2), Rainey-Smith SR(1)(2)(3)(4), Villemagne VL(5), Fripp J(6), 
Doré V(6)(7), Bourgeat P(6), Taddei K(1)(2), Fowler C(8), Masters CL(8), Maruff 
P(8)(9), Rowe CC(7)(8), Ames D(10)(11), Martins RN(1)(2)(12); AIBL 
Investigators.

Author information:
(1)Centre of Excellence for Alzheimer's Disease Research and Care, School of 
Medical and Health Sciences, Edith Cowan University, Joondalup, WA, Australia.
(2)Australian Alzheimer's Research Foundation, Sarich Neuroscience Research 
Institute, Perth, WA, Australia.
(3)Centre for Healthy Ageing, Health Futures Institute, Murdoch University, 
Murdoch, WA, Australia.
(4)School of Psychological Science, University of Western Australia, Perth, WA, 
Australia.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United 
States.
(6)CSIRO Health and Biosecurity/Australian e-Health Research Centre, Herston, 
QLD, Australia.
(7)Department of Molecular Imaging and Therapy, Centre for PET, Austin Health, 
Heidelberg, VIC, Australia.
(8)The Florey Institute, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, Australia.
(9)Cogstate Ltd., Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(10)National Ageing Research Institute, Parkville, VIC, Australia.
(11)Academic Unit for Psychiatry of Old Age, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, 
VIC, Australia.
(12)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, 
Australia.

Background: Worldwide, coffee is one of the most popular beverages consumed. 
Several studies have suggested a protective role of coffee, including reduced 
risk of Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, there is limited longitudinal data 
from cohorts of older adults reporting associations of coffee intake with 
cognitive decline, in distinct domains, and investigating the neuropathological 
mechanisms underpinning any such associations. Methods: The aim of the current 
study was to investigate the relationship between self-reported habitual coffee 
intake, and cognitive decline assessed using a comprehensive neuropsychological 
battery in 227 cognitively normal older adults from the Australian Imaging, 
Biomarkers, and Lifestyle (AIBL) study, over 126 months. In a subset of 
individuals, we also investigated the relationship between habitual coffee 
intake and cerebral Aβ-amyloid accumulation (n = 60) and brain volumes (n = 51) 
over 126 months. Results: Higher baseline coffee consumption was associated with 
slower cognitive decline in executive function, attention, and the AIBL 
Preclinical AD Cognitive Composite (PACC; shown reliably to measure the first 
signs of cognitive decline in at-risk cognitively normal populations), and lower 
likelihood of transitioning to mild cognitive impairment or AD status, over 126 
months. Higher baseline coffee consumption was also associated with slower 
Aβ-amyloid accumulation over 126 months, and lower risk of progressing to 
"moderate," "high," or "very high" Aβ-amyloid burden status over the same 
time-period. There were no associations between coffee intake and atrophy in 
total gray matter, white matter, or hippocampal volume. Discussion: Our results 
further support the hypothesis that coffee intake may be a protective factor 
against AD, with increased coffee consumption potentially reducing cognitive 
decline by slowing cerebral Aβ-amyloid accumulation, and thus attenuating the 
associated neurotoxicity from Aβ-amyloid-mediated oxidative stress and 
inflammatory processes. Further investigation is required to evaluate whether 
coffee intake could be incorporated as a modifiable lifestyle factor aimed at 
delaying AD onset.

Copyright © 2021 Gardener, Rainey-Smith, Villemagne, Fripp, Doré, Bourgeat, 
Taddei, Fowler, Masters, Maruff, Rowe, Ames, Martins and the AIBL Investigators.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2021.744872
PMCID: PMC8641656
PMID: 34867277

Conflict of interest statement: VV has served as a consultant for IXICO. CM is 
an advisor to Prana Biotechnology Ltd., and a consultant to Eli Lilly. PM is a 
full-time employee of Cogstate Ltd. CR has served on scientific advisory boards 
for Bayer Pharma, Elan Corporation, GE Healthcare, and AstraZeneca, has received 
speaker honoraria from Bayer Pharma and GE Healthcare, and has received research 
support from Bayer Pharma, GE Healthcare, Piramal Lifesciences and Avid 
Radiopharmaceuticals. RM is founder of, and owns stock in, Alzhyme, and is a 
co-founder of the KaRa Institute of Neurological Diseases. The remaining authors 
declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or 
financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of 
interest.