1. PLoS One. 2021 Dec 8;16(12):e0260432. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0260432. 
eCollection 2021.

A network-based method for predicting disease-associated enhancers.

Le DH(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Computer Science and Engineering, Thuyloi University, Hanoi, 
Vietnam.

BACKGROUND: Enhancers regulate transcription of target genes, causing a change 
in expression level. Thus, the aberrant activity of enhancers can lead to 
diseases. To date, a large number of enhancers have been identified, yet a small 
portion of them have been found to be associated with diseases. This raises a 
pressing need to develop computational methods to predict associations between 
diseases and enhancers.
RESULTS: In this study, we assumed that enhancers sharing target genes could be 
associated with similar diseases to predict the association. Thus, we built an 
enhancer functional interaction network by connecting enhancers significantly 
sharing target genes, then developed a network diffusion method RWDisEnh, based 
on a random walk with restart algorithm, on networks of diseases and enhancers 
to globally measure the degree of the association between diseases and 
enhancers. RWDisEnh performed best when the disease similarities are integrated 
with the enhancer functional interaction network by known disease-enhancer 
associations in the form of a heterogeneous network of diseases and enhancers. 
It was also superior to another network diffusion method, i.e., PageRank with 
Priors, and a neighborhood-based one, i.e., MaxLink, which simply chooses the 
closest neighbors of known disease-associated enhancers. Finally, we showed that 
RWDisEnh could predict novel enhancers, which are either directly or indirectly 
associated with diseases.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, RWDisEnh could be a potential method for predicting 
disease-enhancer associations.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0260432
PMCID: PMC8654176
PMID: 34879086 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.