1. Genet Med. 2022 Feb;24(2):454-462. doi: 10.1016/j.gim.2021.10.010. Epub 2021
Nov  30.

Reanalysis of eMERGE phase III sequence variants in 10,500 participants and 
infrastructure to support the automated return of knowledge updates.

Zouk H(1), Yu W(2), Oza A(2), Hawley M(2), Vijay Kumar PK(2), Koch C(2), Mahanta 
LM(2), Harley JB(3), Jarvik GP(4), Karlson EW(5), Leppig KA(6), Myers MF(7), 
Prows CA(8), Williams MS(9), Weiss ST(5), Lebo MS(10), Rehm HL(11).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Molecular Medicine, Mass General Brigham Personalized 
Medicine, Cambridge, MA; Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.
(2)Laboratory for Molecular Medicine, Mass General Brigham Personalized 
Medicine, Cambridge, MA.
(3)Division of Human Genetics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 
Cincinnati, OH; University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH; US 
Department of Veteran Affairs Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH.
(4)Departments of Medicine (Medical Genetics) and Genome Sciences, University of 
Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA.
(5)Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.
(6)Genetic Services, Kaiser Permanente of Washington, Seattle, WA.
(7)Division of Human Genetics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 
Cincinnati, OH; University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH.
(8)Division of Human Genetics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 
Cincinnati, OH.
(9)Genomic Medicine Institute, Geisinger, Danville, PA.
(10)Laboratory for Molecular Medicine, Mass General Brigham Personalized 
Medicine, Cambridge, MA; Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA; Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, 
Cambridge, MA.
(11)Laboratory for Molecular Medicine, Mass General Brigham Personalized 
Medicine, Cambridge, MA; Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA; Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA; Medical and Population Genetics, Broad 
Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA; Center for Genomic Medicine, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA. Electronic address: 
hrehm@mgh.harvard.edu.

PURPOSE: The clinical genomics knowledgebase is dynamic with variant 
classifications changing as newly identified cases, additional population data, 
and other evidence become available. This is a challenge for the clinical 
laboratory because of limited resource availability for variant reassessment.
METHODS: Throughout the Electronic Medical Records and Genomics phase III 
program, clinical sites associated with the Mass General Brigham/Broad 
sequencing center received automated, real-time notifications when reported 
variants were reclassified. In this study, we summarized the nature of these 
reclassifications and described the proactive reassessment framework we used for 
the Electronic Medical Records and Genomics program data set to identify 
variants most likely to undergo reclassification.
RESULTS: Reanalysis of 1855 variants led to the reclassification of 2% (n = 45) 
of variants, affecting 0.6% (n = 67) of participants. Of these 
reclassifications, 78% (n = 35) were high-impact changes affecting 
reportability, with 8 variants downgraded from likely pathogenic/pathogenic to 
variants of uncertain significance (VUS) and 27 variants upgraded from VUS to 
likely pathogenic/pathogenic. Most upgraded variants (67%) were initially 
classified as VUS-Favor Pathogenic, highlighting the benefit of VUS 
subcategorization. The most common reason for reclassification was new published 
case data and/or functional evidence.
CONCLUSION: Our results highlight the importance of periodic sequence variant 
reevaluation and the need for automated approaches to advance routine 
implementation of variant reevaluations in clinical practice.

Copyright © 2021 American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gim.2021.10.010
PMCID: PMC10128874
PMID: 34906510 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest H.Z., W.Y., A.O., M.H., 
P.K.V.K., C.K., L.M.M., E.W.K., S.T.W., M.S.L., and H.L.R. were either employed 
at Mass General Brigham at the time this work was performed or are current 
employees of Mass General Brigham, which receives royalties on the sale of 
GeneInsight Software. All other authors declare no conflicts of interest.