1. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2022 Feb;21(2):100187. doi: 10.1016/j.mcpro.2021.100187. 
Epub 2021 Dec 16.

DIA-Based Proteomics Identifies IDH2 as a Targetable Regulator of Acquired Drug 
Resistance in Chronic Myeloid Leukemia.

Liu W(1), Sun Y(2), Ge W(3), Zhang F(2), Gan L(2), Zhu Y(2), Guo T(4), Liu K(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, College of Pharmacy, Dalian Medical 
University, Dalian, Liaoning, China; Key Laboratory of Structural Biology of 
Zhejiang Province, School of Life Sciences, Westlake University, Hangzhou, 
Zhejiang, China; Center for Infectious Disease Research, Westlake Laboratory of 
Life Sciences and Biomedicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China; Institute of Basic 
Medical Sciences, Westlake Institute for Advanced Study, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 
China; Omics Research Institute, Westlake Omics (Hangzhou) Biotechnology Co, 
Ltd, Hangzhou, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Structural Biology of Zhejiang Province, School of Life 
Sciences, Westlake University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China; Center for Infectious 
Disease Research, Westlake Laboratory of Life Sciences and Biomedicine, 
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China; Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Westlake 
Institute for Advanced Study, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(3)Department of Big Data, Westlake Omics (Hangzhou) Biotechnology Co, Ltd, 
Hangzhou, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Structural Biology of Zhejiang Province, School of Life 
Sciences, Westlake University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China; Center for Infectious 
Disease Research, Westlake Laboratory of Life Sciences and Biomedicine, 
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China; Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Westlake 
Institute for Advanced Study, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. Electronic address: 
guotiannan@westlake.edu.cn.
(5)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, College of Pharmacy, Dalian Medical 
University, Dalian, Liaoning, China. Electronic address: liukexin89@163.com.

Drug resistance is a critical obstacle to effective treatment in patients with 
chronic myeloid leukemia. To understand the underlying resistance mechanisms in 
response to imatinib mesylate (IMA) and adriamycin (ADR), the parental 
K562 cells were treated with low doses of IMA or ADR for 2 months to generate 
derivative cells with mild, intermediate, and severe resistance to the drugs as 
defined by their increasing resistance index. PulseDIA-based (DIA 
[data-independent acquisition]) quantitative proteomics was then employed to 
reveal the proteome changes in these resistant cells. In total, 7082 proteins 
from 98,232 peptides were identified and quantified from the dataset using four 
DIA software tools including OpenSWATH, Spectronaut, DIA-NN, and EncyclopeDIA. 
Sirtuin signaling pathway was found to be significantly enriched in both 
ADR-resistant and IMA-resistant K562 cells. In particular, isocitrate 
dehydrogenase (NADP(+)) 2 was identified as a potential drug target correlated 
with the drug resistance phenotype, and its inhibition by the antagonist 
AGI-6780 reversed the acquired resistance in K562 cells to either ADR or IMA. 
Together, our study has implicated isocitrate dehydrogenase (NADP(+)) 2 as a 
potential target that can be therapeutically leveraged to alleviate the drug 
resistance in K562 cells when treated with IMA and ADR.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mcpro.2021.100187
PMCID: PMC8800142
PMID: 34922009 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest T. G. and Y. Z. are 
shareholders of Westlake Omics, Inc. W. G. is an employee of Westlake Omics, 
Inc. The remaining authors declare no competing interests.