1. Lipids. 2022 Mar;57(2):105-114. doi: 10.1002/lipd.12334. Epub 2021 Dec 19.

Genetic variants in SLC22A1 are related to serum lipid levels in Mexican women.

Cahua-Pablo JÁ(1), Gómez-Zamudio JH(2), Reséndiz-Abarca CA(1), Tello-Flores 
VA(1), Eulogio-Metodio Y(1), Ramírez-Vargas MA(1), Cruz M(2), Del Carmen 
Alarcón-Romero L(3), Matia-García I(4), Marino-Ortega LA(4), Zubillaga-Guerrero 
MI(3), Flores-Alfaro E(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratorio en Epidemiología Clínica y Molecular, Facultad de Ciencias 
Químico-Biológicas, Universidad Autónoma de Guerrero, Chilpancingo, Mexico.
(2)Unidad de Investigación Médica en Bioquímica, Hospital de Especialidades 
"Bernardo Sepúlveda", Centro Médico Nacional Siglo XXI, Instituto Mexicano del 
Seguro Social, Mexico City, Mexico.
(3)Laboratorio en Citopatología e Histoquímica, Facultad de Ciencias 
Químico-Biológicas, Universidad Autónoma de Guerrero, Chilpancingo, Mexico.
(4)Laboratorio en Obesidad y Diabetes, Facultad de Ciencias Químico-Biológicas, 
Universidad Autónoma de Guerrero, Chilpancingo, Mexico.

Dyslipidemia is the main risk factor for coronary artery disease and is 
characterized by alterations in concentrations of lipids, including low-density 
lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-c), high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-c), 
and triacylglycerols. The participation of several genes in the development of 
dyslipidemia has been evidenced. Genetic variants in SLC22A1 have been 
associated with elevated cholesterol and LDL-c levels. The aim of this study was 
to evaluate the association between single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 
the SLC22A1 gene with atherogenic risk lipid levels in Mexican women. 
Anthropometric and biochemical measurements were performed, and four SNPs in 
SLC22A1 were genotyped by real-time polymerase chain reaction. The 
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium was verified, and haplotype frequencies were 
calculated. We found significant differences between the allele frequencies of 
the SNPs analyzed with those reported in Mexico and in the world, which could be 
due to differences in the historical admixture of the women studied. Generalized 
linear models were evaluated to determine the association between genotypes and 
haplotypes with lipids levels. We identified a significant increase in total 
cholesterol and LDL-c levels in women who were carriers of the GA and AG 
genotypes of the polymorphisms rs628031 and rs594709, respectively, significant 
effect that is also shown in a dominant inheritance model. Interestingly, we 
identified an important relationship of the AGC-GAT haplotype with the elevation 
in LDL-c levels and AGA-GAT haplotype with the elevation in HDL-c levels. On the 
other hand, we found a strong linkage disequilibrium between the polymorphisms 
studied. Our results show that variants in the SLC22A1 gene influence serum 
levels of atherogenic risk lipids, suggesting that these variants probably 
affect the function of organic cation transporter-1 and therefore, on the 
regulation of lipid metabolism.

© 2021 AOCS.

DOI: 10.1002/lipd.12334
PMID: 34927264 [Indexed for MEDLINE]