1. CRISPR J. 2022 Feb;5(1):40-52. doi: 10.1089/crispr.2021.0087. Epub 2021 Dec
17.

Chimeric RNA: DNA TracrRNA Improves Homology-Directed Repair In Vitro and In 
Vivo.

Simone BW(1), Lee HB(1), Daby CL(1), Ata H(2), Restrepo-Castillo S(3), 
Martínez-Gálvez G(4), Kar B(1), Gendron WAC(3), Clark KJ(1), Ekker SC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Biomedical Engineering and 
Physiology Track, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(2)Department of Clinical and Translational Sciences, Biomedical Engineering and 
Physiology Track, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(3)Mayo Clinic Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Virology and Gene Therapy 
Track, Biomedical Engineering and Physiology Track, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
Minnesota, USA.
(4)Mayo Clinic Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Biomedical Engineering 
and Physiology Track, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.

Nearly 90% of human pathogenic mutations are caused by small genetic variations, 
and methods to correct these errors efficiently are critically important. One 
way to make small DNA changes is providing a single-stranded oligo 
deoxynucleotide (ssODN) containing an alteration coupled with a targeted 
double-strand break (DSB) at the target locus in the genome. Coupling an ssODN 
donor with a CRISPR-Cas9-mediated DSB is one of the most streamlined approaches 
to introduce small changes. However, in many systems, this approach is 
inefficient and introduces imprecise repair at the genetic junctions. We herein 
report a technology that uses spatiotemporal localization of an ssODN with 
CRISPR-Cas9 to improve gene alteration. We show that by fusing an ssODN template 
to the trans-activating RNA (tracrRNA), we recover precise genetic alterations, 
with increased integration and precision in vitro and in vivo. Finally, we show 
that this technology can be used to enhance gene conversion with other gene 
editing tools such as transcription activator like effector nucleases.

DOI: 10.1089/crispr.2021.0087
PMCID: PMC8892967
PMID: 34935462 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: B.W.S. and S.C.E. have a financial interest in 
LEAH Laboratories and Mettaforge Therapeutics. S.C.E. and K.J.C. have a 
financial interest in LifEngine Biotechnologies and Recombinetics, Inc.