1. Eur J Cancer. 2022 Feb;162:209-220. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2021.09.042. Epub 2021
 Dec 18.

Circulating tumour DNA sequencing to determine therapeutic response and identify 
tumour heterogeneity in patients with paediatric solid tumours.

Stankunaite R(1), George SL(2), Gallagher L(3), Jamal S(4), Shaikh R(5), Yuan 
L(6), Hughes D(7), Proszek PZ(8), Carter P(9), Pietka G(10), Heide T(11), James 
C(12), Tari H(13), Lynn C(14), Jain N(15), Portela LR(16), Rogers T(17), Vaidya 
SJ(18), Chisholm JC(19), Carceller F(20), Szychot E(21), Mandeville H(22), 
Angelini P(23), Jesudason AB(24), Jackson M(24), Marshall LV(25), Gatz SA(26), 
Anderson J(27), Sottoriva A(28), Chesler L(29), Hubank M(30).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Pathology Section, The Institute of Cancer Research, London, UK; 
Clinical Genomics, The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation, London, UK; Evolutionary 
Genomics and Modelling Lab, Centre for Evolution and Cancer, The Institute of 
Cancer Research, London, UK. Electronic address: Reda.stankunaite@icr.ac.uk.
(2)Paediatric Tumour Biology, Division of Clinical Studies, The Institute of 
Cancer Research, London, UK; Children and Young People's Unit, Royal Marsden NHS 
Foundation Trust, London, UK. Electronic address: sally.george@icr.ac.uk.
(3)Molecular Pathology Section, The Institute of Cancer Research, London, UK; 
Clinical Genomics, The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation, London, UK. Electronic 
address: lewis.gallagher@icr.ac.uk.
(4)Molecular Pathology Section, The Institute of Cancer Research, London, UK; 
Clinical Genomics, The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation, London, UK. Electronic 
address: sabri.jamal@icr.ac.uk.
(5)Molecular Pathology Section, The Institute of Cancer Research, London, UK; 
Clinical Genomics, The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation, London, UK. Electronic 
address: Ridwan.Shaikh@icr.ac.uk.
(6)Molecular Pathology Section, The Institute of Cancer Research, London, UK; 
Clinical Genomics, The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation, London, UK. Electronic 
address: Lina.Yuan@icr.ac.uk.
(7)Molecular Pathology Section, The Institute of Cancer Research, London, UK; 
Clinical Genomics, The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation, London, UK. Electronic 
address: debbie.hughes@icr.ac.uk.
(8)Molecular Pathology Section, The Institute of Cancer Research, London, UK; 
Clinical Genomics, The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation, London, UK. Electronic 
address: Paula.Proszek@icr.ac.uk.
(9)Molecular Pathology Section, The Institute of Cancer Research, London, UK; 
Clinical Genomics, The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation, London, UK. Electronic 
address: Paul.Carter@icr.ac.uk.
(10)Molecular Pathology Section, The Institute of Cancer Research, London, UK; 
Clinical Genomics, The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation, London, UK. Electronic 
address: Grzegorz.Pietka@icr.ac.uk.
(11)Evolutionary Genomics and Modelling Lab, Centre for Evolution and Cancer, 
The Institute of Cancer Research, London, UK. Electronic address: 
Timon.Heide@icr.ac.uk.
(12)Evolutionary Genomics and Modelling Lab, Centre for Evolution and Cancer, 
The Institute of Cancer Research, London, UK. Electronic address: 
chela.james@icr.ac.uk.
(13)Evolutionary Genomics and Modelling Lab, Centre for Evolution and Cancer, 
The Institute of Cancer Research, London, UK; Glioma Lab, The Institute of 
Cancer Research, London, UK. Electronic address: Haider.Tari@icr.ac.uk.
(14)Evolutionary Genomics and Modelling Lab, Centre for Evolution and Cancer, 
The Institute of Cancer Research, London, UK. Electronic address: 
Claire.Lynn@icr.ac.uk.
(15)Department of Haematology and Oncology, Great Ormond Street Hospital for 
Children NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK. Electronic address: 
Neha.Jain@gosh.nhs.uk.
(16)Department of Haematology and Oncology, Great Ormond Street Hospital for 
Children NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK. Electronic address: 
Laura.ReyPortela@gosh.nhs.uk.
(17)Paediatric Tumour Biology, Division of Clinical Studies, The Institute of 
Cancer Research, London, UK. Electronic address: tony.rogers@icr.ac.uk.
(18)Paediatric Tumour Biology, Division of Clinical Studies, The Institute of 
Cancer Research, London, UK; Children and Young People's Unit, Royal Marsden NHS 
Foundation Trust, London, UK. Electronic address: Sucheta.Vaidya@icr.ac.uk.
(19)Paediatric Tumour Biology, Division of Clinical Studies, The Institute of 
Cancer Research, London, UK; Children and Young People's Unit, Royal Marsden NHS 
Foundation Trust, London, UK. Electronic address: Julia.Chisholm@icr.ac.uk.
(20)Paediatric Tumour Biology, Division of Clinical Studies, The Institute of 
Cancer Research, London, UK; Children and Young People's Unit, Royal Marsden NHS 
Foundation Trust, London, UK. Electronic address: Fernando.Carceller@rmh.nhs.uk.
(21)Oak Centre for Children and Young People, Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust 
Hospital, Sutton, UK; Department of Paediatrics, Paediatric Oncology and 
Immunology, Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin, Poland. Electronic address: 
e.szychot@nhs.net.
(22)Children and Young People's Unit, Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, 
London, UK. Electronic address: Henry.Mandeville@rmh.nhs.uk.
(23)Children and Young People's Unit, Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, 
London, UK. Electronic address: paola.angelini@nhs.net.
(24)Department of Paediatric Haematology and Oncology, Royal Hospital for Sick 
Children, Edinburgh, UK.
(25)Paediatric Tumour Biology, Division of Clinical Studies, The Institute of 
Cancer Research, London, UK; Children and Young People's Unit, Royal Marsden NHS 
Foundation Trust, London, UK. Electronic address: 
LynleyVanessa.Marshall@icr.ac.uk.
(26)Children and Young People's Unit, Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, 
London, UK; Sarcoma Molecular Pathology Team, Divisions of Molecular Pathology 
and Cancer Therapeutics, The Institute of Cancer Research, London, UK. 
Electronic address: S.Gatz@bham.ac.uk.
(27)Department of Haematology and Oncology, Great Ormond Street Hospital for 
Children NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK; Developmental Biology and Cancer 
Programme, UCL GOS Institute of Child Health, London, UK. Electronic address: 
j.anderson@ucl.ac.uk.
(28)Evolutionary Genomics and Modelling Lab, Centre for Evolution and Cancer, 
The Institute of Cancer Research, London, UK. Electronic address: 
andrea.sottoriva@icr.ac.uk.
(29)Paediatric Tumour Biology, Division of Clinical Studies, The Institute of 
Cancer Research, London, UK; Children and Young People's Unit, Royal Marsden NHS 
Foundation Trust, London, UK. Electronic address: Louis.Chesler@icr.ac.uk.
(30)Molecular Pathology Section, The Institute of Cancer Research, London, UK; 
Clinical Genomics, The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation, London, UK. Electronic 
address: Michael.Hubank@icr.ac.uk.

OBJECTIVE: Clinical diagnostic sequencing of circulating tumour DNA (ctDNA) is 
well advanced for adult patients, but application to paediatric cancer patients 
lags behind.
METHODS: To address this, we have developed a clinically relevant (67 gene) NGS 
capture panel and accompanying workflow that enables sensitive and reliable 
detection of low-frequency genetic variants in cell-free DNA (cfDNA) from 
children with solid tumours. We combined gene panel sequencing with low pass 
whole-genome sequencing of the same library to inform on genome-wide copy number 
changes in the blood.
RESULTS: Analytical validity was evaluated using control materials, and the 
method was found to be highly sensitive (0.96 for SNVs and 0.97 for INDEL), 
specific (0.82 for SNVs and 0.978 for INDEL), repeatable (>0.93 [95% CI: 
0.89-0.95]) and reproducible (>0.87 [95% CI: 0.87-0.95]). Potential for clinical 
application was demonstrated in 39 childhood cancer patients with a spectrum of 
solid tumours in which the single nucleotide variants expected from tumour 
sequencing were detected in cfDNA in 94.4% (17/18) of cases with active 
extracranial disease. In 13 patients, where serial samples were available, we 
show a close correlation between events detected in cfDNA and treatment 
response, demonstrate that cfDNA analysis could be a useful tool to monitor 
disease progression, and show cfDNA sequencing has the potential to identify 
targetable variants that were not detected in tumour samples.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first pan-cancer DNA sequencing panel that we know to 
be optimised for cfDNA in children for blood-based molecular diagnostics in 
paediatric solid tumours.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejca.2021.09.042
PMCID: PMC7617116
PMID: 34933802 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement The authors 
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships, which may be 
considered as potential competing interests: Michael Hubank has received 
consultancy or honoraria or lab support in the last 5 years from the following 
companies: Amgen, Astex Pharma, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Bristol Myers Squibb, Lilly, Guardant Health, Illumina, Incyte, Merck, Novartis, 
Qiagen, Roche Diagnostics (each < £2500). Other authors declare no competing 
interests.