1. Front Physiol. 2021 Dec 13;12:793924. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2021.793924. 
eCollection 2021.

Salt-Sensitivity of Blood Pressure and Insulin Resistance.

Ertuglu LA(1), Elijovich F(2), Laffer CL(2), Kirabo A(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical 
Center, Nashville, TN, United States.
(2)Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt 
University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, United States.

Salt sensitivity of blood pressure (SSBP) is an independent risk factor for 
cardiovascular morbidity and mortality that is seen in both hypertensive and 
normotensive populations. Insulin resistance (IR) strongly correlates with SSBP 
and affects nearly 50% of salt sensitive people. While the precise mechanism by 
which IR and SSBP relate remains elusive, several common pathways are involved 
in the genesis of both processes, including vascular dysfunction and immune 
activation. Vascular dysfunction associated with insulin resistance is 
characterized by loss of nitric oxide (NO)-mediated vasodilation and heightened 
endothelin-1 induced vasoconstriction, as well as capillary rarefaction. It 
manifests with increased blood pressure (BP) in salt sensitive murine models. 
Another common denominator in the pathogenesis of insulin resistance, 
hypertension, and salt sensitivity (SS) is immune activation involving 
pro-inflammatory cytokines like tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, IL-1β, and IL-6. 
In the last decade, a new understanding of interstitial sodium storage in 
tissues such as skin and muscle has revolutionized traditional concepts of body 
sodium handling and pathogenesis of SS. We have shown that interstitial Na+ can 
trigger a T cell mediated inflammatory response through formation of 
isolevuglandin protein adducts in antigen presenting cells (APCs), and that this 
response is implicated in salt sensitive hypertension. The peroxisome 
proliferator-activated receptor γ (PPARγ) is a transcription factor that 
modulates both insulin sensitivity and BP. PPARγ agonists increase insulin 
sensitivity and ameliorate salt sensitivity, whereas deficiency of PPARγ results 
in severe insulin resistance and hypertension. These findings suggest that PPARγ 
plays a role in the common pathogenesis of insulin sensitivity and salt 
sensitivity, perhaps via effects on the immune system and vascular function. The 
goal of this review is to discuss those mechanisms that may play a role in both 
SSBP and in insulin resistance.

Copyright © 2021 Ertuglu, Elijovich, Laffer and Kirabo.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2021.793924
PMCID: PMC8711096
PMID: 34966295

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.