1. Hum Reprod Update. 2022 Feb 28;28(2):200-231. doi: 10.1093/humupd/dmab043.

Autophagy: a multifaceted player in the fate of sperm.

Wang M(1)(2)(3), Zeng L(4), Su P(4), Ma L(1)(3), Zhang M(1)(3), Zhang YZ(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Reproductive Medicine, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, 
Wuhan, Hubei, P.R. China.
(2)Harvard Reproductive Endocrine Science Center and Reproductive Endocrine 
Unit, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Clinical Medicine Research Center of Prenatal Diagnosis and Birth Health in 
Hubei Province, Wuhan, Hubei, P.R. China.
(4)Institute of Reproductive Health, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University 
of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, P.R. China.

BACKGROUND: Autophagy is an intracellular catabolic process of degrading and 
recycling proteins and organelles to modulate various physiological and 
pathological events, including cell differentiation and development. Emerging 
data indicate that autophagy is closely associated with male reproduction, 
especially the biosynthetic and catabolic processes of sperm. Throughout the 
fate of sperm, a series of highly specialized cellular events occur, involving 
pre-testicular, testicular and post-testicular events. Nonetheless, the most 
fundamental question of whether autophagy plays a protective or harmful role in 
male reproduction, especially in sperm, remains unclear.
OBJECTIVE AND RATIONALE: We summarize the functional roles of autophagy in the 
pre-testicular (hypothalamic-pituitary-testis (HPG) axis), testicular 
(spermatocytogenesis, spermatidogenesis, spermiogenesis, spermiation) and 
post-testicular (sperm maturation and fertilization) processes according to the 
timeline of sperm fate. Additionally, critical mechanisms of the action and 
clinical impacts of autophagy on sperm are identified, laying the foundation for 
the treatment of male infertility.
SEARCH METHODS: In this narrative review, the PubMed database was used to search 
peer-reviewed publications for summarizing the functional roles of autophagy in 
the fate of sperm using the following terms: 'autophagy', 'sperm', 
'hypothalamic-pituitary-testis axis', 'spermatogenesis', 'spermatocytogenesis', 
'spermatidogenesis', 'spermiogenesis', 'spermiation', 'sperm maturation', 
'fertilization', 'capacitation' and 'acrosome' in combination with 
autophagy-related proteins. We also performed a bibliographic search for the 
clinical impact of the autophagy process using the keywords of autophagy 
inhibitors such as 'bafilomycin A1', 'chloroquine', 'hydroxychloroquine', 
'3-Methyl Adenine (3-MA)', 'lucanthone', 'wortmannin' and autophagy activators 
such as 'rapamycin', 'perifosine', 'metformin' in combination with 'disease', 
'treatment', 'therapy', 'male infertility' and equivalent terms. In addition, 
reference lists of primary and review articles were reviewed for additional 
relevant publications. All relevant publications until August 2021 were 
critically evaluated and discussed on the basis of relevance, quality and 
timelines.
OUTCOMES: (i) In pre-testicular processes, autophagy-related genes are involved 
in the regulation of the HPG axis; and (ii) in testicular processes, mTORC1, the 
main gate to autophagy, is crucial for spermatogonia stem cell (SCCs) 
proliferation, differentiation, meiotic progression, inactivation of sex 
chromosomes and spermiogenesis. During spermatidogenesis, autophagy maintains 
haploid round spermatid chromatoid body homeostasis for differentiation. During 
spermiogenesis, autophagy participates in acrosome biogenesis, flagella 
assembly, head shaping and the removal of cytoplasm from elongating spermatid. 
After spermatogenesis, through PDLIM1, autophagy orchestrates apical ectoplasmic 
specialization and basal ectoplasmic specialization to handle cytoskeleton 
assembly, governing spermatid movement and release during spermiation. In 
post-testicular processes, there is no direct evidence that autophagy 
participates in the process of capacitation. However, autophagy modulates the 
acrosome reaction, paternal mitochondria elimination and clearance of membranous 
organelles during fertilization.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS: Deciphering the roles of autophagy in the entire fate of 
sperm will provide valuable insights into therapies for diseases, especially 
male infertility.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of European 
Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology.

DOI: 10.1093/humupd/dmab043
PMCID: PMC8889000
PMID: 34967891 [Indexed for MEDLINE]