1. Mol Vis. 2021 Dec 7;27:679-690. eCollection 2021.

Lacrimal gland homeostasis is maintained by the AQP5 pathway by attenuating 
endoplasmic reticulum stress inflammation in the lacrimal gland of AQP5 knockout 
mice.

Hu S(1), Di G(1)(2), Cao X(1), Liu Y(1), Wang Y(1), Zhao H(3), Wang D(4), Chen 
P(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Anatomy, Histology and Embryology, School of Basic 
Medicine, Qingdao University, Qingdao, Shandong Province, China.
(2)Institute of Stem Cell Regeneration Medicine, School of Basic Medicine, 
Qingdao University, Qingdao, China.
(3)The 971 Hospital of the Chinese People's Liberation Army Navy, Qingdao, 
Shandong Province, China.
(4)Qingdao Aier Eye Hospital, Qingdao, China.

PURPOSE: AQP5-/- mice spontaneously exhibit dry eye symptoms. The purpose of 
this study was to assess the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-mediated 
inflammation generated by a deficiency of aquaporin 5 (AQP5) in the lacrimal 
gland.
METHODS: Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining, Oil Red O staining, and 
transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analysis were performed to identify 
structural changes in lacrimal gland epithelial cells because of AQP5 
deficiency. Corneal epithelial defects were assessed with sodium fluorescein 
staining. The expression profiles of mRNA and proteins were determined by 
quantitative real-time reverse transcription PCR (qRT-PCR) and western blot. 
Mice in the quercetin group were injected intraperitoneally with 40 mg/kg of 
quercetin, and the control group was injected with an equal volume of dimethyl 
sulfoxide (DMSO) for 4 weeks.
RESULTS: Aqueous tear secretion fell at about 50% in 1- and 6-month-old AQP5-/- 
mice compared with that of AQP5+/+ mice. TEM showed that the ER structure was 
damaged. ER stress was significantly increased in the lacrimal gland of AQP5-/- 
mice. Lipid droplets accumulated in the matrix and acinar cells, and changes 
occurred in the lipid metabolism and gene expression levels for PPARα, CPT1α, 
and CPT2 in the AQP5-/- mice. Immune cell infiltration and increases in the gene 
expression levels of the chemokines CXCL1, CXCL2, and CCL5 were found in the 
lacrimal gland of AQP5-/- mice. Quercetin partially reversed ER stress levels, 
inflammation, and lipid accumulation, and it inhibited tear secretion.
CONCLUSIONS: The study data indicated that a deficiency of AQP5 induced 
pathophysiological changes and functional decompensation of the lacrimal gland. 
Quercetin may improve the inflammation in the lacrimal glands of AQP5-/- mice by 
regulating the ER stress levels.

Copyright © 2021 Molecular Vision.

PMCID: PMC8684812
PMID: 35002213 [Indexed for MEDLINE]