1. Genes (Basel). 2021 Dec 27;13(1):60. doi: 10.3390/genes13010060.

Transcriptomic Analysis of the Pistacia vera (L.) Fruits Enable the 
Identification of Genes and Hormone-Related Gene Linked to Inflorescence Bud 
Abscission.

Benny J(1), Giovino A(2), Marra FP(3), Balan B(1), Martinelli F(4), Caruso T(1), 
Marchese A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Agricultural, Food and Forest Sciences, University of Palermo, 
Viale delle Scienze-Ed. 4, 90128 Palermo, Italy.
(2)Council for Agricultural Research and Economics (CREA), Research Centre for 
Plant Protection and Certification (CREA-DC), 90011 Bagheria, Italy.
(3)Department of Architecture (DARCH), University of Palermo, Viale delle 
Scienze-Ed. 8, 90128 Palermo, Italy.
(4)Department of Biology, University of Florence, Sesto Fiorentino, 50019 
Florence, Italy.

Pistacia vera (L.) is an alternate bearing species. The tree produces axillary 
inflorescence buds every year. Still, they abscise in "ON" overloaded shoots, 
causing a limited production in the following "OFF" year, causing a significant 
and unfavorable production fluctuation. In this work, we carried out de novo 
discovery and transcriptomic analysis in fruits of "ON" and "OFF" shoots of the 
cultivar Bianca. We also investigated whether the fruit signaling pathway and 
hormone biosynthesis directly or indirectly linked to the premature fall of the 
inflorescence buds causing alternate bearing. We identified 1536 differentially 
expressed genes (DEGs) in fruits of "ON" vs. "OFF" shoots, which are involved 
primarily in sugar metabolism, plant hormone pathways and transcription factors. 
The premature bud abscission linked to the phenomenon is attributable to a lack 
of nutrients (primarily sugar) and the possible competition between the same 
branches' sinks (fruits vs. inflorescence buds). Hormone pathways are involved 
as a response to signals degradation and remobilization of carbon and nutrients 
due to the strengthening of the developing embryos. Genes of the secondary 
metabolism and transcription factors are also involved in tailoring the 
individual branches response to the nutritional stress and sink competition. 
Crosstalk among sugar and various hormone-related genes, e.g., ethylene, auxin, 
ABA and cytokinin, were determined. The discovery of putative biomarkers like 
callose synthase 5, trehalose-6-phosphate synthase, NAD(P)-linked oxidoreductase 
and MIOX2, Jasmonate, and salicylic acid-related genes can help to design 
precision farming practices to mitigate the alternate bearing phenomenon to 
increase farming profitability. The aim of the analysis is to provide insight 
into the gene expression profiling of the fate of "ON" and "OFF" fruits 
associated with the alternate bearing in the pistachio.

DOI: 10.3390/genes13010060
PMCID: PMC8774834
PMID: 35052400 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.