1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2022 Jan 4;9:701547. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2021.701547. 
eCollection 2021.

The Wnt Signaling Pathway in Diabetic Nephropathy.

Wang H(1), Zhang R(2), Wu X(2), Chen Y(2), Ji W(2), Wang J(2), Zhang Y(2), Xia 
Y(3), Tang Y(4), Yuan J(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Jining Medical University, Jining, China.
(2)Basic Medical School, Jining Medical University, Jining, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Precision Oncology of Shandong Higher Education, Institute 
of Precision Medicine, Jining Medical University, Jining, China.
(4)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, School of Basic Medicine and Clinical 
Pharmacy, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing, China.
(5)Collaborative Innovation Center, Jining Medical University, Jining, China.

Diabetic nephropathy (DN) is a serious kidney-related complication of both type 
1 and type 2 diabetes mellitus (T1DM, T2DM) and the second major cause of 
end-stage kidney disease. DN can lead to hypertension, edema, and proteinuria. 
In some cases, DN can even progress to kidney failure, a life-threatening 
condition. The precise etiology and pathogenesis of DN remain unknown, although 
multiple factors are believed to be involved. The main pathological 
manifestations of DN include mesangial expansion, thickening of the glomerular 
basement membrane, and podocyte injury. Eventually, these pathological 
manifestations will lead to glomerulosclerosis, thus affecting renal function. 
There is an urgent need to develop new strategies for the prevention and 
treatment of DN. Existing evidence shows that the Wnt signaling cascade plays a 
key role in regulating the development of DN. Previous studies focused on the 
role of the Wnt canonical signaling pathway in DN. Subsequently, accumulated 
evidence on the mechanism of the Wnt non-canonical signaling indicated that 
Wnt/Ca2+ and Wnt/PCP also have essential roles in the progression of DN. In this 
review, we summarize the specific mechanisms of Wnt signaling in the occurrence 
and development of DN in podocyte injury, mesangial cell injury, and renal 
fibrosis. Also, to elucidate the significance of the Wnt canonical pathway in 
the process of DN, we uncovered evidence supporting that both Wnt/PCP and 
Wnt/Ca2+ signaling are critical for DN development.

Copyright © 2022 Wang, Zhang, Wu, Chen, Ji, Wang, Zhang, Xia, Tang and Yuan.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2021.701547
PMCID: PMC8763969
PMID: 35059392

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.