1. Cells. 2022 Jan 7;11(2):200. doi: 10.3390/cells11020200.

Human iPSC-Cardiomyocytes as an Experimental Model to Study Epigenetic Modifiers 
of Electrophysiology.

Pozo MR(1), Meredith GW(1), Entcheva E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, George Washington University, 
Washington, DC 20052, USA.

The epigenetic landscape and the responses to pharmacological epigenetic 
regulators in each human are unique. Classes of epigenetic writers and erasers, 
such as histone acetyltransferases, HATs, and histone deacetylases, HDACs, 
control DNA acetylation/deacetylation and chromatin accessibility, thus exerting 
transcriptional control in a tissue- and person-specific manner. Rapid 
development of novel pharmacological agents in clinical testing-HDAC inhibitors 
(HDACi)-targets these master regulators as common means of therapeutic 
intervention in cancer and immune diseases. The action of these epigenetic 
modulators is much less explored for cardiac tissue, yet all new drugs need to 
be tested for cardiotoxicity. To advance our understanding of chromatin 
regulation in the heart, and specifically how modulation of DNA acetylation 
state may affect functional electrophysiological responses, human-induced 
pluripotent stem-cell-derived cardiomyocyte (hiPSC-CM) technology can be 
leveraged as a scalable, high-throughput platform with ability to provide 
patient-specific insights. This review covers relevant background on the known 
roles of HATs and HDACs in the heart, the current state of HDACi development, 
applications, and any adverse cardiac events; it also summarizes relevant 
differential gene expression data for the adult human heart vs. hiPSC-CMs along 
with initial transcriptional and functional results from using this new 
experimental platform to yield insights on epigenetic control of the heart. We 
focus on the multitude of methodologies and workflows needed to quantify 
responses to HDACis in hiPSC-CMs. This overview can help highlight the power and 
the limitations of hiPSC-CMs as a scalable experimental model in capturing 
epigenetic responses relevant to the human heart.

DOI: 10.3390/cells11020200
PMCID: PMC8774228
PMID: 35053315 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.