1. Transl Vis Sci Technol. 2022 Feb 1;11(2):15. doi: 10.1167/tvst.11.2.15.

A Pilot Application of an iTRAQ-Based Proteomics Screen Estimates the Effects of 
Cigarette Smokers' Serum on RPE Cells With AMD High-Risk Alleles.

Cai B(1), Zhang Z(1)(2), Sun S(1), Lin T(1), Ke Y(1), Li Z(1), Yang J(1), Li 
X(1).

Author information:
(1)Tianjin Key Laboratory of Retinal Functions and Diseases, Tianjin 
International Joint Research and Development Center of Ophthalmology and Vision 
Science, Eye Institute and School of Optometry, Tianjin Medical University Eye 
Hospital, People's Republic of China.
(2)Eye Institute and Department of Ophthalmology, Eye & ENT Hospital, Fudan 
University, NHC Key Laboratory of Myopia (Fudan University); Key Laboratory of 
Myopia, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Shanghai Research Center of 
Ophthalmology and Optometry, Shanghai, China.

PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to explore whether there are interactions 
between genetic (ARMS2/HTRA1) and environmental factors (cigarette smoking) in 
the pathogenesis of age-related macular degeneration (AMD).
METHODS: Primary human retinal pigment epithelial (hRPE) cells were obtained 
from four donors' eyes with AMD high-risk ARMS2/HTRA1 alleles, and two donors' 
eyes with wild-type alleles were used as controls. The pooled serum from 32 
smokers and 35 nonsmokers were collected and used separately to treat hRPE 
cells. The isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ)-based 
proteomics was used to identify associated proteins and comparing the 
differences between AMD high-risk and low-risk HTRA1/ARMS2 alleles after 
exposure to smokers' serum.
RESULTS: After stimulation with the smokers' serum, 400 differentially expressed 
proteins (DEPs) were detected in the high-risk allele cells. Several DEPs are 
involved in neuronal protein degeneration and oxidative stress pathways. The 
smokers' serum stimulation or HTRA1 overexpression can both upregulate 
caveolin-1, which was one of the DEPs. Besides, the smokers' serum enhanced the 
phagocytosis of cultured human RPE cells.
CONCLUSIONS: The study confirmed the AMD high-risk alleles, HTRA1, and cigarette 
smoking can promote AMD development by regulating caveolin-1 expression.
TRANSLATIONAL RELEVANCE: AMD high-risk alleles and environmental risk factors 
can promote the occurrence and development of AMD by regulating caveolin-1 
expression, upregulation of which will induce apoptotic cell death in response 
to cellular stress in early AMD conditions.

DOI: 10.1167/tvst.11.2.15
PMCID: PMC8842534
PMID: 35138344 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: B. Cai, None; Z. Zhang, None; S. 
Sun, None; T. Lin, None; Y. Ke, None; Z. Li, None; J. Yang, None; X. Li, None