1. Front Genet. 2022 Jan 27;12:795123. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2021.795123.
eCollection  2021.

Human Immune System Diseasome Networks and Female Oviductal Microenvironment: 
New Horizons to be Discovered.

Taraschi A(1)(2), Cimini C(1), Colosimo A(1), Ramal-Sanchez M(1), Moussa 
F(1)(3), Mokh S(4), Valbonetti L(1)(5), Capacchietti G(1), Tagaram I(1), Bernabò 
N(1)(5), Barboni B(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Biosciences and Technology for Food, Agriculture and Environment, 
University of Teramo, Teramo, Italy.
(2)Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale dell'Abruzzo e del Molise "G. 
Caporale", Teramo, Italy.
(3)Doctoral School of Science and Technology Lebanese University, Beirut, 
Lebanon.
(4)National Council for Scientific Research (CNRS), Lebanese Atomic Energy 
Commission (LAEC), Laboratory for Analysis of Organic Compound (LACO), Beiru, 
Lebanon.
(5)Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology 
(CNR-IBBC/EMMA/Infrafrontier/IMPC), National Research Council, Rome, Italy.

Human hypofertility and infertility are two worldwide conditions experiencing 
nowadays an alarming increase due to a complex ensemble of events. The immune 
system has been suggested as one of the responsible for some of the 
etiopathogenic mechanisms involved in these conditions. To shed some light into 
the strong correlation between the reproductive and immune system, as can be 
inferred by the several and valuable manuscripts published to date, here we 
built a network using a useful bioinformatic tool (DisGeNET), in which the key 
genes involved in the sperm-oviduct interaction were linked. This constitutes an 
important event related with Human fertility since this interaction, and 
specially the spermatozoa, represents a not-self entity immunotolerated by the 
female. As a result, we discovered that some proteins involved in the 
sperm-oviduct interaction are implicated in several immune system diseases 
while, at the same time, some immune system diseases could interfere by using 
different pathways with the reproduction process. The data presented here could 
be of great importance to understand the involvement of the immune system in 
fertility reduction in Humans, setting the basis for potential immune 
therapeutic tools in the near future.

Copyright © 2022 Taraschi, Cimini, Colosimo, Ramal-Sanchez, Moussa, Mokh, 
Valbonetti, Capacchietti, Tagaram, Bernabò and Barboni.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2021.795123
PMCID: PMC8829125
PMID: 35154249

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.