1. mBio. 2021 Feb 22;13(1):e0387321. doi: 10.1128/mbio.03873-21. Epub 2022 Feb
15.

Plasma Membrane Phosphatidylinositol-4-Phosphate Is Not Necessary for Candida 
albicans Viability yet Is Key for Cell Wall Integrity and Systemic Infection.

Garcia-Rodas R(1), Labbaoui H(1), Orange F(2), Solis N(3), Zaragoza O(4), Filler 
SG(3)(5), Bassilana M(1), Arkowitz RA(1).

Author information:
(1)Université Côte d'Azur, CNRS, INSERM, Institute of Biology Valrose, Nice, 
France.
(2)Université Côte d'Azur, CCMA, Nice, France.
(3)Institute for Infection and Immunity, Lundquist Institute for Biomedical 
Innovation at Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Torrance, California, USA.
(4)Mycology Reference Laboratory, National Centre for Microbiology, Health 
Institute Carlos III, Majadahonda, Madrid, Spain.
(5)David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, California, USA.

Phosphatidylinositol phosphates are key phospholipids with a range of regulatory 
roles, including membrane trafficking and cell polarity. 
Phosphatidylinositol-4-phosphate [PI(4)P] at the Golgi apparatus is required for 
the budding-to-filamentous-growth transition in the human-pathogenic fungus 
Candida albicans; however, the role of plasma membrane PI(4)P is unclear. We 
have investigated the importance of this phospholipid in C. albicans growth, 
stress response, and virulence by generating mutant strains with decreased 
levels of plasma membrane PI(4)P, via deletion of components of the PI-4-kinase 
complex, i.e., Efr3, Ypp1, and Stt4. The amounts of plasma membrane PI(4)P in 
the efr3Δ/Δ and ypp1Δ/Δ mutants were ∼60% and ∼40%, respectively, of that in the 
wild-type strain, whereas it was nearly undetectable in the stt4Δ/Δ mutant. All 
three mutants had reduced plas7ma membrane phosphatidylserine (PS). Although 
these mutants had normal yeast-phase growth, they were defective in filamentous 
growth, exhibited defects in cell wall integrity, and had an increased exposure 
of cell wall β(1,3)-glucan, yet they induced a range of hyphal-specific genes. 
In a mouse model of hematogenously disseminated candidiasis, fungal plasma 
membrane PI(4)P levels directly correlated with virulence; the efr3Δ/Δ mutant 
had wild-type virulence, the ypp1Δ/Δ mutant had attenuated virulence, and the 
stt4Δ/Δ mutant caused no lethality. In the mouse model of oropharyngeal 
candidiasis, only the ypp1Δ/Δ mutant had reduced virulence, indicating that 
plasma membrane PI(4)P is less important for proliferation in the oropharynx. 
Collectively, these results demonstrate that plasma membrane PI(4)P levels play 
a central role in filamentation, cell wall integrity, and virulence in C. 
albicans. IMPORTANCE While the PI-4-kinases Pik1 and Stt4 both produce PI(4)P, 
the former generates PI(4)P at the Golgi apparatus and the latter at the plasma 
membrane, and these two pools are functionally distinct. To address the 
importance of plasma membrane PI(4)P in Candida albicans, we generated deletion 
mutants of the three putative plasma membrane PI-4-kinase complex components and 
quantified the levels of plasma membrane PI(4)P in each of these strains. Our 
work reveals that this phosphatidylinositol phosphate is specifically critical 
for the yeast-to-hyphal transition, cell wall integrity, and virulence in a 
mouse systemic infection model. The significance of this work is in identifying 
a plasma membrane phospholipid that has an infection-specific role, which is 
attributed to the loss of plasma membrane PI(4)P resulting in β(1,3)-glucan 
unmasking.

DOI: 10.1128/mbio.03873-21
PMCID: PMC8942462
PMID: 35164565 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.