1. PLoS Genet. 2022 Feb 22;18(2):e1010088. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1010088. 
eCollection 2022 Feb.

Lrh1 can help reprogram sexual cell fate and is required for Sertoli cell 
development and spermatogenesis in the mouse testis.

Agrimson KS(1), Minkina A(1), Sadowski D(1), Wheeler A(1), Murphy MW(1), 
Gearhart MD(1), Bardwell VJ(1)(2), Zarkower D(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Developmental Biology Center and Department of Genetics, Cell Biology, and 
Development, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, United States of 
America.
(2)University of Minnesota Masonic Cancer Center, Minneapolis, Minnesota, United 
States of America.

The mammalian nuclear hormone receptors LRH1 (NR5A2) and SF1 (NR5A1) are close 
paralogs that can bind the same DNA motif and play crucial roles in gonadal 
development and function. Lrh1 is essential for follicle development in the 
ovary and has been proposed to regulate steroidogenesis in the testis. Lrh1 
expression in the testis is highly elevated by loss of the sex regulator Dmrt1, 
which triggers male-to-female transdifferentiation of Sertoli cells. While Sf1 
has a well-defined and crucial role in testis development, no function for Lrh1 
in the male gonad has been reported. Here we use conditional genetics to examine 
Lrh1 requirements both in gonadal cell fate reprogramming and in normal 
development of the three major cell lineages of the mouse testis. We find that 
loss of Lrh1 suppresses sexual transdifferentiation, confirming that Lrh1 can 
act as a key driver in reprogramming sexual cell fate. In otherwise wild-type 
testes, we find that Lrh1 is dispensable in Leydig cells but is required in 
Sertoli cells for their proliferation, for seminiferous tubule morphogenesis, 
for maintenance of the blood-testis barrier, for feedback regulation of androgen 
production, and for support of spermatogenesis. Expression profiling identified 
misexpressed genes likely underlying most aspects of the Sertoli cell phenotype. 
In the germ line we found that Lrh1 is required for maintenance of functional 
spermatogonia, and hence mutants progressively lose spermatogenesis. Reduced 
expression of the RNA binding factor Nxf2 likely contributes to the SSC defect. 
Unexpectedly, however, over time the Lrh1 mutant germ line recovered abundant 
spermatogenesis and fertility. This finding indicates that severe germ line 
depletion triggers a response allowing mutant spermatogonia to recover the 
ability to undergo complete spermatogenesis. Our results demonstrate that Lrh1, 
like Sf1, is an essential regulator of testis development and function but has a 
very distinct repertoire of functions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1010088
PMCID: PMC8896720
PMID: 35192609 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.