1. Int J Oncol. 2022 Apr;60(4):37. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2022.5327. Epub 2022 Feb 22.

HepaCAM‑PIK3CA axis regulates the reprogramming of glutamine metabolism to 
inhibit prostate cancer cell proliferation.

He Z(#)(1), Gao Y(#)(2), Li T(1), Yu C(3), Ou L(1), Luo C(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Clinical Laboratory Diagnostics (Ministry of Education), 
School of Laboratory Medicine, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400016, 
P.R. China.
(2)Department of Laboratory Diagnosis, People's Hospital of Chongqing Banan 
District, Chongqing 401320, P.R. China.
(3)Center for Clinical Molecular Medicine, Children's Hospital of Chongqing 
Medical University, Chongqing 400014, P.R. China.
(#)Contributed equally

Energy metabolism reprogramming is becoming an increasingly important hallmark 
of cancer. Specifically, cancers tend to undergo metabolic reprogramming to 
upregulate a cell‑dependent glutamine (Gln) metabolism. Notably, hepatocellular 
cell adhesion molecule (HepaCAM) has been previously reported to serve a key 
role as a tumour suppressor. However, the possible regulatory role of HepaCAM in 
Gln metabolism in prostate cancer (PCa) remains poorly understood. In the 
present study, bioinformatics analysis predicted a significant negative 
correlation among the expression of HepaCAM, 
phosphatidylinositol‑4,5‑bisphosphate 3‑kinase catalytic subunit α (PIK3CA), 
glutaminase (GLS) and solute carrier family 1 member 5 (SLC1A5), components of 
Gln metabolism, in clinical and genomic datasets. Immunohistochemistry results 
verified a negative correlation between HepaCAM and PIK3CA expression in PCa 
tissues. Subsequently, liquid chromatography‑tandem mass spectrometry (LC‑MS/MS) 
and gas chromatography‑mass spectrometry (GC‑MS) assays were performed, and the 
results revealed markedly reduced levels of Gln and metabolic flux in the blood 
samples of patients with PCa and in PCa cells. Mechanistically, overexpression 
of HepaCAM inhibited Gln metabolism and proliferation by regulating PIK3CA in 
PCa cells. In addition, Gln metabolism was discovered to be stress‑resistant in 
PCa cells, since the expression levels of GLS and SLC1A5 remained high for a 
period of time after Gln starvation. However, overexpression of HepaCAM reversed 
this resistance to some extent. Additionally, alpelisib, a specific inhibitor of 
PIK3CA, effectively potentiated the inhibitory effects of HepaCAM overexpression 
on Gln metabolism and cell proliferation through mass spectrometry and CCK‑8 
experiments. In addition, the inhibitory effect of PIK3CA on the growth of tumor 
tissue in nude mice was also confirmed by immunohistochemistry in vivo. To 
conclude, the results from the present study revealed an abnormal Gln metabolic 
profile in the blood samples of patients with PCa, suggesting that it can be 
applied as a clinical diagnostic tool for PCa. Additionally, a key role of the 
HepaCAM/PIK3CA axis in regulating Gln metabolism, cell proliferation and tumour 
growth was identified. The combination of alpelisib treatment with the 
upregulation of HepaCAM expression may serve as a novel method for treating 
patients with PCa.

DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2022.5327
PMCID: PMC8878713
PMID: 35191516 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.