1. Biomedicines. 2022 Jan 26;10(2):288. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines10020288.

Modeling Alzheimer's Disease in Caenorhabditis elegans.

Alvarez J(1), Alvarez-Illera P(1), Santo-Domingo J(1), Fonteriz RI(1), Montero 
M(1).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular y Fisiología, Facultad de 
Medicina, Unidad de Excelencia Instituto de Biología y Genética Molecular 
(IBGM), Universidad de Valladolid and CSIC, Ramón y Cajal, 7, E-47005 
Valladolid, Spain.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most frequent cause of dementia. After decades 
of research, we know the importance of the accumulation of protein aggregates 
such as β-amyloid peptide and phosphorylated tau. We also know that mutations in 
certain proteins generate early-onset Alzheimer's disease (EOAD), and many other 
genes modulate the disease in its sporadic form. However, the precise molecular 
mechanisms underlying AD pathology are still unclear. Because of ethical 
limitations, we need to use animal models to investigate these processes. The 
nematode Caenorhabditis elegans has received considerable attention in the last 
25 years, since the first AD models overexpressing Aβ peptide were described. We 
review here the main results obtained using this model to study AD. We include 
works studying the basic molecular mechanisms of the disease, as well as those 
searching for new therapeutic targets. Although this model also has important 
limitations, the ability of this nematode to generate knock-out or 
overexpression models of any gene, single or combined, and to carry out 
toxicity, recovery or survival studies in short timeframes with many individuals 
and at low cost is difficult to overcome. We can predict that its use as a model 
for various diseases will certainly continue to increase.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines10020288
PMCID: PMC8869312
PMID: 35203497

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.