1. PLoS One. 2022 Mar 16;17(3):e0264273. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0264273. 
eCollection 2022.

Genomic analysis of virulence factors and antimicrobial resistance of group B 
Streptococcus isolated from pregnant women in northeastern Mexico.

Palacios-Saucedo GDC(1), Rivera-Morales LG(2), Vázquez-Guillén JM(2), 
Caballero-Trejo A(3), Mellado-García MC(2), Flores-Flores AS(2), 
González-Navarro JA(2), Herrera-Rivera CG(4), Osuna-Rosales LE(5), 
Hernández-González JA(6), Vázquez-Juárez R(6), Barrón-Enríquez C(2), 
Valladares-Trujillo R(7), Treviño-Baez JD(3), Alonso-Téllez CA(4), 
Ramírez-Calvillo LD(4), Cerda-Flores RM(8), Ortiz-López R(5), Rivera-Alvarado 
MÁ(1), Solórzano-Santos F(9), Castro-Garza J(10), Rodríguez-Padilla C(2).

Author information:
(1)División de Investigación en Salud y División de Auxiliares de Diagnóstico, 
Unidad Médica de Alta Especialidad Hospital de Especialidades No. 25, Instituto 
Mexicano del Seguro Social, Monterrey, Nuevo León, México.
(2)Laboratorio de Inmunología y Virología, Facultad de Ciencias Biológicas, 
Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León, San Nicolás de los Garza, Nuevo León, 
México.
(3)Departamento de Epidemiología y Dirección de Educación e Investigación, 
Unidad Médica de Alta Especialidad No. 23 Hospital de Ginecología y Obstetricia 
"Dr. Ignacio Morones Prieto", Instituto Mexicano del Seguro Social, Monterrey, 
Nuevo León, México.
(4)Dirección General de Calidad y Educación en Salud, Secretaría de Salud, 
Alcaldía Miguel Hidalgo, Ciudad de México, México.
(5)Unidad de Genómica, Centro de Investigación y Desarrollo en Ciencias de la 
Salud, Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León, Monterrey, Nuevo León, México.
(6)Laboratorio de Genómica y Bioinformática, Centro de Investigaciones 
Biológicas del Noroeste, La Paz, Baja California Sur, México.
(7)Coordinación de Educación e Investigación en Salud, Hospital General de Zona 
No. 17, Instituto Mexicano del Seguro Social, Monterrey, Nuevo León, México.
(8)Facultad de Enfermería, Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León, Monterrey, Nuevo 
León, México.
(9)Hospital de Pediatría, Centro Médico Nacional Siglo XXI, Instituto Mexicano 
del Seguro Social, Alcaldía Cuauhtémoc, Ciudad de México, México.
(10)Laboratorio de Bioquímica y Genética de Microorganismos, Facultad de 
Ciencias Biológicas, Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León, San Nicolás de los 
Garza, Nuevo León, México.

INTRODUCTION: Group B Streptococcus (GBS) causes infections in women during 
pregnancy and puerperium and invasive infections in newborns. The genes lmb, 
cylE, scpB, and hvgA are involved with increased virulence of GBS, and 
hypervirulent clones have been identified in different regions. In addition, 
increasing resistance of GBS to macrolides and lincosamides has been reported, 
so knowing the patterns of antibiotic resistance may be necessary to prevent and 
treat GBS infections. This study aimed to identify virulence genes and 
antibiotic resistance associated with GBS colonization in pregnant women from 
northeastern Mexico.
METHODS: Pregnant women with 35-37 weeks of gestation underwent recto-vaginal 
swabbing. One swab was inoculated into Todd-Hewitt broth supplemented with 
gentamicin and nalidixic acid, a second swab was inoculated into LIM enrichment 
broth, and a third swab was submerged into a transport medium. All samples were 
subcultured onto blood agar. After overnight incubation, suggestive colonies 
with or without hemolysis were analyzed to confirm GBS identification by Gram 
staining, catalase test, hippurate hydrolysis, CAMP test, and incubation in a 
chromogenic medium. We used latex agglutination to confirm and serotype GBS 
isolates. Antibiotic resistance patterns were assessed by Vitek 2 and disk 
diffusion. Periumbilical, rectal and nasopharyngeal swabs were collected from 
some newborns of colonized mothers. All colonized women and their newborns were 
followed up for three months to assess the development of disease attributable 
to GBS. Draft genomes of all GBS isolates were obtained by whole-genome 
sequencing. In addition, bioinformatic analysis to identify genes encoding 
capsular polysaccharides and virulence factors was performed using BRIG, while 
antibiotic resistance genes were identified using the CARD database.
RESULTS: We found 17 GBS colonized women out of 1154 pregnant women (1.47%). 
None of the six newborns sampled were colonized, and no complications due to GBS 
were detected in pregnant women or newborns. Three isolates were serotype I, 5 
serotype II, 3 serotype III, 4 serotype IV, and 2 serotype V. Ten distinct 
virulence gene profiles were identified, being scpB, lmb, fbsA, acp, PI-1, 
PI-2a, cylE the most common (3/14, 21%). The virulence genes identified were 
scpB, lmb, cylE, PI-1, fbsA, PI-2a, acp, fbsB, PI-2b, and hvgA. We identified 
resistance to tetracycline in 65% (11/17) of the isolates, intermediate 
susceptibility to clindamycin in 41% (7/17), and reduced susceptibility to 
ampicillin in 23.5% (4/17). The tetM gene associated to tetracyclines resistance 
was found in 79% (11/14) and the mel and mefA genes associated to macrolides 
resistance in 7% (1/14).
CONCLUSIONS: The low prevalence of colonization and the non-occurrence of 
mother-to-child transmission suggest that the intentional search for GBS 
colonization in this population is not justified. Our results also suggest that 
risk factors should guide the use of intrapartum antibiotic prophylaxis. The 
detection of strains with genes coding virulence factors means that clones with 
pathogenic potential circulates in this region. On the other hand, the 
identification of decreased susceptibility to antibiotics from different 
antimicrobial categories shows the importance of adequately knowing the 
resistance patterns to prevent and to treat GBS perinatal infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0264273
PMCID: PMC8926241
PMID: 35294459 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.