1. J Clin Lab Anal. 2022 May;36(5):e24359. doi: 10.1002/jcla.24359. Epub 2022 Mar
 21.

Gut microbiome: New biomarkers in early screening of colorectal cancer.

Zhou P(1)(2), Yang D(2)(3), Sun D(1)(2)(3), Zhou Y(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, and Zhejiang Key Laboratory 
of Pathophysiology, School of Medicine, Ningbo University, Ningbo, China.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, The Affiliated Hospital of Medical School, 
Ningbo University, Ningbo, China.
(3)Institute of Digestive Disease of Ningbo University, Ningbo, China.

BACKGROUND: Certain "star intestinal bacteria" have been found to act as a 
contributor to the development of colorectal cancer (CRC). Besides, given that 
the gut microbiome can be detected in a diverse range of samples (stool, tissue, 
blood, etc), it is categorized into fecal microbiome, blood microbiome, and 
tissue microbiome.
METHODS: To provide an overview of the recent research progress, this review 
summarizes the characteristics of the gut microbiome in different samples at 
each stage of CRC and their screening efficiency.
RESULTS: The screening models constructed from different sample microbiomes 
(healthy/colorectal adenoma, healthy/CRC, and colorectal adenoma/CRC) have both 
strengths and constraints in terms of biomarker reproducibility and area under 
the receiver-operating characteristic curve (AUC) of the screening models. Many 
bacteria, such as Bifidobacteria, Fusobacterium nucleatum (F. n), Geotrichum 
candidum, Porphyromonas asaccharolytica, Escherichia coli, Rhodococcus, 
Anaerostipes caccae, Enhydrobacter, Lachnoclostridiumsp. m3, Bacteroides clarus, 
Clostridium hathewayi, Ruminococcaceae, Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, 
Culinariside, and enterotoxigenic Bacteroides fragilis (ETBF), show favorable 
diagnostic efficacy in early screening of colorectal cancer.
CONCLUSIONS: This review highlights stool, blood, tissue, and bowel fluid are 
the main sample sources for biomarkers, each with its own advantages and 
limitations. Moreover, other samples such as extracellular vesicles and biofilms 
also should been deserved further attention.

© 2022 The Authors. Journal of Clinical Laboratory Analysis published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jcla.24359
PMCID: PMC9102648
PMID: 35312122 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.