1. Front Genet. 2022 Mar 9;13:820878. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.820878. eCollection
 2022.

The Impact of Mediterranean Dietary Intervention on Metabolic and Hormonal 
Parameters According to BRCA1/2 Variant Type.

Oliverio A(1), Radice P(2), Colombo M(2), Paradiso A(3), Tommasi S(4), Daniele 
A(3), Terribile DA(5)(6), Magno S(6), Guarino D(5), Manoukian S(7), Peissel 
B(7), Bruno E(1), Pasanisi P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Research, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori di 
Milano, Milan, Italy.
(2)Unit of Molecular Bases of Genetic Risk and Genetic Testing, Fondazione IRCCS 
Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori di Milano, Milan, Italy.
(3)Experimental Oncology, Center for Study of Heredo-Familial Tumors, IRCCS 
Istituto Tumori "Giovanni Paolo II" Bari, Bari, Italy.
(4)Molecular Diagnostics and Pharmacogenetics Unit, IRCCS Istituto Tumori 
"Giovanni Paolo II" Bari, Bari, Italy.
(5)Department of Women Health Area, Università Cattolica S. Cuore, Rome, Italy.
(6)Department of Women and Child Health and Public Health, Fondazione 
Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(7)Unit of Medical Genetics, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori di 
Milano, Milan, Italy.

The female carriers of BRCA1/2 pathogenic variants (mutations) face a high 
lifetime risk of developing breast and/or ovarian cancer. However, the risk may 
differ depending on various genetic and non-genetic elements, including 
metabolic and hormonal factors. We previously showed that a 6-month 
Mediterranean dietary intervention trial reduced body weight and the levels of 
insulin-like growth factor I and other metabolic factors in BRCA mutation 
carriers. We also found that higher baseline levels of glucose and insulin were 
significantly associated with BRCA loss-of-function (LOF) variants. In this 
study, we evaluated whether the BRCA mutation type influences in a different way 
the metabolic and hormonal response to the dietary intervention in 366 female 
carriers. The LOF variant carriers randomized in the intervention group (IG) 
showed significantly higher changes in most considered parameters compared to 
the control group (CG). The nonsynonymous variant carriers in the IG showed 
similar changes, but none of them were statistically significant. Performing the 
"delta" analysis of differences (intention-to-treat analysis), we observed that 
in LOF variant carriers, the reduction of insulin levels was significantly more 
pronounced that in nonsynonymous variant carriers. These findings suggest that 
the changes in insulin levels might be modulated by a different response to the 
dietary intervention mediated by BRCA LOF variants.

Copyright © 2022 Oliverio, Radice, Colombo, Paradiso, Tommasi, Daniele, 
Terribile, Magno, Guarino, Manoukian, Peissel, Bruno and Pasanisi.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2022.820878
PMCID: PMC8959623
PMID: 35356420

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.