1. Int J Pharm. 2022 May 10;619:121704. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2022.121704. Epub 
2022 Mar 28.

Dual targeting powder formulation of antiviral agent for customizable nasal and 
lung deposition profile through single intranasal administration.

Seow HC(1), Liao Q(1), Lau ATY(1), Leung SWS(1), Yuan S(2), Lam JKW(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Pharmacy, LKS Faculty of Medicine, The 
University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong SAR.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Emerging Infectious Diseases, Caro Yu Centre for 
Infection, Department of Microbiology, LKS Faculty of Medicine, The University 
of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong SAR; Centre for Virology, Vaccinology and 
Therapeutics, Hong Kong Science Park, New Territories, Hong Kong SAR.
(3)Department of Pharmacology and Pharmacy, LKS Faculty of Medicine, The 
University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong SAR; Advanced Biomedical 
Instrumentation Centre, Hong Kong Science Park, New Territories, Hong Kong SAR. 
Electronic address: jkwlam@hku.hk.

Unpredictable outbreaks due to respiratory viral infections emphasize the need 
for new drug delivery strategies to the entire respiratory tract. As viral 
attack is not limited to a specific anatomic region, antiviral therapy that 
targets both the upper and lower respiratory tract would be most effective. This 
study aimed to formulate tamibarotene, a retinoid derivative previously reported 
to display broad-spectrum antiviral activity against influenza and severe acute 
respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2), as a novel dual particle size 
powder formulation that targets both the nasal cavity and the lung by a single 
route of intranasal administration. Spray freeze drying (SFD) and spray drying 
(SD) techniques were employed to prepare tamibarotene powder formulations, and 
cyclodextrin was used as the sole excipient to enhance drug solubility. With the 
employment of appropriate atomizing nozzles, particles of size above 10 μm and 
below 5 μm could be produced for nasal and lung deposition, respectively. The 
aerosol performance of the powder was evaluated using Next Generation Impactor 
(NGI) coupled with a glass expansion chamber and the powder was dispersed with a 
nasal powder device. By blending powder of two different particle sizes, a 
single powder formulation with dual aerosol deposition characteristic in both 
the nasal and pulmonary regions was produced. The aerosol deposition fractions 
in the nasal cavity and pulmonary region could be modulated by varying the 
powder mixing ratio. All dry powder formulations exhibited spherical structures, 
amorphous characteristics and improved dissolution profile as compared to the 
unformulated tamibarotene. Overall, a novel dual targeting powder formulation of 
tamibarotene exhibiting customizable aerosol deposition profile was developed. 
This exceptional formulation strategy can be adopted to deliver other 
antimicrobial agents to the upper and lower airways for the prevention and 
treatment of human respiratory infections.

Copyright © 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2022.121704
PMCID: PMC8958263
PMID: 35358643 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.