1. J Biol Chem. 2022 May;298(5):101887. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2022.101887. Epub 2022
 Apr 1.

PALMD regulates aortic valve calcification via altered glycolysis and 
NF-κB-mediated inflammation.

Wang S(1), Yu H(2), Gao J(3), Chen J(4), He P(5), Zhong H(4), Tan X(4), Staines 
KA(6), Macrae VE(7), Fu X(8), Jiang L(9), Zhu D(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Basic Medical Research, The Sixth Affiliated Hospital of 
Guangzhou Medical University, Qingyuan, Guangdong, China; Guangzhou Institute of 
Cardiovascular Disease, Guangdong Key Laboratory of Vascular Diseases, State Key 
Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, The Second Affiliated Hospital, School of 
Basic Medical Sciences, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 
China.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, GMU-GIBH Joint School of 
Life Science, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Basic Medical Research, The Sixth Affiliated Hospital of 
Guangzhou Medical University, Qingyuan, Guangdong, China.
(4)Guangzhou Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, Guangdong Key Laboratory of 
Vascular Diseases, State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, The Second 
Affiliated Hospital, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Guangzhou Medical 
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(5)Guangdong Provincial Geriatrics Institute, and Department of Cardiology, 
Guangdong Cardiovascular Institute, Guangdong Provincial People's Hospital, 
Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou, China.
(6)Centre for Stress and Age-Related Disease, School of Pharmacy and 
Biomolecular Sciences, University of Brighton, Brighton, UK.
(7)Functional Genetics and Development, The Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary 
Studies and The Roslin Institute, University of Edinburgh, Midlothian, UK.
(8)Guangzhou Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, Guangdong Key Laboratory of 
Vascular Diseases, State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, The Second 
Affiliated Hospital, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Guangzhou Medical 
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China. Electronic address: 
fuxiaod@mail.gzhmu.edu.cn.
(9)Guangdong Provincial Geriatrics Institute, and Department of Cardiology, 
Guangdong Cardiovascular Institute, Guangdong Provincial People's Hospital, 
Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou, China. Electronic address: 
jianglei@smu.edu.cn.
(10)Guangzhou Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, Guangdong Key Laboratory of 
Vascular Diseases, State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, The Second 
Affiliated Hospital, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Guangzhou Medical 
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China. Electronic address: 
dongxing.zhu@gzhmu.edu.cn.

Recent genome-wide association and transcriptome-wide association studies have 
identified an association between the PALMD locus, encoding palmdelphin, a 
protein involved in myoblast differentiation, and calcific aortic valve disease 
(CAVD). Nevertheless, the function and underlying mechanisms of PALMD in CAVD 
remain unclear. We herein investigated whether and how PALMD affects the 
pathogenesis of CAVD using clinical samples from CAVD patients and a human valve 
interstitial cell (hVIC) in vitro calcification model. We showed that PALMD was 
upregulated in calcified regions of human aortic valves and calcified hVICs. 
Furthermore, silencing of PALMD reduced hVIC in vitro calcification, osteogenic 
differentiation, and apoptosis, whereas overexpression of PALMD had the opposite 
effect. RNA-Seq of PALMD-depleted hVICs revealed that silencing of PALMD reduced 
glycolysis and nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB)-mediated inflammation in hVICs and 
attenuated tumor necrosis factor α-induced monocyte adhesion to hVICs. Having 
established the role of PALMD in hVIC glycolysis, we examined whether glycolysis 
itself could regulate hVIC osteogenic differentiation and inflammation. 
Intriguingly, the inhibition of PFKFB3-mediated glycolysis significantly 
attenuated osteogenic differentiation and inflammation of hVICs. However, 
silencing of PFKFB3 inhibited PALMD-induced hVIC inflammation, but not 
osteogenic differentiation. Finally, we showed that the overexpression of PALMD 
enhanced hVIC osteogenic differentiation and inflammation, as opposed to 
glycolysis, through the activation of NF-κB. The present study demonstrates that 
the genome-wide association- and transcriptome-wide association-identified CAVD 
risk gene PALMD may promote CAVD development through regulation of glycolysis 
and NF-κB-mediated inflammation. We propose that targeting PALMD-mediated 
glycolysis may represent a novel therapeutic strategy for treating CAVD.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2022.101887
PMCID: PMC9065630
PMID: 35367413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.