1. Eur J Cancer Care (Engl). 2022 Jul;31(4):e13590. doi: 10.1111/ecc.13590. Epub 
2022 Apr 7.

Determining the need for a breast cancer awareness educational intervention for 
women with mild/moderate levels of intellectual disability: A qualitative 
descriptive study.

Walsh S(1), Hegarty J(1), Lehane E(1), Farrell D(2), Taggart L(3), Kelly L(4), 
Sahm L(5), Corrigan M(6), Caples M(1), Martin AM(1), Tabirca S(7), Corrigan 
MA(4), O'Mahony M(1).

Author information:
(1)Catherine McCauley School of Nursing and Midwifery, University College Cork, 
Cork.
(2)Department of Nursing and Healthcare Sciences, Institute of Technology 
Tralee, Tralee, Ireland.
(3)Institute of Nursing and Health, Ulster University, Jordanstown, UK.
(4)Department of Academic Surgery, Cork Breast Research Centre-Cork University 
Hospital, Cork, Ireland.
(5)School of Pharmacy, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland.
(6)St. John of God Hospitaller Ministries, Dublin, Ireland.
(7)Department of Computer Science, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland.

OBJECTIVE: Following a review of the existing body of literature, this study 
aimed to explore the need for a breast cancer awareness intervention 
specifically targeted at women with mild/moderate levels of intellectual 
disability (ID) and provide perspectives on the preferred processes and content 
underpinning an intervention.
METHODS: A qualitative, descriptive design using semi-structured, individual 
(n = 5) and focus group (n = 5) interviews were used to engage with a 
non-probability, purposive sample of key stakeholders (n = 25) including women 
with mild/moderate levels of ID, caregivers and healthcare professionals. Data 
were analysed using qualitative content analysis.
RESULTS: Findings highlighted that an educational intervention should focus on 
breast awareness as opposed to breast cancer awareness. Additionally, findings 
identified that a combined breast awareness and healthy living intervention 
could be effective. However, the intervention needs to have a multimodal, 
hands-on, person-centred approach to learning which is underpinned by theory. 
Furthermore, integrating the caregivers and healthcare professionals into the 
intervention is recommended.
CONCLUSION: Findings from this study provide a foundation for developing and 
implementing a theoretically underpinned, multimodal, breast awareness and 
healthy living educational intervention for women with mild/moderate levels of 
ID.

© 2022 The Authors. European Journal of Cancer Care published by John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ecc.13590
PMCID: PMC9539590
PMID: 35393746 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors of this article have no conflicts of 
interest to report.