1. Phytomedicine. 2022 Jun;100:154075. doi: 10.1016/j.phymed.2022.154075. Epub
2022  Apr 4.

Osmundacetone modulates mitochondrial metabolism in non-small cell lung cancer 
cells by hijacking the glutamine/glutamate/α-KG metabolic axis.

Yang Y(1), He P(1), Hou Y(1), Liu Z(1), Zhang X(1), Li N(2).

Author information:
(1)Inflammation and Immune Mediated Diseases Laboratory of Anhui Province, 
School of Pharmacy, Anhui Medical University, Hefei 230032, China.
(2)Inflammation and Immune Mediated Diseases Laboratory of Anhui Province, 
School of Pharmacy, Anhui Medical University, Hefei 230032, China. Electronic 
address: 1993500019@ahmu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Osmundacetone (OSC) is a bioactive phenolic compound isolated from 
Phellinus igniarius and that was shown to exert cytotoxic effects on cancer 
cells in our previous work. The antiproliferative impact of OSC on non-small 
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and the underlying mechanisms, however, have not been 
studied.
PURPOSE: This study aimed to explore the antiproliferative effect of OSC on 
NSCLC cells and the mechanisms involved.
METHODS: Cell viability, colony formation and cell cycle distribution were 
measured following exposure to OSC in vitro. The anticancer activity of OSC was 
also examined using a xenograft growth assay in vivo. Furthermore, serum 
metabolomics analysis by GC-MS was done to detect alterations in the metabolic 
profile. Next, expression of GLS1 and GLUD1, the key enzymes in glutamine 
metabolism, was evaluated using RT-PCR and western blot. α-KG and NADH 
metabolites were assessed by ELISA. Mitochondrial functions and morphology were 
evaluated using the JC-1 probe and transmission electron microscopy, 
respectively. The ATP production rate in mitochondria of cells with OSC 
treatment was determined using a Seahorse XFe24 Analyzer.
RESULTS: OSC selectively reduced the proliferation of A549 and H460 cells. OSC 
triggered G2/M cell cycle arrest and decreased the cell clone formation. A mouse 
xenograft model revealed that OSC inhibited tumor growth in vivo. Findings of 
serum metabolomics analyses indicated that the anticancer function of OSC was 
related to disorders of glutamine metabolism. Such a speculation was further 
verified by the expression level of GLUD1, which was downregulated by OSC 
treatment. Concentrations of the related metabolites α-KG and NADH were reduced 
in response to OSC treatment. Moreover, OSC led to disorganization of the 
mitochondrial ultrastructure and a decrease in mitochondrial membrane potential. 
OSC also decreased ATP production via oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) but did 
not affect glycolysis in NSCLC cells.
CONCLUSION: The key role of OSC in mitochondrial energy metabolism in NSCLC 
cells is to suppress tumor development and cell proliferation downregulating 
GLUD1 to inhibit the glutamine/glutamate/α-KG metabolic axis and OXPHOS. It 
indicats that OSC might be a potential natural agent for personalized medicine 
and an anticancer metabolic modulator in NSCLC chemotherapy.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.phymed.2022.154075
PMID: 35413646 [Indexed for MEDLINE]