1. Front Aging Neurosci. 2022 Mar 31;14:818606. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2022.818606. 
eCollection 2022.

Proteomics Challenges for the Assessment of Synuclein Proteoforms as Clinical 
Biomarkers in Parkinson's Disease.

Pons ML(1)(2), Loftus N(3), Vialaret J(1), Moreau S(2), Lehmann S(1), Hirtz 
C(1).

Author information:
(1)IRMB-PPC, INM, CHU Montpellier, INSERM, CNRS, Université de Montpellier, 
Montpellier, France.
(2)Shimadzu Corporation, Duisburg, Germany.
(3)Shimadzu Corporation, Manchester, United Kingdom.

Parkinson's disease is a complex neurodegenerative disorder resulting in a 
multifaceted clinical presentation which includes bradykinesia combined with 
either rest tremor, rigidity, or both, as well as many non-motor symptoms. The 
motor features of the disorder are associated with the pathological form of 
alpha synuclein aggregates and fibrils in Lewy bodies and loss of dopaminergic 
neurons in the substantia nigra. Parkinson's disease is increasingly considered 
as a group of underlying disorders with unique genetic, biological, and 
molecular abnormalities that are likely to respond differentially to a given 
therapeutic approach. For this reason, it is clinically challenging to treat and 
at present, no therapy can slow down or arrest the progression of Parkinson's 
disease. There is a clear unmet clinical need to develop reliable diagnostic and 
prognostic biomarkers. When disease-modifying treatments become available, 
prognostic biomarkers are required to support a definitive diagnosis and 
clinical intervention during the long prodromal period as no clinical 
implications or symptoms are observed. Robust diagnostic biomarkers would also 
be useful to monitor treatment response. Potential biomarkers for the sporadic 
form of Parkinson's disease have mostly included synuclein species (monomer, 
oligomer, phosphorylated, Lewy Body enriched fraction and isoforms). In this 
review, we consider the analysis of synuclein and its proteoforms in biological 
samples using proteomics techniques (immunoassay and mass spectrometry) applied 
to neurodegenerative disease research.

Copyright © 2022 Pons, Loftus, Vialaret, Moreau, Lehmann and Hirtz.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2022.818606
PMCID: PMC9009522
PMID: 35431896

Conflict of interest statement: M-LP, NL, and SM were employed by the company 
Shimadzu Corporation. The remaining authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.