1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2022 Apr 1;63(4):18. doi: 10.1167/iovs.63.4.18.

Znhit1 Regulates p21Cip1 to Control Mouse Lens Differentiation.

Lu J(1)(2), An J(1)(2), Wang J(1)(2), Cao X(1)(2), Cao Y(1)(2), Huang C(1)(2), 
Jiao S(1)(2), Yan D(1)(2), Lin X(3), Zhou X(1)(2)(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)School of Optometry and Ophthalmology and Eye Hospital, Wenzhou Medical 
University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Optometry, Ophthalmology and Vision Science, Wenzhou, 
Zhejiang, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, School of Life Sciences, 
Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(4)National Clinical Research Center for Ocular Diseases, Wenzhou, China.
(5)Oujiang Laboratory, Zhejiang Lab for Regenerative Medicine, Vision and Brain 
Health, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(6)Research Unit of Myopia Basic Research and Clinical Prevention and Control, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Wenzhou, China.

PURPOSE: The transparency of the ocular lens is essential for refracting and 
focusing light onto the retina, and transparency is controlled by many factors 
and signaling pathways. Here we showed a critical role of chromatin remodeler 
zinc finger HIT-type containing 1 (Znhit1) in maintaining lens transparency.
METHODS: To explore the roles of Znhit1 in lens development, the cre-loxp system 
was used to generate lens-specific Znhit1 knockout mice (Znhit1Mlr10-Cre; Znhit1 
cKO). Morphological changes in mice lenses were examined using hematoxylin and 
eosin staining. RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) and assay for transposase accessible 
chromatin using sequencing (ATAC-seq) were applied to screen transcriptome 
changes. Immunofluorescence staining were performed to assess proteins 
distribution and terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick-end labeling 
staining were used for determining apoptosis. The mRNAs expression was examined 
by quantitative RT-PCR and proteins expression by Western blot.
RESULTS: Lens-specific conditional knockout mice had a severe cataract, 
microphthalmia phenotype, and seriously abnormal lens fiber cells 
differentiation. Deletion of Znhit1 in the lens resulted in decreased cell 
proliferation and increased cell apoptosis of the lens epithelia. ATAC-seq 
showed that Znhit1 deficiency increased chromatin accessibility of 
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors, including p57Kip2 and p21Cip1, and 
upregulated the expression of these genes in mRNA and protein levels. And we 
also showed that loss of Znhit1 lead to lens fibrosis by upregulating the 
expression of p21Cip1.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggested that Znhit1 is required for the survival of 
lens epithelial cells. The loss of Znhit1 leads to the overexpression of 
p21Cip1, further resulting in lens fibrosis, and impacted the establishment of 
lens transparency.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.63.4.18
PMCID: PMC9055562
PMID: 35472217 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: J. Lu, None; J. An, None; J. Wang, 
None; X. Cao, None; Y. Cao, None; C. Huang, None; S. Jiao, None; D. Yan, None; 
X. Lin, None; X. Zhou, None