1. J Biol Chem. 2022 Jun;298(6):101987. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2022.101987. Epub 2022
 Apr 27.

Discovery of two distinct aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase complexes anchored to the 
Plasmodium surface tRNA import protein.

Jaramillo Ponce JR(1), Kapps D(1), Paulus C(1), Chicher J(2), Frugier M(3).

Author information:
(1)Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, Architecture et Réactivité de l'ARN, UPR 
9002, Strasbourg, France.
(2)Strasbourg-Esplanade Proteomics Facility, Université de Strasbourg, 
Strasbourg, France.
(3)Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, Architecture et Réactivité de l'ARN, UPR 
9002, Strasbourg, France. Electronic address: m.frugier@ibmc-cnrs.unistra.fr.

Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (aaRSs) attach amino acids to their cognate transfer 
RNAs. In eukaryotes, a subset of cytosolic aaRSs is organized into a 
multisynthetase complex (MSC), along with specialized scaffolding proteins 
referred to as aaRS-interacting multifunctional proteins (AIMPs). In Plasmodium, 
the causative agent of malaria, the tRNA import protein (tRip), is a membrane 
protein that participates in tRNA trafficking; we show that tRip also functions 
as an AIMP. We identified three aaRSs, the glutamyl-tRNA synthetase (ERS), 
glutaminyl-tRNA synthetase (QRS), and methionyl-tRNA synthetase (MRS), which 
were specifically coimmunoprecipitated with tRip in Plasmodium berghei blood 
stage parasites. All four proteins contain an N-terminal 
glutathione-S-transferase (GST)-like domain that was demonstrated to be involved 
in MSC assembly. In contrast to previous studies, further dissection of GST-like 
interactions identified two exclusive heterotrimeric complexes: the Q-complex 
(tRip-ERS-QRS) and the M-complex (tRip-ERS-MRS). Gel filtration and light 
scattering suggest a 2:2:2 stoichiometry for both complexes but with distinct 
biophysical properties and mutational analysis further revealed that the 
GST-like domains of QRS and MRS use different strategies to bind ERS. Taken 
together, our results demonstrate that neither the singular homodimerization of 
tRip nor its localization in the parasite plasma membrane prevents the formation 
of MSCs in Plasmodium. Besides, the extracellular localization of the 
tRNA-binding module of tRip is compensated by the presence of additional 
tRNA-binding modules fused to MRS and QRS, providing each MSC with two spatially 
distinct functions: aminoacylation of intraparasitic tRNAs and binding of 
extracellular tRNAs. This unique host-pathogen interaction is discussed.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2022.101987
PMCID: PMC9136112
PMID: 35487244 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.