1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2022 May 20;50(9):4900-4916. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkac347.

A systematic dissection of determinants and consequences of snoRNA-guided 
pseudouridylation of human mRNA.

Nir R(1), Hoernes TP(2), Muramatsu H(3)(4), Faserl K(5), Karikó K(3)(6), 
Erlacher MD(2), Sas-Chen A(1)(7), Schwartz S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Weizmann Institute of Science, 
Rehovot 7610001, Israel.
(2)Institute of Genomics and RNomics, Medical University of 
Innsbruck, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 
USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 
USA.
(5)Institute of Clinical Biochemistry, Biocenter, Medical University of 
Innsbruck, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria.
(6)BioNTech RNA Pharmaceuticals, Mainz, Germany.
(7)The Shmunis School of Biomedicine and Cancer Research, The George S. Wise 
Faculty of Life Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.

RNA can be extensively modified post-transcriptionally with >170 covalent 
modifications, expanding its functional and structural repertoire. Pseudouridine 
(Ψ), the most abundant modified nucleoside in rRNA and tRNA, has recently been 
found within mRNA molecules. It remains unclear whether pseudouridylation of 
mRNA can be snoRNA-guided, bearing important implications for understanding the 
physiological target spectrum of snoRNAs and for their potential therapeutic 
exploitation in genetic diseases. Here, using a massively parallel reporter 
based strategy we simultaneously interrogate Ψ levels across hundreds of 
synthetic constructs with predesigned complementarity against endogenous 
snoRNAs. Our results demonstrate that snoRNA-mediated pseudouridylation can 
occur on mRNA targets. However, this is typically achieved at relatively low 
efficiencies, and is constrained by mRNA localization, snoRNA expression levels 
and the length of the snoRNA:mRNA complementarity stretches. We exploited these 
insights for the design of snoRNAs targeting pseudouridylation at premature 
termination codons, which was previously shown to suppress translational 
termination. However, in this and follow-up experiments in human cells we 
observe no evidence for significant levels of readthrough of pseudouridylated 
stop codons. Our study enhances our understanding of the scope, 'design rules', 
constraints and consequences of snoRNA-mediated pseudouridylation.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkac347
PMCID: PMC9122591
PMID: 35536311 [Indexed for MEDLINE]