1. F S Sci. 2022 May;3(2):118-129. doi: 10.1016/j.xfss.2022.03.002. Epub 2022 Mar
 30.

The role of Hippo pathway signaling and A-kinase anchoring protein 13 in 
primordial follicle activation and inhibition.

Maher JY(1), Islam MS(2), Yin O(3), Brennan J(2), Gough E(4), Driggers P(2), 
Segars J(2).

Author information:
(1)Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland; Eunice Kennedy Shriver 
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, Maryland; Children's National Medical Center, Washington, 
D.C.. Electronic address: jacqueline.maher@nih.gov.
(2)Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.
(3)David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, 
California.
(4)Department of International Health, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public 
Health, Baltimore, Maryland.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether the mechanotransduction and pharmacomanipulation 
of A-kinase anchoring protein 13 (AKAP13) altered Hippo signaling pathway 
transcription and growth factors in granulosa cells. Primary ovarian 
insufficiency is the depletion or dysfunction of primordial ovarian follicles. 
In vitro activation of ovarian tissue in patients with primary ovarian 
insufficiency alters the Hippo and phosphatase and tensin 
homolog/phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/protein kinase B/forkhead box O3 pathways. 
A-kinase anchoring protein 13 is found in granulosa cells and may regulate the 
Hippo pathway via F-actin polymerization resulting in altered nuclear 
yes-associated protein (YAP)/transcriptional coactivator with PDZ-binding motif 
coactivators and Tea domain family (TEAD) transcription factors.
DESIGN: Laboratory studies.
SETTING: Translational science laboratory.
PATIENT(S): None.
INTERVENTION(S): COV434 cells, derived from a primary human granulosa tumor cell 
line, were studied under different cell density and well stiffness conditions. 
Cells were transfected with a TEAD-luciferase (TEAD-luc) reporter as well as 
expression constructs for AKAP13 or AKAP13 mutants and then treated with AKAP13 
activators, inhibitors, and follicle-stimulating hormone.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): TEAD gene activation or inhibition was measured by 
TEAD-luciferase assays. The messenger ribonucleic acid levels of Hippo pathway 
signaling molecules, including connective tissue growth factor (CTGF), 
baculoviral inhibitors of apoptosis repeat-containing 5, Ankyrin repeat 
domain-containing protein 1, YAP1, and TEAD1, were measured by quantitative 
real-time polymerase chain reaction. Protein expressions for AKAP13, CTGF, YAP1, 
and TEAD1 were measured using Western blot.
RESULT(S): Increased TEAD-luciferase activity and expression of markers for 
cellular growth were associated with decreased cell density, increased well 
stiffness, and AKAP13 activator (A02) treatment. Additionally, decreased 
TEAD-luc activity and expression of markers for cellular growth were associated 
with AKAP13 inhibitor (A13) treatment, including a reduced expression of the 
BIRC5 and ANKRD1 (YAP-responsive genes) transcript levels and CTGF protein 
levels. There were no changes in TEAD-luc with follicle-stimulating hormone 
treatment, supporting Hippo pathway involvement in the gonadotropin-independent 
portion of folliculogenesis.
CONCLUSION(S): These findings suggest that AKAP13 mediates Hippo-regulated 
changes in granulosa cell growth via mechanotransduction and 
pharmacomanipulation. The AKAP13 regulation of the Hippo pathway may represent a 
potential target for regulation of follicle activation.

Copyright © 2022 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.xfss.2022.03.002
PMCID: PMC11096729
PMID: 35560009 [Indexed for MEDLINE]