1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2022 Apr 27;13:849279. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2022.849279. eCollection 2022.

Type 1 Insulin-Like Growth Factor Receptor Nuclear Localization in High-Grade 
Glioma Cells Enhances Motility, Metabolism, and In Vivo Tumorigenesis.

Martin A(1), Fernandez MC(1), Cattaneo ER(2), Schuster CD(3), Venara M(1), 
Clément F(1), Berenstein A(1)(4), Lombardi MG(5), Bergadá I(1), Gutierrez M(1), 
Martí MA(3), Gonzalez-Baro MR(2), Pennisi PA(1).

Author information:
(1)Centro de Investigaciones Endocrinológicas "Dr. César Bergadá" 
CONICET-FEI-División de Endocrinología, Hospital de Niños R. Gutierrez, Buenos 
Aires, Argentina.
(2)Instituto de Investigaciones Bioquímicas de La Plata, CONICET, Facultad de 
Ciencias Médicas, Universidad Nacional de La Plata, La Plata, Argentina.
(3)Departamento de Química Biológica, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, 
Universidad de Buenos Aires (FCEyN-UBA) e Instituto de Química Biológica de la 
Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales (IQUIBICEN) CONICET, Pabellòn 2 de 
Ciudad Universitaria, Ciudad de Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(4)Instituto Multidisciplinario de Investigaciones en Patologías Pediátricas, 
CONICET, Hospital de Niños R. Gutierrez, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(5)Servicio de Oncología, Hospital de Niños R. Gutierrez, Buenos Aires, 
Argentina.

Gliomas are the most frequent solid tumors in children. Among these, high-grade 
gliomas are less common in children than in adults, though they are similar in 
their aggressive clinical behavior. In adults, glioblastoma is the most lethal 
tumor of the central nervous system. Insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor 
(IGF1R) plays an important role in cancer biology, and its nuclear localization 
has been described as an adverse prognostic factor in different tumors. 
Previously, we have demonstrated that, in pediatric gliomas, IGF1R nuclear 
localization is significantly associated with high-grade tumors, worst clinical 
outcome, and increased risk of death. Herein we explore the role of IGF1R 
intracellular localization by comparing two glioblastoma cell lines that differ 
only in their IGF1R capacity to translocate to the nucleus. In vitro, IGF1R 
nuclear localization enhances glioblastoma cell motility and metabolism without 
affecting their proliferation. In vivo, IGF1R has the capacity to translocate to 
the nucleus and allows not only a higher proliferation rate and the earlier 
development of tumors but also renders the cells sensitive to OSI906 therapy. 
With this work, we provide evidence supporting the implications of the presence 
of IGF1R in the nucleus of glioma cells and a potential therapeutic opportunity 
for patients harboring gliomas with IGF1R nuclear localization.

Copyright © 2022 Martin, Fernandez, Cattaneo, Schuster, Venara, Clément, 
Berenstein, Lombardi, Bergadá, Gutierrez, Martí, Gonzalez-Baro and Pennisi.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2022.849279
PMCID: PMC9094447
PMID: 35574033 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.