1. Commun Med (Lond). 2022 Jan 19;2:9. doi: 10.1038/s43856-022-00071-1.
eCollection  2022.

Development and preliminary validation of a machine learning system for thyroid 
dysfunction diagnosis based on routine laboratory tests.

Hu M(#)(1), Asami C(#)(1), Iwakura H(2), Nakajima Y(3), Sema R(1), Kikuchi T(1), 
Miyata T(1), Sakamaki K(4), Kudo T(5), Yamada M(3), Akamizu T(2)(5), Sakakibara 
Y(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)AI Strategy Team, Cosmic Corporation Co., Ltd, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)First Department of Internal Medicine, Wakayama Medical University Hospital, 
Wakayama, Japan.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Gunma University Hospital, Maebashi, Gunma 
Japan.
(4)Health Control Center, Hidaka Hospital, Takasaki, Gunma Japan.
(5)Present Address: Department of Internal Medicine, Kuma Hospital, Kobe, Hyogo 
Japan.
(6)Department of Biosciences and Informatics, Keio University, Yokohama City, 
Kanagawa Japan.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Approximately 2.4 million patients in Japan would benefit from 
treatment for thyroid disease, including Graves' disease and Hashimoto's 
disease. However, only 450,000 of them are receiving treatment, and many 
patients with thyroid dysfunction remain largely overlooked. In this 
retrospective study, we aimed to develop and conduct preliminary testing on a 
machine learning method for screening patients with hyperthyroidism and 
hypothyroidism who would benefit from prompt medical treatment.
METHODS: We collected electronic medical records and medical checkup data from 
four hospitals in Japan. We applied four machine learning algorithms to 
construct classification models to distinguish patients with hyperthyroidism and 
hypothyroidism from control subjects using routine laboratory tests. Performance 
evaluation metrics such as sensitivity, specificity, and the area under receiver 
operating characteristic (AUROC) were obtained. Techniques such as feature 
importance were further applied to understand the contribution of each feature 
to the machine learning output.
RESULTS: The results of cross-validation and external evaluation indicated that 
we achieved high classification accuracies (AUROC = 93.8% for hyperthyroidism 
model and AUROC = 90.9% for hypothyroidism model). Serum creatinine (S-Cr), mean 
corpuscular volume (MCV), and total cholesterol were the three features that 
were most strongly correlated with the hyperthyroidism model, and S-Cr, lactic 
acid dehydrogenase (LDH), and total cholesterol were correlated with the 
hypothyroidism model.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrated the potential of machine learning approaches for 
diagnosing the presence of thyroid dysfunction from routine laboratory tests. 
Further validation, including prospective clinical studies, is necessary prior 
to application of our method in the clinic.

© The Author(s) 2022.

DOI: 10.1038/s43856-022-00071-1
PMCID: PMC9053267
PMID: 35603277

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsY.S. declare the following 
competing interests: a paid scientific advisory board member of Cosmic 
Corporation Co., Ltd. All other authors declare no competing interests.