1. J Cyst Fibros. 2023 Jan;22(1):124-131. doi: 10.1016/j.jcf.2022.05.007. Epub
2022  May 23.

VOCAL: An observational study of ivacaftor for people with cystic fibrosis and 
selected non-G551D-CFTR gating mutations.

Simmonds NJ(1), van der Ent CK(2), Colombo C(3), Kinnman N(4), DeSouza C(4), 
Thorat T(4), Chew ML(4), Chandarana K(4), Castellani C(5).

Author information:
(1)Adult Cystic Fibrosis Centre, Royal Brompton Hospital, London, UK, and 
National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London, UK. 
Electronic address: n.simmonds@rbht.nhs.uk.
(2)Department of Pediatric Respiratory Diseases, University Medical Center 
Utrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(3)Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, University of 
Milan, Milan, Italy.
(4)Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated, Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Cystic Fibrosis Centre, IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genoa, Italy.

BACKGROUND: VOCAL was an observational study of the effect of long-term 
ivacaftor on real-world clinical outcomes and healthcare resource utilization 
(HCRU) in people with cystic fibrosis (pwCF) in Italy, the Netherlands, and the 
UK.
METHODS: pwCF aged ≥6 years with non-G551D-CFTR gating mutations were eligible. 
Prospective data were collected up to 48 months after enrollment; retrospective 
data were collected to ensure that 12 months of pre-ivacaftor data were 
available. Endpoints included absolute change from baseline in percent predicted 
forced expiratory volume in 1 second (ppFEV1) and measures of nutritional 
status. Pulmonary exacerbation (PEx) rates, HCRU, and respiratory microbiology 
during ivacaftor treatment were compared with data from the 12-month period 
before initiation.
RESULTS: Seventy-three eligible pwCF were enrolled and received ivacaftor; 65 
(89.0%) completed the study (48 [65.8%] completed ≥48 months of ivacaftor). 
During the first 6 months of ivacaftor, ppFEV1, body mass index (BMI), and 
BMI-for-age z-score showed least-squares mean absolute improvements of 10.8 
percentage points, 0.79 kg/m2, and 0.54, respectively; improvements were 
maintained through 48 months. Rates of PEx, antibiotic use due to PEx, and 
hospitalization decreased by >50% during ivacaftor treatment compared with 
before ivacaftor. The number of respiratory cultures and sputum was lower 
post-ivacaftor, as was the percentage of pwCF with positive respiratory cultures 
for 3 of 9 pathogens evaluated (Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Aspergillus fumigatus, 
Stenotrophomonas maltophilia). Reported safety results were consistent with CF 
and ivacaftor's known safety profile.
CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrate the positive long-term effectiveness of 
ivacaftor on clinical outcomes and HCRU in pwCF with non-G551D-CFTR gating 
mutations in real-world settings.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcf.2022.05.007
PMID: 35613999 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest All authors 
received nonfinancial support (assistance with manuscript preparation) from 
ArticulateScience, LLC, which received funding from Vertex Pharmaceuticals 
Incorporated. Additional disclosures are as follows: CCa reports consulting fees 
from Vertex, Chiesi, and Mylan in the past 36 months. CCo reports steering 
committee fees from Vertex during the conduct of the present study and 
participation in advisory boards for Vertex and Mylan in the past 36 months. CD, 
MLC, and NK are former employees of Vertex and may own stock in Vertex. KC and 
TT are employees of Vertex and may own stock or stock options in Vertex. CKvdE 
has nothing further to disclose. MLC owns stock or stock options in Pfizer Inc, 
in the past 36 months. NJS reports steering committee fees from Vertex since the 
initial planning of the work; honoraria for lectures from Vertex, Chiesi, and 
Zambon in the past 36 months; honoraria for lectures and speakers bureau from 
Gilead in the past 36 months; and participation on an advisory board for Vertex, 
Gilead, Chiesi, and Menarini in the past 36 months.