1. Front Bioeng Biotechnol. 2022 May 10;10:873531. doi:
10.3389/fbioe.2022.873531.  eCollection 2022.

Identifying Features of Cardiac Disease Phenotypes Based on Mechanical Function 
in a Catecholaminergic Polymorphic Ventricular Tachycardia Model.

Stempien A(1)(2), Josvai M(1)(2), de Lange WJ(3), Hernandez JJ(3), Notbohm J(4), 
Kamp TJ(5)(6)(7), Valdivia HH(5), Eckhardt LL(5)(7), Maginot KR(3), Ralphe 
JC(3), Crone WC(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 
Madison, WI, United States.
(2)Wisconsin Institute for Discovery, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, 
WI, United States.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and 
Public Health, Madison, WI, United States.
(4)Department of Engineering Physics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, 
WI, United States.
(5)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of 
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, United States.
(6)Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 
Madison, WI, United States.
(7)Cellular and Molecular Arrhythmia Research Program, Department of Medicine, 
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, United States.

Catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT) is characterized by 
an arrhythmogenic mechanism involving disruption of calcium handling. This 
genetic disease can lead to sudden death in children and young adults during 
physical or emotional stress. Prior CPVT studies have focused on calcium 
handling, but mechanical functionality has rarely been investigated in vitro. In 
this research we combine stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes from a CPVT patient 
(RyR2-H2464D mutation) and a healthy familial control with an engineered culture 
platform to evaluate mechanical function of cardiomyocytes. Substrates with 
Young's modulus ranging from 10 to 50 kPa were used in conjunction with 
microcontact printing of ECM proteins into defined patterns for subsequent 
attachment. Digital Image Correlation (DIC) was used to evaluate collections of 
contracting cells. The amplitude of contractile strain was utilized as a 
quantitative indicator of functionality and disease severity. We found 
statistically significant differences: the maximum contractile strain was 
consistently higher in patient samples compared to control samples on all 
substrate stiffnesses. Additionally, the patient cell line had a statistically 
significantly slower intrinsic contraction rate than the control, which agrees 
with prior literature. Differences in mechanical strain have not been previously 
reported, and hypercontractility is not a known characteristic of CPVT. However, 
functional changes can occur as the disease progresses, thus this observation 
may not represent behavior observed in adolescent and adult patients. These 
results add to the limited studies of mechanical function of CPVT CMs reported 
in literature and identify functional differences that should be further 
explored.

Copyright © 2022 Stempien, Josvai, de Lange, Hernandez, Notbohm, Kamp, Valdivia, 
Eckhardt, Maginot, Ralphe and Crone.

DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2022.873531
PMCID: PMC9127198
PMID: 35620470

Conflict of interest statement: TK was a consultant for Cellular Dynamics 
International, a stem cell biotechnology company. The remaining authors declare 
that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial 
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.