1. J Fungi (Basel). 2022 May 20;8(5):534. doi: 10.3390/jof8050534.

MAPK CcSakA of the HOG Pathway Is Involved in Stipe Elongation during Fruiting 
Body Development in Coprinopsis cinerea.

Zhao J(1), Yuan J(1), Chen Y(1), Wang Y(1), Chen J(1), Bi J(1), Lyu L(1), Yu 
C(2), Yuan S(1), Liu Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Microbes and Microbial Functional Genomics, 
Jiangsu Engineering and Technology Research Center for Industrialization of 
Microbial Resources, College of Life Science, Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing 
210023, China.
(2)Nanjing Institute of Environmental Sciences, Ministry of Ecology and 
Environment, Nanjing 210042, China.

Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways, such as the high-osmolarity 
glycerol mitogen-activated protein kinase (HOG) pathway, are evolutionarily 
conserved signaling modules responsible for transmitting environmental stress 
signals in eukaryotic organisms. Here, we identified the MAPK homologue in the 
HOG pathway of Coprinopsis cinerea, which was named CcSakA. Furthermore, during 
the development of the fruiting body, CcSakA was phosphorylated in the fast 
elongating apical part of the stipe, which meant that CcSakA was activated in 
the apical elongating stipe region of the fruiting body. The knockdown of CcSakA 
resulted in a shorter stipe of the fruiting body compared to the control strain, 
and the expression of phosphomimicking mutant CcSakA led to a longer stipe of 
the fruiting body compared to the control strain. The chitinase CcChiE1, which 
plays a key role during stipe elongation, was downregulated in the CcSakA 
knockdown strains and upregulated in the CcSakA phosphomimicking mutant strains. 
The results indicated that CcSakA participated in the elongation of stipes in 
the fruiting body development of C. cinerea by regulating the expression of 
CcChiE1. Analysis of the H2O2 concentration in different parts of the stipe 
showed that the oxidative stress in the elongating part of the stipe was higher 
than those in the non-elongating part. The results indicated that CcSakA of the 
HOG pathway may be activated by oxidative stress. Our results demonstrated that 
the HOG pathway transmits stress signals and regulates the expression of CcChiE1 
during fruiting body development in C. cinerea.

DOI: 10.3390/jof8050534
PMCID: PMC9147448
PMID: 35628789

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.