1. BMC Biol. 2022 Jun 4;20(1):131. doi: 10.1186/s12915-022-01323-1.

Intradiol ring cleavage dioxygenases from herbivorous spider mites as a new 
detoxification enzyme family in animals.

Njiru C(1), Xue W(1), De Rouck S(1), Alba JM(2), Kant MR(2), Chruszcz M(3), 
Vanholme B(4)(5), Dermauw W(1)(6), Wybouw N(7), Van Leeuwen T(8).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Agrozoology, Department of Plants and Crops, Faculty of 
Bioscience Engineering, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.
(2)Department of Evolutionary and Population Biology, Institute for Biodiversity 
and Ecosystem Dynamics, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of South Carolina, 
Columbia, SC, 29208, USA.
(4)Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Ghent University, 
Ghent, Belgium.
(5)VIB Center for Plant Systems Biology, Ghent, Belgium.
(6)Flanders Research Institute for Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (ILVO), Plant 
Sciences Unit, Merelbeke, Belgium.
(7)Terrestrial Ecology Unit, Department of Biology, Faculty of Sciences, Ghent 
University, Ghent, Belgium. nicky.wybouw@ugent.be.
(8)Laboratory of Agrozoology, Department of Plants and Crops, Faculty of 
Bioscience Engineering, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium. 
thomas.vanleeuwen@ugent.be.

BACKGROUND: Generalist herbivores such as the two-spotted spider mite 
Tetranychus urticae thrive on a wide variety of plants and can rapidly adapt to 
novel hosts. What traits enable polyphagous herbivores to cope with the 
diversity of secondary metabolites in their variable plant diet is unclear. 
Genome sequencing of T. urticae revealed the presence of 17 genes that code for 
secreted proteins with strong homology to "intradiol ring cleavage dioxygenases 
(DOGs)" from bacteria and fungi, and phylogenetic analyses show that they have 
been acquired by horizontal gene transfer from fungi. In bacteria and fungi, 
DOGs have been well characterized and cleave aromatic rings in catecholic 
compounds between adjacent hydroxyl groups. Such compounds are found in high 
amounts in solanaceous plants like tomato, where they protect against herbivory. 
To better understand the role of this gene family in spider mites, we used a 
multi-disciplinary approach to functionally characterize the various T. urticae 
DOG genes.
RESULTS: We confirmed that DOG genes were present in the T. urticae genome and 
performed a phylogenetic reconstruction using transcriptomic and genomic data to 
advance our understanding of the evolutionary history of spider mite DOG genes. 
We found that DOG expression differed between mites from different plant hosts 
and was induced in response to jasmonic acid defense signaling. In consonance 
with a presumed role in detoxification, expression was localized in the mite's 
gut region. Silencing selected DOGs expression by dsRNA injection reduced the 
mites' survival rate on tomato, further supporting a role in mitigating the 
plant defense response. Recombinant purified DOGs displayed a broad substrate 
promiscuity, cleaving a surprisingly wide array of aromatic plant metabolites, 
greatly exceeding the metabolic capacity of previously characterized microbial 
DOGs.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that the laterally acquired spider mite DOGs 
function as detoxification enzymes in the gut, disarming plant metabolites 
before they reach toxic levels. We provide experimental evidence to support the 
hypothesis that this proliferated gene family in T. urticae is causally linked 
to its ability to feed on an extremely wide range of host plants.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12915-022-01323-1
PMCID: PMC9167512
PMID: 35658860 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.