1. BMC Endocr Disord. 2022 Jun 9;22(1):154. doi: 10.1186/s12902-022-01069-5.

MRI-negative Cushing's Disease: Management Strategy and Outcomes in 15 Cases 
Utilizing a Pure Endoscopic Endonasal Approach.

Sharifi G(1)(2), Amin AA(1)(2), Sabahi M(3), Echeverry NB(4), Dilmaghani 
NA(2)(5), Mousavinejad SA(1)(2), Valizadeh M(6), Davoudi Z(7), Adada B(8), 
Borghei-Razavi H(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Loghman Hakim Hospital, Shahid Beheshti 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Skull Base Research Center, Loghman Hakim Hospital, Shahid Beheshti 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Neurosurgery Research Group (NRG), Student Research Committee, Hamadan 
University of Medical Sciences, Hamadan, Iran.
(4)Department of Neurosurgery, Rutgers-New Jersey Medical School, Newark, NJ, 
USA.
(5)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Loghman Hakim Hospital, 
Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(6)Obesity Research Center, Research Institute for Endocrine Sciences, Shahid 
Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(7)Department of Endocrinology, Loghman Hakim Hospital, Shahid Beheshti Medical 
University, Tehran, Iran.
(8)Department of Neurological Surgery, Pauline Braathen Neurological Center, 
Cleveland Clinic Florida, Weston, Florida, USA.
(9)Department of Neurological Surgery, Pauline Braathen Neurological Center, 
Cleveland Clinic Florida, Weston, Florida, USA. borgheh2@ccf.org.
(10)Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of Medicine of Case Western Reserve 
University, Director of Minimally Invasive Cranial and Pituitary Surgery 
Program, Research Director of Neuroscience Institute, Cleveland Clinic Florida 
Region, 2950 Cleveland Clinic Blvd. Weston, Cleveland, FL, 33331, USA. 
borgheh2@ccf.org.

BACKGROUND: Cushing's disease (CD) is among the most common etiologies of 
hypercortisolism. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is often utilized in the 
diagnosis of CD, however, up to 64% of adrenocorticotropic hormone 
(ACTH)-producing pituitary microadenomas are undetectable on MRI. We report 15 
cases of MRI negative CD who underwent surgical resection utilizing a purely 
endoscopic endonasal approach.
METHODS: Endoscopic endonasal transsphenoidal surgery (EETS) was performed on 
134 CD cases by a single surgeon. Fifteen cases met inclusion criteria: no 
conclusive MRI studies and no previous surgical treatment. Data collected 
included signs/symptoms, pre- and post-operative hormone levels, and 
complications resulting from surgical or medical management. Data regarding 
tumor diameter, location, and tumor residue/recurrence was obtained from both 
pre- and post-operative MRI. Immunohistochemistry was performed to assess for 
tumor hormone secretion.
RESULTS: Aside from a statistically significant difference (P = 0.001) in 
histopathological results between patients with negative and positive MRI, there 
were no statistically significant difference between these two groups in any 
other demographic or clinical data point. Inferior petrosal sinus sampling 
(IPSS) with desmopressin (DDAVP®) administration was performed on the 15 
patients with inconclusive MRIs to identify the origin of ACTH hypersecretion 
via a central/peripheral (C/P) ratio. IPSS in seven, five and three patients 
showed right, left, and central side lateralization, respectively. With a mean 
follow-up of 5.5 years, among MRI-negative patients, 14 (93%) and 12 patients 
(80%) achieved early and long-term remission, respectively. In the MRI-positive 
cohort, over a mean follow-up of 4.8 years, 113 patients (94.9%) and 102 
patients (85.7%) achieved initial and long-term remission, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Surgical management of MRI-negative/inconclusive Cushing's disease 
is challenging scenario requiring a multidisciplinary approach. An experienced 
neurosurgeon, in collaboration with a dedicated endocrinologist, should identify 
the most likely location of the adenoma utilizing IPSS findings, followed by 
careful surgical exploration of the pituitary to identify the adenoma.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12902-022-01069-5
PMCID: PMC9178868
PMID: 35676664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors certify that they have no 
affiliations with or involvement in any organization or entity with any 
financial interest (such as honoraria; educational grants; participation in 
speakers’ bureaus; membership, employment, consultancies, stock ownership, or 
other equity interest; and expert testimony or patent-licensing arrangements), 
or non-financial interest (such as personal or professional relationships, 
affiliations, knowledge or beliefs) in the subject matter or materials discussed 
in this manuscript.