1. Pathol Res Pract. 2022 Aug;236:153953. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2022.153953. Epub
2022  May 27.

P504S/alpha-methylacyl-CoA racemase, HNF1β and napsin A in morular metaplasia 
and clear cell carcinoma of the endometrium: An immunohistochemical analysis.

Arciuolo D(1), Travaglino A(2), Raffone A(3), Santoro A(1), Inzani F(1), 
Piermattei A(1), Bui L(1), Scaglione G(1), D'Alessandris N(1), Valente M(1), 
Fulgione C(4), Guida M(4), Mollo A(5), Insabato L(6), Zannoni GF(7).

Author information:
(1)Gynecopathology and Breast Pathology Unit, Department of Woman and Child's 
Health Sciences and Public Health, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. 
Gemelli IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(2)Gynecopathology and Breast Pathology Unit, Department of Woman and Child's 
Health Sciences and Public Health, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. 
Gemelli IRCCS, Rome, Italy; Pathology Unit, Department of Advanced Biomedical 
Sciences, University of Naples "Federico II", Naples, Italy.
(3)Division of Gynaecology and Human Reproduction Physiopathology, Department of 
Medical and Surgical Sciences (DIMEC), IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliera Univeristaria 
di Bologna. S. Orsola Hospital, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy. 
Electronic address: antonio.raffone2@unibo.it.
(4)Gynecology and Obstetrics Unit, Department of Neurosciences, Reproductive 
Sciences and Dentistry, University of Naples "Federico II", Naples, Italy.
(5)Gynecology and Obstetrics Unit, Department of Medicine, Surgery and Dentistry 
"Schola Medica Salernitana", University of Salerno, Baronissi, Italy.
(6)Pathology Unit, Department of Advanced Biomedical Sciences, University of 
Naples "Federico II", Naples, Italy.
(7)Gynecopathology and Breast Pathology Unit, Department of Woman and Child's 
Health Sciences and Public Health, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. 
Gemelli IRCCS, Rome, Italy; Gynecologic Oncology Unit, Department of Woman and 
Child's Health Sciences and Public Health, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario 
A. Gemelli IRCCS, Rome, Italy.

AIMS: Endometrial morular metaplasia (MorM) can show cytoplasm clarification, 
which may mimic clear cell carcinoma (CCC), especially on biopsy. We aimed to 
assess the expression of CCC markers in MorM.
METHODS: Twenty cases of MorM with areas of cytoplasmic clarification were 
assessed by immunohistochemistry for HNF1β, Napsin A, and 
P504S/alpha-Methylacyl-CoA racemase (AMACR); 60 tumors were selected as controls 
(20 classical MorM, 20 conventional squamous differentiation and 20 CCC).
RESULTS: Eighteen cases (90%) showed overt squamous/keratinizing areas within 
MorM, and 11 cases (55%) showed isolated ghost cells which might mimic the 
hyaline globules of CCC. All cases (100%) showed expression of AMACR, which was 
mostly diffuse and strong; in all cases, the expression was restricted to the 
prototypical MorM areas, while glandular areas and overtly squamous areas were 
negative. Twelve cases (60%) showed HNF1β expression, which was focal/multifocal 
and/or weak; the expression was found in all tumor components. No case showed 
Napsin A expression in any component. Classical MorM showed similar 
immunophenotype, while conventional squamous differentiation did not show AMACR 
expression. Most CCC expressed AMACR (70%), HNF1β (85%), and Napsin A (75%), 
mostly with diffuse and strong positivity.
CONCLUSION: MorM may show features that mimic CCC and consistently expresses 
AMACR, which may be accompanied by HNF1β expression; Napsin A is consistently 
negative instead. These findings should be considered to avoid overdiagnosis.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.prp.2022.153953
PMID: 35696768 [Indexed for MEDLINE]