1. Stem Cell Res Ther. 2022 Jun 17;13(1):261. doi: 10.1186/s13287-022-02933-w.

Autologous skin-derived neural precursor cell therapy reverses canine Alzheimer 
dementia-like syndrome in a proof of concept veterinary trial.

Valenzuela M(1)(2), Duncan T(3), Abey A(4), Johnson A(5), Boulamatsis C(4), 
Dalton MA(4), Jacobson E(6), Brunel L(4), Child G(4), Simpson D(7), Buckland 
M(4)(8), Lowe A(3), Siette J(9), Westbrook F(3), McGreevy P(10).

Author information:
(1)Skin2Neuron Pty Ltd, Sydney, Australia. mvalenzuela@skin2neuron.org.
(2)University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia. 
mvalenzuela@skin2neuron.org.
(3)University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia.
(4)University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia.
(5)Skin2Neuron Pty Ltd, Sydney, Australia.
(6)Sydney Children's Hospital, Sydney, Australia.
(7)Animal Referral Hospital Homebush, Sydney, Australia.
(8)Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Sydney, Australia.
(9)Western Sydney University, Sydney, Australia.
(10)University of New England, Armidale, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Older companion dogs naturally develop a dementia-like syndrome with 
biological, clinical and therapeutic similarities to Alzheimer disease (AD). 
Given there has been no new safe, clinically effective and widely accessible 
treatment for AD for almost 20 years, an all-new cell therapeutic approach was 
trialled in canine veterinary patients, and further modelled in aged rats for 
more detailed neurobiological analysis.
METHODS: A Phase 1/2A veterinary trial was conducted in N = 6 older companion 
dogs with definitive diagnosis of Canine Cognitive Dysfunction (CCD). Treatment 
comprised direct microinjection of 250,000 autologous skin-derived 
neuroprecursors (SKNs) into the bilateral hippocampus using MRI-guided 
stereotaxis. Safety was assessed clinically and efficacy using the validated 
Canine Cognitive Dysfunction Rating Scale (CCDR) at baseline and 3-month post 
treatment. Intention to treat analysis imputed a single patient that had a 
surgical adverse event requiring euthanasia. Three dog brains were donated 
following natural death and histology carried out to quantify Alzheimer 
pathology as well as immature neurons and synapses; these were compared to a 
brain bank (N = 12) of untreated aged dogs with and without CCD. Further, an 
age-related memory dysfunction rat model (N = 16) was used to more closely 
evaluate intrahippocampal engraftment of canine SKN cells, focusing on mnemonic 
and synaptic effects as well as donor cell survival, neurodifferentation and 
electrophysiologic circuit integration in a live hippocampal slice preparation.
RESULTS: Four out-of-five dogs improved on the primary clinical CCDR endpoint, 
three fell below diagnostic threshold, and remarkably, two underwent full 
syndromal reversal lasting up to 2 years. At post mortem, synaptic density in 
the hippocampus specifically was nine standard deviations above non-treated 
dogs, and intensity of new neurons also several fold higher. There was no impact 
on AD pathology or long-term safety signals. Modelling in aged rats replicated 
the main canine trial findings: hippocampally-dependent place memory deficits 
were reversed and synaptic depletion rescued. In addition, this model confirmed 
donor cell survival and migration throughout the hippocampus, neuronal 
differentiation in situ, and physiologically-correct integration into pyramidal 
layer circuits.
CONCLUSIONS: With further development, SKN cell therapy may have potential for 
treating carefully chosen AD patients based on neurosynaptic restoration in the 
hippocampus.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13287-022-02933-w
PMCID: PMC9205057
PMID: 35715872 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: This work commenced and developed academically 
by MV from 2012–2019 at the University of Sydney. In 2018, MV, TD and Dr An 
Truong invented new technology for manufacturing SKN-like cells from mature 
adult human skin; Skin2Neuron Pty Ltd was formed in 2019 to commercially develop 
this concept and fund ongoing research including the conclusion of this work. In 
2020, Skin2Neuron acquired the IP and MV now serves the company as chief 
executive officer with a financial interest.