1. Diagn Cytopathol. 2022 Oct;50(10):E275-E279. doi: 10.1002/dc.25004. Epub 2022 
Jun 18.

Bilateral follicular variant of papillary thyroid cancer with different RAS 
mutations detected with next-generation sequencing: Report of an unusual case 
and literature review.

Marín F(1)(2), Del Nuevo E(3), Belinchón A(3), Acevedo A(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Hospital Universitario Quironsalud, Madrid, 
Spain.
(2)Medical Sciences School, Universidad Europea, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Department of Genetics, SYNLAB Global Diagnostics, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Department of Pathology, Hospital Universitario Quironsalud, Madrid, Spain.

Multifocality in papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) is a common finding, but the 
clonal relationship between individual tumors remains uncertain. While multiple 
synchronous tumor foci of PTC may develop through permeation of intraglandular 
lymph vessels of a single malignant clone, they can also arise from independent 
progenitor clones sustained by different genetic events. We report the case of a 
37-year-old man who underwent total thyroidectomy after fine-needle aspiration 
of two bilateral thyroid nodules that yielded cytological findings consistent 
with atypia of undetermined significance/follicular lesion of undetermined 
significance. By next-generation sequencing of a large panel of thyroid 
carcinoma related genes, we found that the larger tumor harbored a mutation of 
the NRAS gene, while the contralateral tumor harbored a different mutation in 
the HRAS gene. Final pathology of the surgical specimen showed two encapsulated 
follicular variant papillary thyroid carcinomas of 16 and 6 mm in the right and 
the left lobes, respectively. To the best of our knowledge, this is the fourth 
case of multifocal PTC showing different HRAS and NRAS mutations, and highlights 
that mutational heterogeneity is also present in non-BRAF, non-RET genes, 
supporting the hypothesis that independent progenitor clones may explain 
multifocality in papillary thyroid carcinoma.

© 2022 The Authors. Diagnostic Cytopathology published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/dc.25004
PMCID: PMC9545367
PMID: 35716104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.