1. Microbiol Spectr. 2022 Aug 31;10(4):e0101922. doi: 10.1128/spectrum.01019-22. 
Epub 2022 Jun 23.

Genome-Scale Mining of Acetogens of the Genus Clostridium Unveils Distinctive 
Traits in [FeFe]- and [NiFe]-Hydrogenase Content and Maturation.

Di Leonardo PF(#)(1), Antonicelli G(1)(2), Agostino V(1), Re A(#)(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Sustainable Future Technologies, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia 
Foundation, Turin, Italy.
(2)Department of Environment, Land and Infrastructure Engineering, Politecnico 
di Torino, Turin, Italy.
(3)Department of Applied Science and Technology, Politecnico di Torino, Turin, 
Italy.
(#)Contributed equally

Knowledge of the organizational and functional properties of hydrogen metabolism 
is pivotal to the construction of a framework supportive of a hydrogen-fueled 
low-carbon economy. Hydrogen metabolism relies on the mechanism of action of 
hydrogenases. In this study, we investigated the genomes of several industrially 
relevant acetogens of the genus Clostridium (C. autoethanogenum, C. ljungdahlii, 
C. carboxidivorans, C. drakei, C. scatologenes, C. coskatii, C. ragsdalei, C. 
sp. AWRP) to systematically identify their intriguingly diversified 
hydrogenases' repertoire. An entirely computational annotation pipeline unveiled 
common and strain-specific traits in the functional content of [NiFe]- and 
[FeFe]-hydrogenases. Hydrogenases were identified and categorized into 
functionally distinct classes by the combination of sequence homology, with 
respect to a database of curated nonredundant hydrogenases, with the analysis of 
sequence patterns characteristic of the mode of action of [FeFe]- and 
[NiFe]-hydrogenases. The inspection of the genes in the neighborhood of the 
catalytic subunits unveiled a wide agreement between their genomic arrangement 
and the gene organization templates previously developed for the predicted 
hydrogenase classes. Subunits' characterization of the identified hydrogenases 
allowed us to glean some insights on the redox cofactor-binding determinants in 
the diaphorase subunits of the electron-bifurcating [FeFe]-hydrogenases. 
Finally, the reliability of the inferred hydrogenases was corroborated by the 
punctual analysis of the maturation proteins necessary for the biosynthesis of 
[NiFe]- and [FeFe]-hydrogenases. IMPORTANCE Mastering hydrogen metabolism can 
support a sustainable carbon-neutral economy. Of the many microorganisms 
metabolizing hydrogen, acetogens of the genus Clostridium are appealing, with 
some of them already in usage as industrial workhorses. Having provided detailed 
information on the hydrogenase content of an unprecedented number of clostridial 
acetogens at the gene level, our study represents a valuable knowledge base to 
deepen our understanding of hydrogenases' functional specificity and/or 
redundancy and to develop a large array of biotechnological processes. We also 
believe our study could serve as a basis for future strain-engineering 
approaches, acting at the hydrogenases' level or at the level of their 
maturation proteins. On the other side, the wealth of functional elements 
discussed in relation to the identified hydrogenases is worthy of further 
investigation by biochemical and structural studies to ultimately lead to the 
usage of these enzymes as valuable catalysts.

DOI: 10.1128/spectrum.01019-22
PMCID: PMC9431212
PMID: 35735976 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.