1. Microbiome. 2022 Jun 24;10(1):96. doi: 10.1186/s40168-022-01264-5.

Functional changes of the gastric bypass microbiota reactivate thermogenic 
adipose tissue and systemic glucose control via intestinal FXR-TGR5 crosstalk in 
diet-induced obesity.

Münzker J(1), Haase N(1), Till A(2), Sucher R(3), Haange SB(4), Nemetschke L(1), 
Gnad T(5), Jäger E(1)(6), Chen J(1), Riede SJ(1), Chakaroun R(1), Massier L(1), 
Kovacs P(1), Ost M(7)(8), Rolle-Kampczyk U(4), Jehmlich N(4), Weiner J(1), 
Heiker JT(9), Klöting N(9), Seeger G(10), Morawski M(10), Keitel V(11), Pfeifer 
A(5), von Bergen M(4), Heeren J(12), Krügel U(13), Fenske WK(14).

Author information:
(1)Medical Department III, Endocrinology, Nephrology, Rheumatology, University 
Hospital of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine I, Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and 
Metabolism, University Medical Center Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(3)Department of Visceral-, Transplant-, Thoracic- and Vascular Surgery, 
University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.
(4)Department of Molecular Systems Biology, Helmholtz Centre for Environmental 
Research Leipzig-UFZ, Leipzig, Germany.
(5)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University Hospital, University of 
Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(6)Department for Pathology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center Los Angeles, Los 
Angeles, USA.
(7)Department of Neuropathology, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.
(8)German Institute of Human Nutrition Potsdam-Rehbruecke (DIfE), Nuthetal, 
Germany.
(9)Helmholtz Institute for Metabolic, Obesity and Vascular Research (HI-MAG) of 
the Helmholtz Zentrum München at the University of Leipzig and University 
Hospital Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.
(10)Paul Flechsig Institute of Brain Research, Faculty of Medicine, University 
of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.
(11)Clinic for Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Infectious Diseases, Medical 
Faculty, University Hospital Düsseldorf, Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf, 
Germany.
(12)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Cell Biology, University Medical 
Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(13)Rudolf Boehm Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of 
Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.
(14)Department of Internal Medicine I, Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and 
Metabolism, University Medical Center Bonn, Bonn, Germany. 
Wiebke.fenske@ukbonn.de.

BACKGROUND: Bariatric surgery remains the most effective therapy for adiposity 
reduction and remission of type 2 diabetes. Although different bariatric 
procedures associate with pronounced shifts in the gut microbiota, their 
functional role in the regulation of energetic and metabolic benefits achieved 
with the surgery are not clear.
METHODS: To evaluate the causal as well as the inherent therapeutic character of 
the surgery-altered gut microbiome in improved energy and metabolic control in 
diet-induced obesity, an antibiotic cocktail was used to eliminate the gut 
microbiota in diet-induced obese rats after gastric bypass surgery, and gastric 
bypass-shaped gut microbiota was transplanted into obese littermates. Thorough 
metabolic profiling was combined with omics technologies on samples collected 
from cecum and plasma to identify adaptions in gut microbiota-host signaling, 
which control improved energy balance and metabolic profile after surgery.
RESULTS: In this study, we first demonstrate that depletion of the gut 
microbiota largely reversed the beneficial effects of gastric bypass surgery on 
negative energy balance and improved glucolipid metabolism. Further, we show 
that the gastric bypass-shaped gut microbiota reduces adiposity in diet-induced 
obese recipients by re-activating energy expenditure from metabolic active brown 
adipose tissue. These beneficial effects were linked to improved glucose 
homeostasis, lipid control, and improved fatty liver disease. Mechanistically, 
these effects were triggered by modulation of taurine metabolism by the gastric 
bypass gut microbiota, fostering an increased abundance of intestinal and 
circulating taurine-conjugated bile acid species. In turn, these bile acids 
activated gut-restricted FXR and systemic TGR5 signaling to stimulate adaptive 
thermogenesis.
CONCLUSION: Our results establish the role of the gut microbiome in the weight 
loss and metabolic success of gastric bypass surgery. We here identify a 
signaling cascade that entails altered bile acid receptor signaling resulting 
from a collective, hitherto undescribed change in the metabolic activity of a 
cluster of bacteria, thereby readjusting energy imbalance and metabolic disease 
in the obese host. These findings strengthen the rationale for 
microbiota-targeted strategies to improve and refine current therapies of 
obesity and metabolic syndrome. Video Abstract Bariatric Surgery (i.e. RYGB) or 
the repeated fecal microbiota transfer (FMT) from RYGB donors into DIO 
(diet-induced obesity) animals induces shifts in the intestinal microbiome, an 
effect that can be impaired by oral application of antibiotics (ABx). Our 
current study shows that RYGB-dependent alterations in the intestinal microbiome 
result in an increase in the luminal and systemic pool of Taurine-conjugated 
Bile acids (TCBAs) by various cellular mechanisms acting in the intestine and 
the liver. TCBAs induce signaling via two different receptors, farnesoid X 
receptor (FXR, specifically in the intestines) and the G-protein-coupled bile 
acid receptor TGR5 (systemically), finally resulting in metabolic improvement 
and advanced weight management. BSH, bile salt hydrolase; BAT brown adipose 
tissue.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40168-022-01264-5
PMCID: PMC9229785
PMID: 35739571 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.