1. Clin Genet. 2022 Oct;102(4):253-261. doi: 10.1111/cge.14185. Epub 2022 Aug 22.

Establishing the relationship between familial dysbetalipoproteinemia and 
genetic variants in the APOE gene.

Heidemann BE(1), Koopal C(1), Baass A(2)(3), Defesche JC(4), Zuurbier L(4), 
Mulder MT(5), Roeters van Lennep JE(5), Riksen NP(6), Boot C(7), Marais AD(8), 
Visseren FLJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Vascular Medicine, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht 
University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(2)Genetic Dyslipidemias Clinic of the Montreal Clinical Research Institute, 
Montreal, Québec, Canada.
(3)Department of Medicine, Divisions of Experimental Medicine and Medical 
Biochemistry, McGill University, Montreal, Québec, Canada.
(4)Department of Human Genetics, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, 
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus University Medical Center, 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine and Research Institute for Molecular Life 
Sciences, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(7)Department of Blood Sciences, Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation 
Trust, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(8)Division of Chemical Pathology, Department of Pathology, Faculty of Health 
Sciences, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.

Familial Dysbetalipoproteinemia (FD) is the second most common monogenic 
dyslipidemia and is associated with a very high cardiovascular risk due to 
cholesterol-enriched remnant lipoproteins. FD is usually caused by a recessively 
inherited variant in the APOE gene (ε2ε2), but variants with dominant 
inheritance have also been described. The typical dysbetalipoproteinemia 
phenotype has a delayed onset and requires a metabolic hit. Therefore, the 
diagnosis of FD should be made by demonstrating both the genotype and 
dysbetalipoproteinemia phenotype. Next Generation Sequencing is becoming more 
widely available and can reveal variants in the APOE gene for which the relation 
with FD is unknown or uncertain. In this article, two approaches are presented 
to ascertain the relationship of a new variant in the APOE gene with FD. The 
comprehensive approach consists of determining the pathogenicity of the variant 
and its causal relationship with FD by confirming a dysbetalipoproteinemia 
phenotype, and performing in vitro functional tests and, optionally, in vivo 
postprandial clearance studies. When this is not feasible, a second, pragmatic 
approach within reach of clinical practice can be followed for individual 
patients to make decisions on treatment, follow-up, and family counseling.

© 2022 The Authors. Clinical Genetics published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cge.14185
PMCID: PMC9543580
PMID: 35781703 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.