1. Front Aging. 2021 Dec 10;2:781582. doi: 10.3389/fragi.2021.781582. eCollection
 2021.

Oral-Gut-Brain Axis in Experimental Models of Periodontitis: Associating Gut 
Dysbiosis With Neurodegenerative Diseases.

Sansores-España LD(1)(2), Melgar-Rodríguez S(1), Olivares-Sagredo K(1), 
Cafferata EA(3), Martínez-Aguilar VM(2), Vernal R(1), Paula-Lima AC(4)(5)(6), 
Díaz-Zúñiga J(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Periodontal Biology Laboratory, Faculty of Dentistry, University of Chile, 
Santiago, Chile.
(2)Faculty of Dentistry, Autonomous University of Yucatán, Mérida, México.
(3)Department of Periodontology, School of Dentistry, Universidad Científica Del 
Sur, Lima, Perú.
(4)Biomedical Neuroscience Institute, Faculty of Medicine, Universidad de Chile, 
Santiago, Chile.
(5)Department of Neuroscience, Faculty of Medicine, Universidad de Chile, 
Santiago, Chile.
(6)Institute for Research in Dental Sciences, Faculty of Dentistry, Universidad 
de Chile, Santiago, Chile.
(7)Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Atacama, Copiapó, 
Chile.

Periodontitis is considered a non-communicable chronic disease caused by a 
dysbiotic microbiota, which generates a low-grade systemic inflammation that 
chronically damages the organism. Several studies have associated periodontitis 
with other chronic non-communicable diseases, such as cardiovascular or 
neurodegenerative diseases. Besides, the oral bacteria considered a keystone 
pathogen, Porphyromonas gingivalis, has been detected in the hippocampus and 
brain cortex. Likewise, gut microbiota dysbiosis triggers a low-grade systemic 
inflammation, which also favors the risk for both cardiovascular and 
neurodegenerative diseases. Recently, the existence of an axis of Oral-Gut 
communication has been proposed, whose possible involvement in the development 
of neurodegenerative diseases has not been uncovered yet. The present review 
aims to compile evidence that the dysbiosis of the oral microbiota triggers 
changes in the gut microbiota, which creates a higher predisposition for the 
development of neuroinflammatory or neurodegenerative diseases.The 
Oral-Gut-Brain axis could be defined based on anatomical communications, where 
the mouth and the intestine are in constant communication. The oral-brain axis 
is mainly established from the trigeminal nerve and the gut-brain axis from the 
vagus nerve. The oral-gut communication is defined from an anatomical relation 
and the constant swallowing of oral bacteria. The gut-brain communication is 
more complex and due to bacteria-cells, immune and nervous system interactions. 
Thus, the gut-brain and oral-brain axis are in a bi-directional relationship. 
Through the qualitative analysis of the selected papers, we conclude that 
experimental periodontitis could produce both neurodegenerative pathologies and 
intestinal dysbiosis, and that periodontitis is likely to induce both conditions 
simultaneously. The severity of the neurodegenerative disease could depend, at 
least in part, on the effects of periodontitis in the gut microbiota, which 
could strengthen the immune response and create an injurious inflammatory and 
dysbiotic cycle. Thus, dementias would have their onset in dysbiotic phenomena 
that affect the oral cavity or the intestine. The selected studies allow us to 
speculate that oral-gut-brain communication exists, and bacteria probably get to 
the brain via trigeminal and vagus nerves.

Copyright © 2021 Sansores-España, Melgar-Rodríguez, Olivares-Sagredo, Cafferata, 
Martínez-Aguilar, Vernal, Paula-Lima, Díaz-Zúñiga.

DOI: 10.3389/fragi.2021.781582
PMCID: PMC9261337
PMID: 35822001

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.