1. PLoS Genet. 2022 Jul 15;18(7):e1009765. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1009765. 
eCollection 2022 Jul.

The cell surface hyaluronidase TMEM2 plays an essential role in mouse neural 
crest cell development and survival.

Inubushi T(1), Nakanishi Y(1), Abe M(2), Takahata Y(3), Nishimura R(3), Kurosaka 
H(1), Irie F(4), Yamashiro T(1), Yamaguchi Y(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics, Osaka University 
Graduate School of Dentistry, Osaka, Japan.
(2)Department of Oral Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Osaka University 
Graduate School of Dentistry, Osaka, Japan.
(3)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Osaka University Graduate 
School of Dentistry, Osaka, Japan.
(4)Human Genetics Program, Sanford Burnham Prebys Medical Discovery Institute, 
La Jolla, California, United States of America.

Hyaluronan (HA) is a major extracellular matrix component whose tissue levels 
are dynamically regulated during embryonic development. Although the synthesis 
of HA has been shown to exert a substantial influence on embryonic 
morphogenesis, the functional importance of the catabolic aspect of HA turnover 
is poorly understood. Here, we demonstrate that the transmembrane hyaluronidase 
TMEM2 plays an essential role in neural crest development and the morphogenesis 
of neural crest derivatives, as evidenced by the presence of severe craniofacial 
abnormalities in Wnt1-Cre-mediated Tmem2 knockout (Tmem2CKO) mice. Neural crest 
cells (NCCs) are a migratory population of cells that gives rise to diverse cell 
lineages, including the craniofacial complex, the peripheral nervous system, and 
part of the heart. Analysis of Tmem2 expression during NCC formation and 
migration reveals that Tmem2 is expressed at the site of NCC delamination and in 
emigrating Sox9-positive NCCs. In Tmem2CKO embryos, the number of NCCs 
emigrating from the neural tube is greatly reduced. Furthermore, linage tracing 
reveals that the number of NCCs traversing the ventral migration pathway and the 
number of post-migratory neural crest derivatives are both significantly reduced 
in a Tmem2CKO background. In vitro studies using Tmem2-depleted mouse O9-1 
neural crest cells demonstrate that Tmem2 expression is essential for the 
ability of these cells to form focal adhesions on and to migrate into 
HA-containing substrates. Additionally, we show that Tmem2-deficient NCCs 
exhibit increased apoptotic cell death in NCC-derived tissues, an observation 
that is corroborated by in vitro experiments using O9-1 cells. Collectively, our 
data demonstrate that TMEM2-mediated HA degradation plays an essential role in 
normal neural crest development. This study reveals the hitherto unrecognized 
functional importance of HA degradation in embryonic development and highlights 
the pivotal role of Tmem2 in the developmental process.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1009765
PMCID: PMC9328550
PMID: 35839257 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.