1. Front Aging Neurosci. 2022 Jun 29;14:861344. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2022.861344. 
eCollection 2022.

An Improved Model of Moderate Sleep Apnoea for Investigating Its Effect as a 
Comorbidity on Neurodegenerative Disease.

Roberts R(1), Wall MJ(1), Braren I(2), Dhillon K(1), Evans A(1), Dunne J(1), 
Nyakupinda S(1), Huckstepp RTR(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, University of Warwick, Coventry, United Kingdom.
(2)University Medical Center Eppendorf, Vector Facility, Institute for 
Experimental Pharmacology and Toxikology, Hamburg, Germany.

Sleep apnoea is a highly prevalent disease that often goes undetected and is 
associated with poor clinical prognosis, especially as it exacerbates many 
different disease states. However, most animal models of sleep apnoea (e.g., 
intermittent hypoxia) have recently been dispelled as physiologically 
unrealistic and are often unduly severe. Owing to a lack of appropriate models, 
little is known about the causative link between sleep apnoea and its 
comorbidities. To overcome these problems, we have created a more realistic 
animal model of moderate sleep apnoea by reducing the excitability of the 
respiratory network. This has been achieved through controlled genetically 
mediated lesions of the preBötzinger complex (preBötC), the inspiratory 
oscillator. This novel model shows increases in sleep disordered breathing with 
alterations in breathing during wakefulness (decreased frequency and increased 
tidal volume) as observed clinically. The increase in dyspnoeic episodes leads 
to reduction in REM sleep, with all lost active sleep being spent in the awake 
state. The increase in hypoxic and hypercapnic insults induces both systemic and 
neural inflammation. Alterations in neurophysiology, an inhibition of 
hippocampal long-term potentiation (LTP), is reflected in deficits in both long- 
and short-term spatial memory. This improved model of moderate sleep apnoea may 
be the key to understanding why this disorder has such far-reaching and often 
fatal effects on end-organ function.

Copyright © 2022 Roberts, Wall, Braren, Dhillon, Evans, Dunne, Nyakupinda and 
Huckstepp.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2022.861344
PMCID: PMC9278434
PMID: 35847678

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.