1. Front Public Health. 2022 Jul 4;10:915363. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2022.915363. 
eCollection 2022.

Spike Mutation Profiles Associated With SARS-CoV-2 Breakthrough Infections in 
Delta Emerging and Predominant Time Periods in British Columbia, Canada.

Fibke CD(1), Joffres Y(2), Tyson JR(3), Colijn C(4), Janjua NZ(2)(5), Fjell 
C(3), Prystajecky N(3)(6), Jassem A(3)(6), Sbihi H(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)BC Centre for Disease Control, UBC BCCDC, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(2)BC Center for Disease Control, Data and Analytics Services, Vancouver, BC, 
Canada.
(3)Public Health Laboratory, BC Center for Disease Control, Vancouver, BC, 
Canada.
(4)Department of Mathematics, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada.
(5)School of Population and Public Health, The University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(6)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

BACKGROUND: COVID-19 vaccination is a key public health measure in the pandemic 
response. The rapid evolution of SARS-CoV-2 variants introduce new groups of 
spike protein mutations. These new mutations are thought to aid in the evasion 
of vaccine-induced immunity and render vaccines less effective. However, not all 
spike mutations contribute equally to vaccine escape. Previous studies associate 
mutations with vaccine breakthrough infections (BTI), but information at the 
population level remains scarce. We aimed to identify spike mutations associated 
with SARS-CoV-2 vaccine BTI in a community setting during the emergence and 
predominance of the Delta-variant.
METHODS: This case-control study used both genomic, and epidemiological data 
from a provincial COVID-19 surveillance program. Analyses were stratified into 
two periods approximating the emergence and predominance of the Delta-variant, 
and restricted to primary SARS-CoV-2 infections from either unvaccinated 
individuals, or those infected ≥14 days after their second vaccination dose in a 
community setting. Each sample's spike mutations were concatenated into a unique 
spike mutation profile (SMP). Penalized logistic regression was used to identify 
spike mutations and SMPs associated with SARS-CoV-2 vaccine BTI in both time 
periods.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: This study reports population level relative risk 
estimates, between 2 and 4-folds, of spike mutation profiles associated with BTI 
during the emergence and predominance of the Delta-variant, which comprised 
19,624 and 17,331 observations, respectively. The identified mutations cover 
multiple spike domains including the N-terminal domain (NTD), receptor binding 
domain (RBD), S1/S2 cleavage region, fusion peptide and heptad regions. 
Mutations in these different regions imply various mechanisms contribute to 
vaccine escape. Our profiling method identifies naturally occurring spike 
mutations associated with BTI, and can be applied to emerging SARS-CoV-2 
variants with novel groups of spike mutations.

Copyright © 2022 Fibke, Joffres, Tyson, Colijn, Janjua, Fjell, Prystajecky, 
Jassem and Sbihi.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2022.915363
PMCID: PMC9289444
PMID: 35859775 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: NJ participates in Abbvie Advisory Board 
meeting. The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the 
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as 
a potential conflict of interest.