1. Biomolecules. 2022 Jul 16;12(7):990. doi: 10.3390/biom12070990.

Impact of Primary RPE Cells in a Porcine Organotypic Co-Cultivation Model.

Wagner N(1), Safaei A(1), Hurst J(2), Vogt PA(1), Dick HB(1), Joachim SC(1), 
Schnichels S(2).

Author information:
(1)Experimental Eye Research Institute, University Eye Hospital, Ruhr-University 
Bochum, 44892 Bochum, Germany.
(2)Centre for Ophthalmology, University Eye Hospital Tübingen, 72076 Tübingen, 
Germany.

The pathological events of age-related macular degeneration are characterized by 
degenerative processes involving the photoreceptor cells, retinal pigment 
epithelium (RPE), and the Bruch's membrane as well as choroidal alterations. To 
mimic in vivo interactions between photoreceptor cells and RPE cells ex vivo, 
complex models are required. Hence, the aim of this study was to establish a 
porcine organotypic co-cultivation model and enlighten the interactions of 
photoreceptor and RPE cells, with a special emphasis on potential 
neuroprotective effects. Porcine neuroretina explants were cultured with primary 
porcine RPE cells (ppRPE) or medium derived from these cells (=conditioned 
medium). Neuroretina explants cultured alone served as controls. After eight 
days, RT-qPCR and immunohistology were performed to analyze photoreceptors, 
synapses, macroglia, microglia, complement factors, and pro-inflammatory 
cytokines (e.g., IL1B, IL6, TNF) in the neuroretina samples. The presence of 
ppRPE cells preserved photoreceptors, whereas synaptical density was unaltered. 
Interestingly, on an immunohistological as well as on an mRNA level, microglia 
and complement factors were comparable in all groups. Increased IL6 levels were 
noted in ppRPE and conditioned medium samples, while TNF was only upregulated in 
the ppRPE group. IL1B was elevated in conditioned medium samples. In conclusion, 
a co-cultivation of ppRPE cells and neuroretina seem to have beneficial effects 
on the neuroretina, preserving photoreceptors and maintaining synaptic vesicles 
in vitro. This organotypic co-cultivation model can be used to investigate the 
complex interactions between the retina and RPE cells, gain further insight into 
neurodegenerative pathomechanisms occurring in retinal diseases, and evaluate 
potential therapeutics.

DOI: 10.3390/biom12070990
PMCID: PMC9313304
PMID: 35883547 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.