1. Antioxidants (Basel). 2022 Jul 26;11(8):1453. doi: 10.3390/antiox11081453.

Increased Heme Oxygenase 1 Expression upon a Primary Exposure to the Respiratory 
Syncytial Virus and a Secondary Mycobacterium bovis Infection.

Canedo-Marroquín G(1)(2), Soto JA(1)(3), Andrade CA(1), Bueno SM(1), Kalergis 
AM(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Millennium Institute of Immunology and Immunotherapy, Departamento de 
Genética Molecular y Microbiología, Facultad de Ciencias Biológicas, Pontificia 
Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago 8331150, Chile.
(2)Centre for Biomedical Research and Innovation, Faculty of Dentistry, 
Universidad de los Andes, Santiago 7620157, Chile.
(3)Millennium Institute on Immunology and Immunotherapy, Departamento de 
Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad de Ciencias de la Vida, Universidad Andrés Bello, 
Santiago 8370146, Chile.
(4)Departamento de Endocrinología, Facultad de Medicina, Pontificia Universidad 
Católica de Chile, Santiago 8330023, Chile.

The human respiratory syncytial virus (hRSV) is the leading cause of severe 
lower respiratory tract infections in infants. Because recurrent epidemics based 
on reinfection occur in children and adults, hRSV has gained interest as a 
potential primary pathogen favoring secondary opportunistic infections. Several 
infection models have shown different mechanisms by which hRSV promotes 
immunopathology to prevent the development of adaptive protective immunity. 
However, little is known about the long-lasting effects of viral infection on 
pulmonary immune surveillance mechanisms. As a first approach, here we evaluated 
whether a primary infection by hRSV, once resolved, dampens the host immune 
response to a secondary infection with an attenuated strain of Mycobacterium 
bovis (M. Bovis) strain referred as to Bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG). We 
analyzed leukocyte dynamics and immunomodulatory molecules in the lungs after 
eleven- and twenty-one-days post-infection with Mycobacterium, using previous 
hRSV infected mice, by flow cytometry and the expression of critical genes 
involved in the immune response by real-time quantitative reverse transcription 
polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR). Among the latter, we analyzed the 
expression of Heme Oxygenase (HO)-1 in an immunization scheme in mice. Our data 
suggest that a pre-infection with hRSV has a conditioning effect promoting lung 
pathology during a subsequent mycobacterial challenge, characterized by 
increased infiltration of innate immune cells, including interstitial and 
alveolar macrophages. Our data also suggest that hRSV impairs pulmonary immune 
responses, promoting secondary mycobacterial colonization and lung survival, 
which could be associated with an increase in the expression of HO-1. 
Additionally, BCG is a commonly used vaccine that can be used as a platform for 
the generation of new recombinant vaccines, such as a recombinant BCG strain 
expressing the nucleoprotein of hRSV (rBCG-N-hRSV). Therefore, we evaluated if 
the immunization with rBCG-N-hRSV could modulate the expression of HO-1. We 
found a differential expression pattern for HO-1, where a higher induction of 
HO-1 was detected on epithelial cells compared to dendritic cells during late 
infection times. This is the first study to demonstrate that infection with hRSV 
produces damage in the lung epithelium, promoting subsequent mycobacterial 
colonization, characterized by an increase in the neutrophils and alveolar 
macrophages recruitment. Moreover, we determined that immunization with 
rBCG-N-hRSV modulates differentially the expression of HO-1 on immune and 
epithelial cells, which could be involved in the repair of pulmonary tissue.

DOI: 10.3390/antiox11081453
PMCID: PMC9332618
PMID: 35892656

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.