1. Front Pharmacol. 2022 Jul 13;13:934057. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2022.934057. 
eCollection 2022.

Epimedium koreanum Nakai-Induced Liver Injury-A Mechanistic Study Using 
Untargeted Metabolomics.

Li P(1), Zhang L(1), Guo Z(1), Kang Q(1), Chen C(1), Liu X(1), Ma Q(1), Zhang 
J(1), Hu Y(1), Wang T(1).

Author information:
(1)Beijing Institute of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Beijing University of 
Chinese Medicine, Beijing, China.

Epimedii Folium is widely used worldwide as an herbal supplement, and the risk 
of its induced liver damage has emerged in recent years. Our preliminary study 
has found that, among several Epimedii Folium species specified in the Chinese 
Pharmacopoeia, Epimedium koreanum Nakai has a more severe propensity for 
hepatotoxicity. However, the mechanism of hepatotoxicity of Epimedium koreanum 
Nakai is still unclear. In this study, untargeted metabolomics was performed to 
analyze the serum and liver tissue to explore the mechanism of hepatotoxicity of 
Epimedium koreanum Nakai. The results of experiments in vivo showed that, after 
28 days of exposure to Epimedium koreanum Nakai ethanol extract (EEE), the liver 
weight, levels of AST, ALP, TBIL, etc. in serum of rats in the EEE group were 
significantly increased, as well as severe cytoplasmic vacuolation appeared in 
the liver tissue, which suggested that EEE has significant hepatotoxicity. 
Subsequently, the results of metabolomics revealed significant changes in the 
metabolic profile in the liver and serum of rats after EEE exposure, in which 
metabolites in serum such as flavin mononucleotide, phenylacetylglycine, 
glutathione, l-tryptophan, and sphingomyelin were able to accurately identify 
liver injury caused by EEE and could be used as serum markers to reflect 
EEE-induced liver injury. The KEGG pathway enrichment analysis revealed that EEE 
caused extensive effects on rats' metabolic pathways. Some of the most affected 
pathways included glutathione metabolism, glutamate metabolism pathway, primary 
bile acid biosynthesis pathway, and sphingolipid metabolism pathway, which were 
all directed to the biological process of ferroptosis. Then, the main markers 
related to ferroptosis in the liver were examined, and the results demonstrated 
that the content of malondialdehyde was significantly increased, the activity of 
superoxide dismutase was significantly reduced, the ferroptosis inhibitory 
proteins GPX4 and System xc - were significantly downregulated, and the 
ferroptosis-promoting protein ACSL4 was significantly up-regulated. Judging from 
these results, we concluded that the mechanism of hepatotoxicity of Epimedium 
koreanum Nakai was probably related to the induction of ferroptosis in 
hepatocytes.

Copyright © 2022 Li, Zhang, Guo, Kang, Chen, Liu, Ma, Zhang, Hu and Wang.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2022.934057
PMCID: PMC9326364
PMID: 35910368

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.