1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2022 Aug 2;63(9):3. doi: 10.1167/iovs.63.9.3.

Hypolacrimia and Alacrimia as Diagnostic Features for Genetic or Congenital 
Conditions.

Willems M(1)(2), Wells CF(2), Coubes C(2), Pequignot M(1), Kuony A(1)(3), Michon 
F(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Neurosciences of Montpellier, University of Montpellier, 
INSERM, Montpellier, France.
(2)Medical Genetic Department for Rare Diseases and Personalized Medicine, 
Reference Center AD SOOR, AnDDI-RARE, Montpellier University Hospital Center, 
Montpellier, France.
(3)Université Paris Cité, CNRS, Institut Jacques Monod, Paris, France.

As part of the lacrimal apparatus, the lacrimal gland participates in the 
maintenance of a healthy eye surface by producing the aqueous part of the tear 
film. Alacrimia and hypolacrimia, which are relatively rare during childhood or 
young adulthood, have their origin in a number of mechanisms which include 
agenesia, aplasia, hypoplasia, or incorrect maturation of the gland. Moreover, 
impaired innervation of the gland and/or the cornea and alterations of protein 
secretion pathways can lead to a defective tear film. In most conditions leading 
to alacrimia or hypolacrimia, however, the altered tear film is only one of 
numerous defects that arise and therefore is commonly disregarded. Here, we have 
systematically reviewed all of those genetic conditions or congenital disorders 
that have alacrimia or hypolacrimia as a feature. Where it is known, we describe 
the mechanism of the defect in question. It has been possible to clearly 
establish the physiopathology of only a minority of these conditions. As 
hypolacrimia and alacrimia are rare features, this review could be used as a 
tool in clinical genetics to perform a quick diagnosis, necessary for 
appropriate care and counseling.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.63.9.3
PMCID: PMC9363675
PMID: 35925585 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: M. Willems, None; C.F. Wells, None; 
C. Coubes, None; M. Pequignot, None; A. Kuony, None; F. Michon, None