1. Cureus. 2022 Jul 6;14(7):e26619. doi: 10.7759/cureus.26619. eCollection 2022 
Jul.

Trametinib: Could It Be a Promising Drug to Treat Atypical Chronic Myeloid 
Leukemia?

Elsayed M(1), Harry S(2), Nanua S(3), Zaidi S(4), Habib MH(5), Raza S(3).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, University of Missouri Kansas City School of Medicine, 
Kansas City, USA.
(2)Hematology/Oncology, Saint Francis Cancer Center Warren Clinic, Tulsa, USA.
(3)Oncology, Saint Luke's Cancer Institute, University of Missouri Kansas City, 
Kansas City, USA.
(4)Oncology, University of Kansas School of Medicine, Kansas City, USA.
(5)Oncology, Rutgers Cancer Institute of New Jersey, New Brunswick, USA.

Atypical chronic myeloid leukemia (aCML) is a rare disease that is currently 
classified under the myelodysplastic (MDS)/myeloproliferative neoplasm (MPN) 
disease spectrum. MDS/MPN diseases are characterized by the absence of the 
Philadelphia (Ph) chromosome and the overlap between bone marrow fibrosis and 
dysplastic features. The Ph chromosome, resulting from BCR-ABL1 translocation, 
helps to distinguish aCML from chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). The currently 
reported incidence of aCML is imprecise because aCML is diagnosed primarily 
based on morphological features and other unspecified laboratory findings, and 
there is an especially high chance of under-diagnosis of aCML and other MDS/MPN 
diseases. Recent advances in next-generation sequencing (NGS) have allowed a 
greater understanding of the nature of aCML, providing better opportunities to 
achieve higher diagnostic accuracy and for the use of more targeted treatment to 
achieve better outcomes. Herein, we present a case of a 68-year-old woman who 
came to our hospital complaining of shortness of breath, fatigue, and weakness, 
who was found to have significantly increased leukocytosis, hepatosplenomegaly, 
and was negative for the Ph chromosome. Further investigations with NGS revealed 
mutations in ASXL1, GATA2, NRAS, and SRSF2 but not CSF3R. In addition to this, 
peripheral smear and bone marrow aspiration findings were suggestive of aCML 
based on specific morphological findings. Since the patient was ineligible for a 
stem cell transplant (SCT), symptomatic treatment was started with cell 
transfusion; however, the patient continued to have symptomatic anemia that 
required multiple transfusions. A trial with trametinib, a mitogen-activated 
protein kinase kinase (MEK) inhibitor, was later started as a targeted therapy 
based on one of her genetic mutations. Interestingly, the patient's blood counts 
stabilized, she reported feeling better, and she did not need any blood 
transfusions for four consecutive months during treatment with trametinib. 
Unfortunately, our patient later died from sepsis resulting from secondary 
infections. In light of the significant advancements in NGS, clinicians should 
always consider utilizing it as a helpful tool to not only establish a rare 
diagnosis of aCML but also to offer the best available targeted therapy when 
applicable. This might alleviate the burden associated with the poor prognosis 
of aCML.

Copyright © 2022, Elsayed et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.26619
PMCID: PMC9356656
PMID: 35949766

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.