1. Front Immunol. 2022 Jul 22;13:921728. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.921728. 
eCollection 2022.

Human Lung Fibroblasts Exhibit Induced Inflammation Memory via Increased IL6 
Gene Expression and Release.

Yap JMG(1), Ueda T(2), Kanemitsu Y(1), Takeda N(1), Fukumitsu K(1), Fukuda S(1), 
Uemura T(1), Tajiri T(1), Ohkubo H(1), Maeno K(1), Ito Y(1), Oguri T(1), Ugawa 
S(2), Niimi A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Nagoya 
City University Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Aichi, Japan.
(2)Department of Anatomy and Neuroscience, Nagoya City University Graduate 
School of Medical Sciences, Aichi, Japan.

Fibroblasts of different origins are known to possess stromal memory after 
inflammatory episodes. However, there are no studies exploring human lung 
fibroblast memory which may predict a subsequent inflammatory response in 
chronic respiratory diseases and COVID-19. MRC-5 and HF19 human lung fibroblast 
cell lines were treated using different primary and secondary stimulus 
combinations: TNFα-WD-TNFα, Poly (I:C)-WD-TNFα, TNFα-WD-Poly (I:C), or 
LPS-WD-TNFα with a 24-h rest period (withdrawal period; WD) between the two 24-h 
stimulations. TLR3 and NF-κB inhibitors were used to determine pathways 
involved. The effect of SARS-Cov-2 spike protein to inflammatory response of 
lung fibroblasts was also investigated. mRNA expressions of genes and IL6 
release were measured using qRT-PCR and ELISA, respectively. Statistical 
significance was determined by using one- or two-way ANOVA, followed by 
Bonferroni's post hoc analysis for comparison of multiple groups. Preexposure 
with Poly (I:C) significantly increased TNFα-induced IL6 gene expression and IL6 
release in both cell lines, while it affected neither gene expressions of IL1B, 
IL2, IL8, and MMP8 nor fibrosis-related genes: ACTA2, COL1A1, POSTN, and TGFB1. 
Inhibition of TLR3 or NF-κB during primary stimulation significantly 
downregulated IL6 release. Simultaneous treatment of MRC-5 cells with SARS-CoV-2 
spike protein further increased TNFα-induced IL6 release; however, preexposure 
to Poly (I:C) did not affect it. Human lung fibroblasts are capable of retaining 
inflammatory memory and showed an augmented response upon secondary exposure. 
These results may contribute to the possibility of training human lung 
fibroblasts to respond suitably on inflammatory episodes after viral infection.

Copyright © 2022 Yap, Ueda, Kanemitsu, Takeda, Fukumitsu, Fukuda, Uemura, 
Tajiri, Ohkubo, Maeno, Ito, Oguri, Ugawa and Niimi.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.921728
PMCID: PMC9356221
PMID: 35941890 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The following authors received research grants 
and personal fees outside the submitted work: YK received research grants from 
Novartis Pharma, MSD, Sanofi, and personal fees from GSK, Novartis Pharma, 
AstraZeneca, Sanofi, and Kyorin. KF received research grants from Novartis 
Pharma and GSK. SF received personal fees from AstraZeneca and Eli Lilly. HO 
received a research grant from Boehringer Ingelheim. KM received personal fees 
from Pfizer and Chugai Pharmaceutical. TO reports personal fees from 
AstraZeneca, Eli Lilly Japan, Taiho Pharmaceutical, Pfizer, Chugai 
Pharmaceutical, MSD, Daiichi Sankyo, and Asahi Kasei Pharma, as well as research 
grants and personal fees from Kyowa Hakko Kirin, Boehringer Ingelheim, Ono 
Pharmaceutical, and Novartis. AN reports personal fees from Astellas, 
AstraZeneca, Kyorin, GSK, MSD, Shionogi, Bayer, Sanofi, Taiho, and Boehringer 
Ingelheim, and research grants from Astellas, Kyorin, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Novartis, MSD, Daiichi Sankyo, Taiho, Teijin, Ono, Takeda, and Sanofi 
Pharmaceutical. The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in 
the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed 
as a potential conflict of interest.