1. Anim Nutr. 2022 Jun 21;11:1-14. doi: 10.1016/j.aninu.2022.03.008. eCollection 
2022 Dec.

Integrated liver proteomics and metabolomics identify metabolic pathways 
affected by pantothenic acid deficiency in Pekin ducks.

Tang J(1), Wu Y(1), Zhang B(1), Liang S(1), Guo Z(1), Hu J(1), Zhou Z(1), Xie 
M(1), Hou S(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Animal Nutrition, Key Laboratory of Animal (Poultry) 
Genetics Breeding and Reproduction, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, 
Institute of Animal Sciences, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, 100193, 
Beijing, China.

Pantothenic acid deficiency (PAD) in animals causes growth depression, fasting 
hypoglycemia and impaired lipid and glucose metabolism. However, a systematic 
multi-omics analysis of effects of PAD on hepatic function has apparently not 
been reported. We investigated liver proteome and metabolome changes induced by 
PAD to explain its effects on growth and liver metabolic disorders. Pekin ducks 
(1-d-old, n = 128) were allocated into 2 groups, with 8 replicates and 8 birds 
per replicate. For 16 d, all ducks had ad libitum access to either a PAD or a 
pantothenic acid adequate (control, CON) diet, formulated by supplementing a 
basal diet with 0 or 8 mg pantothenic acid/kg of diet, respectively. Liver 
enlargement, elevated liver glycogen concentrations and decreased liver 
concentrations of triglyceride and unsaturated fatty acids were present in the 
PAD group compared to the CON group. Based on integrated liver proteomics and 
metabolomics, PAD mainly affected glycogen synthesis and degradation, glycolysis 
and gluconeogenesis, tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle, peroxisome 
proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) signaling pathway, fatty acid beta 
oxidation, and oxidative phosphorylation. Selected proteins were confirmed by 
Western blotting. Downregulation of proteins and metabolites involved in 
glycogen synthesis and degradation, glycolysis and gluconeogenesis implied that 
these processes were impaired in PAD ducks, which could have contributed to 
fasting hypoglycemia, liver glycogen storage, insufficient ATP production, and 
growth retardation. In contrast, PAD also upregulated proteins and metabolites 
involved in fatty acid beta oxidation, the TCA cycle, and oxidative 
phosphorylation processes in the liver; presumably compensatory responses to 
produce ATP. We inferred that PAD decreased liver triglyceride and unsaturated 
fatty acids by activating fatty acid beta oxidation and impairing unsaturated 
fatty acid synthesis. These findings contributed to our understanding of the 
mechanisms of PAD-induced changes in hepatic metabolism.

© 2022 Chinese Association of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine. Publishing 
services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.aninu.2022.03.008
PMCID: PMC9356036
PMID: 35950191

Conflict of interest statement: We declare that we have no financial and 
personal relationships with other people or organizations that can 
inappropriately influence our work, and there is no professional or other 
personal interest of any nature or kind in any product, service and/or company 
that could be construed as influencing the content of this paper.