1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2022 Jul 29;12:941939. doi: 
10.3389/fcimb.2022.941939. eCollection 2022.

Lymphostatin, a virulence factor of attaching and effacing Escherichia coli, 
inhibits proliferation and cytokine responses of human T cells in a manner 
associated with cell cycle arrest but not apoptosis or necrosis.

Ruamsap N(1)(2), Riyapa D(3), Janesomboon S(1), Stevens JM(4), Pichyangkul S(2), 
Pattanapanyasat K(5), Demons ST(2), Stevens MP(4), Korbsrisate S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol 
University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(2)Department of Bacterial and Parasitic Diseases, Armed Forces Research 
Institute of Medical Sciences, Bangkok, Thailand.
(3)Center for Research and Innovation, Faculty of Medical Technology, Mahidol 
University, Nakhon Pathom, Thailand.
(4)The Roslin Institute and Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies, 
University of Edinburgh, Easter Bush, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(5)Department for Research and Development, Siriraj Center of Research 
Excellence for Microparticle and Exosome in Diseases, Faculty of Medicine 
Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.

Lymphostatin is a virulence factor of enteropathogenic E. coli (EPEC) and 
non-O157 serogroup enterohaemorrhagic E. coli. Previous studies using whole-cell 
lysates of EPEC showed that lymphostatin inhibits the mitogen-activated 
proliferation of bulk human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and the 
production of cytokines IL-2, IL-4, IL-5, and IFN-γ. Here, we used highly 
purified lymphostatin and PBMC-derived T cells to show that lymphostatin 
inhibits anti-CD3/anti-CD28-activated proliferation of human CD4+ and CD8+ T 
cells and blocks the synthesis of IL-2, IL-4, IL-10 and IFN-γ without affecting 
cell viability and in a manner dependent on an N-terminal DTD 
glycosyltransferase motif. Such inhibition was not observed with T cells 
activated by phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate and ionomycin, implying that 
lymphostatin targets T cell receptor signaling. Analysis of the expression of 
CD69 indicated that lymphostatin suppresses T cell activation at an early stage 
and no impacts on apoptosis or necrosis were observed. Flow cytometric analysis 
of the DNA content of lymphostatin-treated CD4+ and CD8+ T cells showed a 
concentration- and DTD-dependent accumulation of the cells in the G0/G1 phase of 
the cell cycle, and corresponding reduction of the percentage of cells in S 
phase. Consistent with this, we found a marked reduction in the abundance of 
cyclins D3, E and A and loss of phosphorylated Rb over time in activated T cells 
from 8 donors treated with lymphostatin. Moreover, the cyclin-dependent kinase 
(cdk) inhibitor p27kip1, which inhibits progression of the cell cycle at G1 by 
acting on cyclin E-cdk2 or cyclin D-cdk4 complexes, was found to be accumulated 
in lymphostatin-treated T cells. Analysis of the abundance of phosphorylated 
kinases involved in signal transduction found that 30 of 39 were reduced in 
abundance following lymphostatin treatment of T cells from 5 donors, albeit not 
significantly so. Our data provide novel insights into the mode of action of 
lymphostatin on human T lymphocytes.

Copyright © 2022 Ruamsap, Riyapa, Janesomboon, Stevens, Pichyangkul, 
Pattanapanyasat, Demons, Stevens and Korbsrisate.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2022.941939
PMCID: PMC9373022
PMID: 35967844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.