1. ESMO Open. 2022 Oct;7(5):100555. doi: 10.1016/j.esmoop.2022.100555. Epub 2022 
Aug 18.

Multimodal survival prediction in advanced pancreatic cancer using machine 
learning.

Keyl J(1), Kasper S(2), Wiesweg M(3), Götze J(4), Schönrock M(4), Sinn M(4), 
Berger A(5), Nasca E(5), Kostbade K(3), Schumacher B(6), Markus P(7), Albers 
D(6), Treckmann J(8), Schmid KW(9), Schildhaus HU(9), Siveke JT(10), Schuler 
M(2), Kleesiek J(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, West German Cancer Center, University 
Hospital Essen (AöR), University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany; Institute 
for AI in Medicine (IKIM), University Hospital Essen (AöR), Essen, Germany; 
German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Partner site University Hospital Essen (AöR), 
Essen, Germany. Electronic address: Julius.Keyl@uk-essen.de.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, West German Cancer Center, University 
Hospital Essen (AöR), University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany; German 
Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Partner site University Hospital Essen (AöR), Essen, 
Germany; Medical Faculty, University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.
(3)Department of Medical Oncology, West German Cancer Center, University 
Hospital Essen (AöR), University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany; Medical 
Faculty, University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine II, Oncology, Hematology, BMT and Pneumology, 
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(5)Institute for AI in Medicine (IKIM), University Hospital Essen (AöR), Essen, 
Germany.
(6)Department of Gastroenterology, Elisabeth Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany.
(7)Department of General Surgery and Traumatology, Elisabeth Hospital Essen, 
Essen, Germany.
(8)Department of General, Visceral and Transplant Surgery, West German Cancer 
Center, University Hospital Essen (AöR), Essen, Germany.
(9)Medical Faculty, University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany; Institute of 
Pathology, West German Cancer Center, University Hospital Essen (AöR), Essen, 
Germany.
(10)Department of Medical Oncology, West German Cancer Center, University 
Hospital Essen (AöR), University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany; Medical 
Faculty, University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany; Bridge Institute of 
Experimental Tumor Therapy (BIT), West German Cancer Center, University Hospital 
Essen (AöR), Essen, Germany; Division of Solid Tumor Translational Oncology, 
German Cancer Consortium (DKTK) Partner site Essen, German Cancer Research 
Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany.
(11)Institute for AI in Medicine (IKIM), University Hospital Essen (AöR), Essen, 
Germany; Medical Faculty, University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Existing risk scores appear insufficient to assess the individual 
survival risk of patients with advanced pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) 
and do not take advantage of the variety of parameters that are collected during 
clinical care.
METHODS: In this retrospective study, we built a random survival forest model 
from clinical data of 203 patients with advanced PDAC. The parameters were 
assessed before initiation of systemic treatment and included age, CA19-9, 
C-reactive protein, metastatic status, neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio and total 
serum protein level. Separate models including imaging and molecular parameters 
were built for subgroups.
RESULTS: Over the entire cohort, a model based on clinical parameters achieved a 
c-index of 0.71. Our approach outperformed the American Joint Committee on 
Cancer (AJCC) staging system and the modified Glasgow Prognostic Score (mGPS) in 
the identification of high- and low-risk subgroups. Inclusion of the KRAS p.G12D 
mutational status could further improve the prediction, whereas radiomics data 
of the primary tumor only showed little benefit. In an external validation 
cohort of PDAC patients with liver metastases, our model achieved a c-index of 
0.67 (mGPS: 0.59).
CONCLUSIONS: The combination of multimodal data and machine-learning algorithms 
holds potential for personalized prognostication in advanced PDAC already at 
diagnosis.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.esmoop.2022.100555
PMCID: PMC9588888
PMID: 35988455 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure SK reports honoraria (self) from 
Merck, Amgen, Roche, Sanofi, Aventis, Servier and Lilly; honoraria (institution) 
from Merck, Amgen, Roche and Lilly; advisory/consultancy roles with Merck, 
Amgen, Roche, Sanofi, Aventis, Servier and Lilly; research grants/funding (self) 
from Merck, Bristol Myers Squibb, Roche and Lilly; research grants/funding 
(institution) from Merck and Lilly; and travel/accommodation expenses from 
Merck, Amgen, Roche, Sanofi, Aventis, Servier, Pierre Fabre and Lilly. MW 
reports honoraria from Amgen, Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis, Roche and Takeda; 
and received research funding from Bristol Myers Squibb and Takeda. JTS reports 
honoraria as consultant or for continuing medical education presentations from 
AstraZeneca, Bayer, Immunocore, Roche and Servier. His institution receives 
research funding from Bristol Myers Squibb, Celgene, Roche. He holds ownership 
and serves on the Board of Directors of Pharma15, all outside the submitted 
work. MS reports compensated consultancy from Amgen, AstraZeneca, BIOCAD, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol Myers Squibb, GlaxoSmithKline, Janssen, Merck 
Serono, Novartis, Roche, Sanofi and Takeda; honoraria for continuing medical 
education presentations from Amgen, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol Myers Squibb, 
Janssen and Novartis; and received research funding to his institution from 
AstraZeneca and Bristol Myers Squibb. All other authors have declared no 
conflicts of interest. Data sharing De-identified datasets analyzed in this 
study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.