1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2022 Aug 5;9:880763. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2022.880763. 
eCollection 2022.

Adeno-associated virus-mediated expression of activated factor V (FVa) for 
hemophilia phenotypic correction.

Sun J(1)(2), Chen X(2), Chai Z(2), Niu H(2), Dobbins AL(2), Nichols TC(3), Li 
C(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pharmacoengineering and Molecular Pharmaceutics, Eshelman School 
of Pharmacy, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, 
United States.
(2)Gene Therapy Center, School of Medicine, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, United States.
(3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of North Carolina 
at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, United States.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel 
Hill, NC, United States.

Adeno-associated virus (AAV) gene therapy has been successfully applied in 
hemophilia patients excluding patients with inhibitors. During the coagulation 
pathway, activated factor V (FVa) functions downstream as a cofactor of 
activated factor X (FXa) to amplify thrombin generation. We hypothesize that the 
expression of FVa via gene therapy can improve hemostasis of both factor IX and 
FVIII deficiencies, regardless of clotting factor inhibitor. A human FVa (hFVa) 
expression cassette was constructed, and AAV8 vectors encoding hFVa 
(AAV8/TTR-hFVa) were intravenously administrated into mice with hemophilia A and 
B with or without FVIII inhibitors. Hemostasis, including hFVa level, activated 
partial thromboplastin time (aPTT), tail clip, and the saphenous vein bleeding 
assay (SVBA), was evaluated. In hemophilia B mice, a dose of 4 × 1013 vg/kg 
AAV8/TTR-hFVa vectors achieved a complete phenotypic correction over 28 weeks. 
In hemophilia A mice, hemostasis improvement was also achieved, regardless of 
FVIII inhibitor development. In vivo hemostasis efficacy was confirmed by tail 
clip and SVBA. Interestingly, while minimal shortening of aPTT was observed at a 
lower dose of AAV8 vectors, hemostasis improvement was still achieved via in 
vivo bleeding assays. Collectively, FVa-based AAV gene therapy shows promise for 
hemostasis correction in hemophilia, regardless of inhibitor development and no 
potential risk for thrombosis.

Copyright © 2022 Sun, Chen, Chai, Niu, Dobbins, Nichols and Li.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2022.880763
PMCID: PMC9388760
PMID: 35991645

Conflict of interest statement: JS and CL are inventors on the patent 
application related to this work and hold equity in GeneVentiv Therapeutics, 
Inc. The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the 
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as 
a potential conflict of interest.