1. Front Pediatr. 2022 Aug 30;10:964201. doi: 10.3389/fped.2022.964201.
eCollection  2022.

Case report: First case report of an Emirati child with a novel gene variant 
causing aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase deficiency.

Babiker MOE(1), Kurian MA(2)(3), Suleiman J(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Neurosciences Centre, Al Jalila Children's Specialty Hospital, Dubai, United 
Arab Emirates.
(2)Developmental Neurosciences Department, University College London (UCL) Great 
Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Neurology, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS 
Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom.
(4)Division of Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, Tawam Hospital, Al Ain, 
United Arab Emirates.
(5)College of Medicine and Health Sciences, United Arab Emirates University, Al 
Ain, United Arab Emirates.

Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase (AADC) deficiency is a rare, neurometabolic 
disorder resulting from biallelic mutations in the dopa decarboxylase (DDC) 
gene. This is the first reported case of AADC deficiency in the United Arab 
Emirates (UAE) and describes an Emirati male patient who presented in the first 
few months of life with a severe phenotype of global hypotonia, developmental 
delay and oculogyric crisis. Following whole exome sequencing, a novel 
homozygous mutation in the DDC gene (c.1144G>T, p.Val382Phe) was reported and 
the patient underwent further testing, after which a diagnosis of AADC 
deficiency was confirmed. This mutation has not been previously described, but 
the clinical phenotype and corresponding biochemical profile confirmed that it 
is a pathogenic variant. The patient is currently managed at a tertiary referral 
center in the UAE and is treated in accordance with published guidance on AADC 
deficiency, including the recommended medical therapy combined with 
multidisciplinary care from a team of specialists. Some symptomatic improvements 
have been reported but at 5 years of age the patient continues to exhibit 
profound developmental delay, oculogyric crisis and is prone to recurrent 
respiratory infections. In order to improve outcomes for patients with AADC 
deficiency in the Middle Eastern region, there is an urgent need to raise the 
index of clinical suspicion, particularly among primary care physicians, 
pediatricians, and pediatric neurologists, and to improve access to diagnostic 
testing. This is particularly relevant at the current time, given the ongoing 
development of potentially disease-modifying gene therapy for AADC deficiency.

Copyright © 2022 Babiker, Kurian and Suleiman.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2022.964201
PMCID: PMC9468477
PMID: 36110109

Conflict of interest statement: Authors MB and JS have received an honorarium 
from PTC Therapeutics for advisory work. The remaining author declares that the 
research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial 
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.