1. Thromb J. 2022 Sep 26;20(1):55. doi: 10.1186/s12959-022-00411-0.

The potential impact of Covid-19 on the capacity of routine laboratory tests to 
detect heparin-induced thrombocytopenia.

Draxler DF(1)(2)(3), Brodard J(4), Zante B(5), Jakob SM(5), Wiegand J(6), Kremer 
Hovinga JA(4), Angelillo-Scherrer A(4)(7), Rovo A(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology and Central Hematology Laboratory, Inselspital, Bern 
University Hospital, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland. 
dominik.draxler@insel.ch.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Inselspital, Bern University Hospital, University 
of Bern, Bern, Switzerland. dominik.draxler@insel.ch.
(3)Bern Center for Precision Medicine, Bern, Switzerland. 
dominik.draxler@insel.ch.
(4)Department of Hematology and Central Hematology Laboratory, Inselspital, Bern 
University Hospital, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(5)Department of Intensive Care Medicine, Inselspital, Bern University Hospital, 
University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(6)Department of Intensive Care Medicine, Lindenhofspital, Bern, Switzerland.
(7)Bern Center for Precision Medicine, Bern, Switzerland.

In Covid-19, anticoagulation with heparin is often administered to prevent or 
treat thromboembolic events. Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) is a severe 
complication of heparin treatment, caused by heparin-dependent, platelet 
activating anti-platelet factor 4 (PF4)/heparin antibodies. Diagnosis of HIT is 
based on the combination of clinical parameters, allowing to determine the 
pretest probability, and laboratory testing for anti-PF4/heparin antibodies and 
confirmatory functional assays, such as the heparin-induced platelet activation 
(HIPA) test.We report the case of a patient with severe Covid-19 pneumonia 
requiring ECMO treatment, who developed recurrent clotting of the ECMO filter 
and a drop in platelet count under heparin treatment. He was therefore suspected 
to have HIT and the anticoagulation was switched to argatroban. Despite high 
clinical probability and high titres of anti-PF4/heparin antibodies, the 
functional HIPA test was negative. Nevertheless, argatroban was continued rather 
than to reinstate anticoagulation with heparin. Reevaluation 7 days later then 
demonstrated a strongly positive functional HIPA test and confirmed the 
diagnosis of HIT. Under anticoagulation with argatroban the patient gradually 
improved and was finally weaned off the ECMO.In conclusion, this case highlights 
the critical importance of clinical judgement, exploiting the 4 T score, given 
that Covid-19 patients may present a different pattern of routine laboratory 
test results in HIT diagnostics. The possibility of a false negative HIPA test 
has to be considered, particularly in early phases of presentation. In cases of 
a discrepancy with high clinical probability of HIT and/or high titre 
anti-PF4/heparin antibodies despite a negative HIPA test, a reevaluation within 
3 to 5 days after the initial test should be considered in order to avoid 
precipitant reestablishment of unfractionated heparin, with potentially fatal 
consequences.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12959-022-00411-0
PMCID: PMC9510722
PMID: 36163073

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare, there are no conflicts of 
interest with respect to this manuscript.