1. Front Vet Sci. 2022 Sep 14;9:1003042. doi: 10.3389/fvets.2022.1003042. 
eCollection 2022.

Magnetic resonance imaging features of canine intradural/extramedullary 
intervertebral disc extrusion in seven cases.

Casado D(1), Fernandes R(2), Lourinho F(3), Gonçalves R(4), Clark R(1), Violini 
F(1), Carrera I(5).

Author information:
(1)Willows Veterinary Centre and Referral Service, Part of Linnaeus Veterinary 
Limited, Solihull, United Kingdom.
(2)Paragon Veterinary Referrals, Part of Linnaeus Veterinary Limited, Wakefield, 
United Kingdom.
(3)Southern Counties Veterinary Specialists, Ringwood, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences, University of Liverpool, 
Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(5)Vet Oracle, Norfolk, United Kingdom.

Intervertebral disc disease, including intervertebral disc extrusions and 
protrusions, is the most common spinal cord disorder in dogs. Atypical and 
uncommon intervertebral disc herniations include intradural/intramedullary disc 
extrusion, intervertebral foraminal disc extrusion and intervertebral disc 
herniation (Schmorl's node). Intradural/extramedullary disc extrusion is the 
least common type of intervertebral disc herniation in veterinary medicine, 
characterized by extruded disc material within the intradural space. To date, 
only one study has been published in veterinary medicine reporting 
intradural/extramedullary disc extrusions. In this study, low field MRI was 
used, and the authors could not find any MRI features to diagnose with 
confidence an intradural/extramedullary disc location of the extruded disc 
material. The aim of this study was to describe the high field (1.5T) MRI 
characteristics of surgically confirmed intradural/extramedullary disc 
extrusions. This is a retrospective, multicentric and descriptive study. 
Inclusion criteria was surgical confirmation of intradural/extramedullary disc 
extrusion by durotomy and complete MRI study of the spine. Seven cases were 
included. Images were reviewed by a radiology resident and a certified 
radiologist, with emphasis on the following signs: "Golf-tee sign" (widening of 
the subarachnoid space cranial and caudal to the lesion), "Beak sign" (pointed 
and sharp compressive lesion) and "Y sign" (division of the dura and arachnoid 
layers). MRI showed a "Y sign" in all the cases (7/7) seen from the T2-weighted 
sagittal views, while "Golf-tee sign" was not recognized in any of the cases 
(0/7). Additionally, "beak sign" was present in half of the cases (4/7). "Y 
sign" maybe a reliable MRI feature for identifying intradural/medullary disc 
extrusions from the MRI study. As the arachnoid is peeled from the dura by the 
disc herniation there is a splitting of the arachnoid mater and the ventral 
dura. The intradural disc material will be surrounded by CSF signal intensity 
margin, giving the appearance of a Y, which can be identified from the 
T2-weighted sagittal images.

Copyright © 2022 Casado, Fernandes, Lourinho, Gonçalves, Clark, Violini and 
Carrera.

DOI: 10.3389/fvets.2022.1003042
PMCID: PMC9517942
PMID: 36187811

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that this study received 
funding from Linnaeus Veterinary Limited. The funder was not involved in the 
study design, collection, analysis, interpretation of data, the writing of this 
article, or the decision to submit it for publication.