1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2022 Sep 23;13:995900. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2022.995900. eCollection 2022.

Fluoxetine treatment supports predictive validity of the three hit model of 
depression in male PACAP heterozygous mice and underpins the impact of early 
life adversity on therapeutic efficacy.

Gaszner T(1)(2), Farkas J(1)(2), Kun D(1)(2), Ujvári B(1)(2), Berta G(3), 
Csernus V(1), Füredi N(1)(2), Kovács LÁ(1)(2), Hashimoto H(4)(5)(6)(7)(8), 
Reglődi D(1)(9), Kormos V(10), Gaszner B(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy, Medical School, University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary.
(2)Research Group for Mood Disorders, Centre for Neuroscience & Szentágothai 
Research Centre, University Medical School, University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary.
(3)Department of Medical Biology, Medical School, University of Pécs, Pécs, 
Hungary.
(4)Laboratory of Molecular Neuropharmacology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, Japan.
(5)Molecular Research Center for Children's Mental Development, United Graduate 
School of Child Development, Osaka University, Kanazawa University, Hamamatsu 
University School of Medicine, Chiba University and University of Fukui, Suita, 
Osaka, Japan.
(6)Division of Bioscience, Institute for Datability Science, Osaka University, 
Suita, Osaka, Japan.
(7)Transdimensional Life Imaging Division, Institute for Open and 
Transdisciplinary Research Initiatives, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, Japan.
(8)Department of Molecular Pharmaceutical Sciences, Graduate School of Medicine, 
Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, Japan.
(9)ELKH-PTE PACAP Research Group Department of Anatomy, Medical School, 
University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary.
(10)Department of Pharmacology and Pharmacotherapy, Medical School & 
Szentágothai Research Centre, Molecular Pharmacology Research Group, University 
of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary.

According to the three hit concept of depression, interaction of genetic 
predisposition altered epigenetic programming and environmental stress factors 
contribute to the disease. Earlier we demonstrated the construct and face 
validity of our three hit concept-based mouse model. In the present work, we 
aimed to examine the predictive validity of our model, the third willnerian 
criterion. Fluoxetine treatment was applied in chronic variable mild stress 
(CVMS)-exposed (environmental hit) CD1 mice carrying one mutated allele of 
pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide gene (genetic hit) that were 
previously exposed to maternal deprivation (epigenetic hit) vs. controls. 
Fluoxetine reduced the anxiety level in CVMS-exposed mice in marble burying 
test, and decreased the depression level in tail suspension test if mice were 
not deprived maternally. History of maternal deprivation caused fundamental 
functional-morphological changes in response to CVMS and fluoxetine treatment in 
the corticotropin-releasing hormone-producing cells of the bed nucleus of the 
stria terminalis and central amygdala, in tyrosine-hydroxylase content of 
ventral tegmental area, in urocortin 1-expressing cells of the centrally 
projecting Edinger-Westphal nucleus, and serotonergic cells of the dorsal raphe 
nucleus. The epigenetic background of alterations was approved by altered 
acetylation of histone H3. Our findings further support the validity of both the 
three hit concept and that of our animal model. Reversal of behavioral and 
functional-morphological anomalies by fluoxetine treatment supports the 
predictive validity of the model. This study highlights that early life stress 
does not only interact with the genetic and environmental factors, but has 
strong influence also on therapeutic efficacy.

Copyright © 2022 Gaszner, Farkas, Kun, Ujvári, Berta, Csernus, Füredi, Kovács, 
Hashimoto, Reglődi, Kormos and Gaszner.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2022.995900
PMCID: PMC9537566
PMID: 36213293 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.