1. mBio. 2022 Dec 20;13(6):e0237122. doi: 10.1128/mbio.02371-22. Epub 2022 Oct
13.

Identification of Attenuators of Transcriptional Termination: Implications for 
RNA Regulation in Escherichia coli.

Morita T(1)(2)(3), Majdalani N(3), Miura MC(1), Inose R(1), Oshima T(4), Tomita 
M(1)(2)(5), Kanai A(1)(2)(5), Gottesman S(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Advanced Biosciences, Keio Universitygrid.26091.3c, Tsuruoka, 
Yamagata, Japan.
(2)Graduate School of Media and Governance, Keio Universitygrid.26091.3c, 
Fujisawa, Kanagawa, Japan.
(3)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer 
Institute, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(4)Department of Biotechnology, Toyama Prefectural University, Imizu, Toyama, 
Japan.
(5)Faculty of Environment and Information studies, Keio Universitygrid.26091.3c, 
Fujisawa, Kanagawa, Japan.

The regulatory function of many bacterial small RNAs (sRNAs) requires the 
binding of the RNA chaperone Hfq to the 3' portion of the sRNA intrinsic 
terminator, and therefore sRNA signaling might be regulated by modulating its 
terminator. Here, using a multicopy screen developed with the terminator of sRNA 
SgrS, we identified an sRNA gene (cyaR) and three protein-coding genes (cspD, 
ygjH, and rof) that attenuate SgrS termination in Escherichia coli. Analyses of 
CyaR and YgjH, a putative tRNA binding protein, suggested that the CyaR activity 
was indirect and the effect of YgjH was moderate. Overproduction of the protein 
attenuators CspD and Rof resulted in more frequent readthrough at terminators of 
SgrS and two other sRNAs, and regulation by SgrS of target mRNAs was reduced. 
The effect of Rof, a known inhibitor of Rho, was mimicked by bicyclomycin or by 
a rho mutant, suggesting an unexpected role for Rho in sRNA termination. CspD, a 
member of the cold shock protein family, bound both terminated and readthrough 
transcripts, stabilizing them and attenuating termination. By RNA sequencing 
analysis of the CspD overexpression strain, we found global effects of CspD on 
gene expression across some termination sites. We further demonstrated effects 
of endogenous CspD under slow growth conditions where cspD is highly expressed. 
These findings provided evidence of changes in the efficiency of intrinsic 
termination, confirming this as an additional layer of the regulation of sRNA 
signaling. IMPORTANCE Growing evidence suggests that the modulation of intrinsic 
termination and readthrough of transcription is more widespread than previously 
appreciated. For small RNAs, proper termination plays a critical role in their 
regulatory function. Here, we present a multicopy screen approach to identify 
factors that attenuate small RNA termination and therefore abrogate signaling 
dependent on the small RNA. This study highlights a new aspect of regulation of 
small RNA signaling as well as the modulation of intrinsic termination.

DOI: 10.1128/mbio.02371-22
PMCID: PMC9765468
PMID: 36226957 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.