1. Molecules. 2022 Sep 21;27(19):6189. doi: 10.3390/molecules27196189.

The Antioxidative Effects of Picein and Its Neuroprotective Potential: A Review 
of the Literature.

Elyasi L(1), Rosenholm JM(2), Jesmi F(3), Jahanshahi M(1).

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Research Center, Department of Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine, 
Golestan University of Medical Sciences, Gorgan 4917955315, Iran.
(2)Pharmaceutical Sciences Laboratory, Faculty of Science and Engineering, Åbo 
Akademi University, 20500 Turku, Finland.
(3)Pars Advanced and Minimally Invasive Medical Manners Research Center, Pars 
Hospital, Iran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran 1415944911, Iran.

Neurodegenerative diseases (NDDs) are the main cause of dementia in the elderly, 
having no cure to date, as the currently available therapies focus on symptom 
remission. Most NDDs will progress despite treatment and eventually result in 
the death of the patient after several years of a burden on both the patient and 
the caregivers. Therefore, it is necessary to investigate agents that tackle the 
disease pathogenesis and can efficiently slow down or halt disease progression, 
with the hope of curing the patients and preventing further burden and 
mortality. Accordingly, recent research has focused on disease-modifying 
treatments with neuroregenerative or neuroprotective effects. For this purpose, 
it is necessary to understand the pathogenesis of NDDs. It has been shown that 
oxidative stress plays an important role in the damage to the central nervous 
system and the progression of neurodegenerative disorders. Furthermore, 
mitochondrial dysfunction and the accumulation of unfolded proteins, including 
beta-amyloid (Aβ), tau proteins, and α-synuclein, have been suggested. 
Accordingly, cellular and molecular studies have investigated the efficacy of 
several natural compounds (herbs and nutritional agents) for their 
neuroprotective and antioxidative properties. The most popular herbs suggested 
for the treatment and/or prevention of NDDs include Withania somnifera 
(ashwagandha), ginseng, curcumin, resveratrol, Baccopa monnieri, and Ginkgo 
biloba. In some herbs, such as ginseng, preclinical and clinical evidence are 
available for supporting its effectiveness; however, in some others, only 
cellular and animal studies are available. In line with the scant literature in 
terms of the effectiveness of herbal compounds on NDDs, there are also other 
herbal agents that have been disregarded. Picein is one of the herbal agents 
that has been investigated in only a few studies. Picein is the active 
ingredient of several herbs and can be thus extracted from different types of 
herbs, which makes it more available. It has shown to have anti-inflammatory 
properties in cellular and plant studies; however, to date, only one study has 
suggested its neuroprotective properties. Furthermore, some cellular studies 
have shown no anti-inflammatory effect of picein. Therefore, a review of the 
available literature is required to summarize the results of studies on picein. 
To date, no review study seems to have addressed this issue. Thus, in the 
present study, we gather the available information about the antioxidative and 
potential neuroprotective properties of picein and its possible effectiveness in 
treating NDDs. We also summarize the plants from which picein can be extracted 
in order to guide researchers for future investigations.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules27196189
PMCID: PMC9571929
PMID: 36234724 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.