1. PLoS Biol. 2022 Oct 21;20(10):e3001837. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3001837. 
eCollection 2022 Oct.

The rearing environment persistently modulates mouse phenotypes from the 
molecular to the behavioural level.

Jaric I(1), Voelkl B(1), Clerc M(2), Schmid MW(3), Novak J(1), Rosso M(1), 
Rufener R(4), von Kortzfleisch VT(5), Richter SH(5), Buettner M(6), Bleich A(6), 
Amrein I(7), Wolfer DP(7), Touma C(8), Sunagawa S(2), Würbel H(1).

Author information:
(1)Animal Welfare Division, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Bern, Bern, 
Switzerland.
(2)Department of Biology, Institute of Microbiology and Swiss Institute of 
Bioinformatics, ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland.
(3)MWSchmid GmbH, Glarus, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, Solna, Sweden.
(5)Department of Behavioural Biology, University of Münster, Münster, Germany.
(6)Institute for Laboratory Animal Science and Central Animal Facility, Hannover 
Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
(7)Institute of Anatomy, Division of Functional Neuroanatomy, University of 
Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland; Department of Health Sciences and Technology, ETH 
Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland.
(8)Department of Behavioural Biology, Osnabrück University, Osnabrück, Germany.

The phenotype of an organism results from its genotype and the influence of the 
environment throughout development. Even when using animals of the same 
genotype, independent studies may test animals of different phenotypes, 
resulting in poor replicability due to genotype-by-environment interactions. 
Thus, genetically defined strains of mice may respond differently to 
experimental treatments depending on their rearing environment. However, the 
extent of such phenotypic plasticity and its implications for the replicability 
of research findings have remained unknown. Here, we examined the extent to 
which common environmental differences between animal facilities modulate the 
phenotype of genetically homogeneous (inbred) mice. We conducted a comprehensive 
multicentre study, whereby inbred C57BL/6J mice from a single breeding cohort 
were allocated to and reared in 5 different animal facilities throughout early 
life and adolescence, before being transported to a single test laboratory. We 
found persistent effects of the rearing facility on the composition and 
heterogeneity of the gut microbial community. These effects were paralleled by 
persistent differences in body weight and in the behavioural phenotype of the 
mice. Furthermore, we show that environmental variation among animal facilities 
is strong enough to influence epigenetic patterns in neurons at the level of 
chromatin organisation. We detected changes in chromatin organisation in the 
regulatory regions of genes involved in nucleosome assembly, neuronal 
differentiation, synaptic plasticity, and regulation of behaviour. Our findings 
demonstrate that common environmental differences between animal facilities may 
produce facility-specific phenotypes, from the molecular to the behavioural 
level. Furthermore, they highlight an important limitation of inferences from 
single-laboratory studies and thus argue that study designs should take 
environmental background into account to increase the robustness and 
replicability of findings.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3001837
PMCID: PMC9629646
PMID: 36269766 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.