1. Hepatol Commun. 2022 Dec;6(12):3311-3323. doi: 10.1002/hep4.2082. Epub 2022
Oct  20.

Profiling of cell-free DNA methylation and histone signatures in pediatric 
NAFLD: A pilot study.

Buzova D(1), Braghini MR(2), Bianco SD(3), Lo Re O(4)(5), Raffaele M(4), 
Frohlich J(4), Kisheva A(6), Crudele A(2), Mosca A(7), Sartorelli MR(7), Balsano 
C(8), Cerveny J(1), Mazza T(3), Alisi A(2), Vinciguerra M(4)(5)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Adaptive Biotechnologies, Global Change Research Institute CAS, 
Brno, Czech Republic.
(2)Unit of Molecular Genetics of Complex Phenotypes, Bambino Gesù Children's 
Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(3)Laboratory of Bioinformatics, Fondazione IRCCS Casa Sollievo della 
Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo (FG), Italy.
(4)International Clinical Research Center, St. Anne's University Hospital, Brno, 
Czech Republic.
(5)Department of Translational Stem Cell Biology, Research Institute of the 
Medical University of Varna, Varna, Bulgaria.
(6)Department of Internal Diseases I, Medical University of Varna, Varna, 
Bulgaria.
(7)Hepatology, Gastroenterology and Nutrition Unit, Bambino Gesù Children's 
Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(8)Department of Life, Health & Environmental Sciences- MESVA-School of 
Emergency and Urgency Medicine, University of L'Aquila, L'Aquila, Italy.
(9)Liverpool Center for Cardiovascular Science, Liverpool Johns Moore 
University, Liverpool, UK.

Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) has become the most common chronic 
liver disease in children and adolescents, increasing the risk of its 
progression toward nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), cirrhosis, and cancer. 
There is an urgent need for noninvasive early diagnostic and prognostic tools 
such as epigenetic marks (epimarks), which would replace liver biopsy in the 
future. We used plasma samples from 67 children with biopsy-proven NAFLD, and as 
controls we used samples from 20 children negative for steatosis by ultrasound. 
All patients were genotyped for patatin-like phospholipase domain containing 3 
(PNPLA3), transmembrane 6 superfamily member 2 (TM6SF2), membrane bound 
O-acyltransferase domain containing 7 (MBOAT7), and klotho-β (KLB) gene 
variants, and data on anthropometric and biochemical parameters were collected. 
Furthermore, plasma cell-free DNA (cfDNA) methylation was quantified using a 
commercially available kit, and ImageStream(X) was used for the detection of 
free circulating histone complexes and variants. We found a significant 
enrichment of the levels of histone macroH2A1.2 in the plasma of children with 
NAFLD compared to controls, and a strong correlation between cfDNA methylation 
levels and NASH. Receiver operating characteristic curve analysis demonstrated 
that combination of cfDNA methylation, PNPLA3 rs738409 variant, coupled with 
either high-density lipoprotein cholesterol or alanine aminotransferase levels 
can strongly predict the progression of pediatric NAFLD to NASH with area under 
the curve >0.87. Conclusion: Our pilot study combined epimarks and genetic and 
metabolic markers for a robust risk assessment of NAFLD development and 
progression in children, offering a promising noninvasive tool for the 
consistent diagnosis and prognosis of pediatric NAFLD. Further studies are 
necessary to identify their pathogenic origin and function.

© 2022 The Authors. Hepatology Communications published by Wiley Periodicals LLC 
on behalf of American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/hep4.2082
PMCID: PMC9701487
PMID: 36264206 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Nothing to report.