1. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2022 Oct 22;41(1):311. doi: 10.1186/s13046-022-02506-y.

Dissecting super-enhancer driven transcriptional dependencies reveals novel 
therapeutic strategies and targets for group 3 subtype medulloblastoma.

Li M(#)(1), Han Y(#)(1), Wang C(#)(2)(3), Kang W(1), Jiang W(1), Zhang L(4), 
Tang Y(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Cell Differentiation and Apoptosis of National Ministry of 
Education, Department of Pathophysiology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School 
of Medicine, 280 South Chongqing Road, 200025, Shanghai, People's Republic of 
China.
(2)Department of Breast Surgery, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang 
University School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, People's Republic 
of China.
(3)ZJU-UoE Institute, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, International 
Campus, Zhejiang University, Haining, People's Republic of China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Cell Differentiation and Apoptosis of National Ministry of 
Education, Department of Pathophysiology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School 
of Medicine, 280 South Chongqing Road, 200025, Shanghai, People's Republic of 
China. lei.zhang2012@sjtu.edu.cn.
(5)Key Laboratory of Cell Differentiation and Apoptosis of National Ministry of 
Education, Department of Pathophysiology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School 
of Medicine, 280 South Chongqing Road, 200025, Shanghai, People's Republic of 
China. yujietang@shsmu.edu.cn.
(6)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Department of 
Histoembryology, Genetics and Developmental Biology, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University School of Medicine, 280 South Chongqing Road, Shanghai, 200025, 
People's Republic of China. yujietang@shsmu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Medulloblastoma is the most common malignant pediatric brain tumor 
and group 3 subtype medulloblastoma (G3-MB) exhibits the worst prognosis. Super 
enhancers (SEs) are large clusters of enhancers that play important roles in 
cancer through transcriptional control of cell identity genes, oncogenes and 
tumor-dependent genes. Dissecting SE-driven transcriptional dependencies of 
cancer leads to identification of novel oncogenic mechanisms, therapeutic 
strategies and targets.
METHODS: Integrative SE analyses of primary tissues and patient-derived tumor 
cell lines of G3-MB were performed to extract the conserved SE-associated gene 
signatures and their oncogenic potentials were evaluated by gene expression, 
tumor-dependency and patient prognosis analyses. SE-associated subtype-specific 
upregulated tumor-dependent genes, which were revealed as members of SE-driven 
core transcriptional regulatory network of G3-MB, were then subjected to 
functional validation and mechanistic investigation. SE-associated therapeutic 
potential was further explored by genetic or pharmaceutical targeting of SE 
complex components or SE-associated subtype-specific upregulated tumor-dependent 
genes individually or in combination, and the underlying therapeutic mechanisms 
were also examined.
RESULTS: The identified conserved SE-associated transcripts of G3-MB tissues and 
cell lines were enriched of subtype-specifically upregulated tumor-dependent 
genes and MB patients harboring enrichment of those transcripts exhibited worse 
prognosis. Fourteen such conserved SE-associated G3-MB-specific upregulated 
tumor-dependent genes were identified to be members of SE-driven core 
transcriptional regulatory network of G3-MB, including three well-recognized TFs 
(MYC, OTX2 and CRX) and eleven newly identified downstream effector genes 
(ARL4D, AUTS2, BMF, IGF2BP3, KIF21B, KLHL29, LRP8, MARS1, PSMB5, SDK2 and 
SSBP3). An OTX2-SE-ARL4D regulatory axis was further revealed to represent a 
subtype-specific tumor dependency and therapeutic target of G3-MB via 
contributing to maintaining cell cycle progression and inhibiting neural 
differentiation of tumor cells. Moreover, BET inhibition with CDK7 inhibition or 
proteasome inhibition, two combinatory strategies of targeting SE complex 
components (BRD4, CDK7) or SE-associated effector gene (PSMB5), were shown to 
exhibit synergistic therapeutic effects against G3-MB via stronger suppression 
of SE-associated transcription or higher induction of ER stress, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study verifies the oncogenic role and therapeutic potential of 
SE-driven transcriptional dependencies of G3-MB, resulting in better 
understanding of its tumor biology and identification of novel SE-associated 
therapeutic strategies and targets.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13046-022-02506-y
PMCID: PMC9587669
PMID: 36273157 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.