1. Mol Med Rep. 2022 Dec;26(6):363. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2022.12880. Epub 2022 Oct
25.

Role of glucose metabolism in ocular angiogenesis (Review).

Li Q(#)(1), Gui X(#)(1), Zhang H(1), Zhu W(1), Zhang R(1), Shen W(1), Song H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Shanghai Changhai Hospital, Naval Medical 
University, Shanghai 200433, P.R. China.
(#)Contributed equally

Glucose metabolism, the major source of energy, plays a crucial role in 
physiological cell function and the maintenance of homeostasis. Glucose acts as 
the predominant source of metabolic fuel in the generation of ATP and is 
involved in biosynthesis and epigenetics. Thus, glucose metabolism maintains a 
key role in cell function, homeostasis, energy generation, biosynthesis and 
epigenetics. An increasing number of studies have revealed that glucose 
metabolism is intricately involved in angiogenesis, with the disruption of 
angiogenesis contributing to several vascular diseases. Ocular vascular diseases 
are common ophthalmological disorders, and the prevalence of these disorders is 
increasing annually. Ocular vascular diseases largely occur from abnormal 
congenital development or acquired disturbances to the vasculature. Thus, 
identifying the process of occurrence and development of physiological and 
pathological angiogenesis is of utmost importance, and this involves 
understanding the inseparable role of intercellular communications between 
vascular cells. Although vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is a 
well‑recognized therapeutic target for the management of ocular vascular 
diseases, VEGF‑based therapy fails to achieve the desired therapeutic effects in 
several cases, partly due to drug resistance and non‑compliance. In the present 
review, current knowledge on the processes and roles of glucose metabolism in 
governing both physiological and pathological ocular angiogenesis are 
summarized, highlighting vascular glucose metabolism as a promising strategy for 
maintaining or restoring the physiological functions of the vasculature, thus 
potentially ameliorating ocular vascular diseases.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2022.12880
PMCID: PMC9641713
PMID: 36281924 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.