1. Aging Cell. 2022 Dec;21(12):e13731. doi: 10.1111/acel.13731. Epub 2022 Oct 28.

SIAH proteins regulate the degradation and intra-mitochondrial aggregation of 
PINK1: Implications for mitochondrial pathology in Parkinson's disease.

Abd Elghani F(1), Safory H(1), Hamza H(1), Savyon M(1), Farhoud M(1), 
Toren-Hershoviz M(1), Vitic Z(2), Ebanks K(3), Shani V(1), Bisharat S(1), 
Shaulov L(1), Brodski C(2), Song Z(4), Bandopadhyay R(3), Engelender S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion-Israel 
Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel.
(2)Department of Physiology and Cell Biology, Zlotowski Center for Neuroscience, 
Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Be'er Sheva, 
Israel.
(3)Reta Lila Weston Institute of Neurological Studies, UCL Queen Square 
Institute of Neurology, London, UK.
(4)Hubei Key Laboratory of Cell Homeostasis, College of Life Sciences, Frontier 
Science Center for Immunology and Metabolism, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.

Parkinson's disease (PD) is characterized by degeneration of neurons, 
particularly dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra. PD brains show 
accumulation of α-synuclein in Lewy bodies and accumulation of dysfunctional 
mitochondria. However, the mechanisms leading to mitochondrial pathology in 
sporadic PD are poorly understood. PINK1 is a key for mitophagy activation and 
recycling of unfit mitochondria. The activation of mitophagy depends on the 
accumulation of uncleaved PINK1 at the outer mitochondrial membrane and 
activation of a cascade of protein ubiquitination at the surface of the 
organelle. We have now found that SIAH3, a member of the SIAH proteins but 
lacking ubiquitin-ligase activity, is increased in PD brains and cerebrospinal 
fluid and in neurons treated with α-synuclein preformed fibrils (α-SynPFF). We 
also observed that SIAH3 is aggregated together with PINK1 in the mitochondria 
of PD brains. SIAH3 directly interacts with PINK1, leading to their 
intra-mitochondrial aggregation in cells and neurons and triggering a cascade of 
toxicity with PINK1 inactivation along with mitochondrial depolarization and 
neuronal death. We also found that SIAH1 interacts with PINK1 and promotes 
ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation of PINK1. Similar to the dimerization 
of SIAH1/SIAH2, SIAH3 interacts with SIAH1, promoting its translocation to 
mitochondria and preventing its ubiquitin-ligase activity toward PINK1. Our 
results support the notion that the increase in SIAH3 and intra-mitochondrial 
aggregation of SIAH3-PINK1 may mediate α-synuclein pathology by promoting 
proteotoxicity and preventing the elimination of dysfunctional mitochondria. We 
consider it possible that PINK1 activity is decreased in sporadic PD, which 
impedes proper mitochondrial renewal in the disease.

© 2022 The Authors. Aging Cell published by Anatomical Society and John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/acel.13731
PMCID: PMC9741505
PMID: 36307912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.