1. Front Bioeng Biotechnol. 2022 Oct 12;10:1009102. doi: 
10.3389/fbioe.2022.1009102. eCollection 2022.

The use of predictive models to develop chromatography-based purification 
processes.

Bernau CR(1), Knödler M(1)(2), Emonts J(1), Jäpel RC(1)(2), Buyel JF(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Fraunhofer Institute for Molecular Biology and Applied Ecology IME, Aachen, 
Germany.
(2)Institute for Molecular Biotechnology, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, 
Germany.
(3)University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences, Vienna (BOKU), Department 
of Biotechnology (DBT), Institute of Bioprocess Science and Engineering (IBSE), 
Vienna, Austria.

Chromatography is the workhorse of biopharmaceutical downstream processing 
because it can selectively enrich a target product while removing impurities 
from complex feed streams. This is achieved by exploiting differences in 
molecular properties, such as size, charge and hydrophobicity (alone or in 
different combinations). Accordingly, many parameters must be tested during 
process development in order to maximize product purity and recovery, including 
resin and ligand types, conductivity, pH, gradient profiles, and the sequence of 
separation operations. The number of possible experimental conditions quickly 
becomes unmanageable. Although the range of suitable conditions can be narrowed 
based on experience, the time and cost of the work remain high even when using 
high-throughput laboratory automation. In contrast, chromatography modeling 
using inexpensive, parallelized computer hardware can provide expert knowledge, 
predicting conditions that achieve high purity and efficient recovery. The 
prediction of suitable conditions in silico reduces the number of empirical 
tests required and provides in-depth process understanding, which is recommended 
by regulatory authorities. In this article, we discuss the benefits and specific 
challenges of chromatography modeling. We describe the experimental 
characterization of chromatography devices and settings prior to modeling, such 
as the determination of column porosity. We also consider the challenges that 
must be overcome when models are set up and calibrated, including the 
cross-validation and verification of data-driven and hybrid (combined 
data-driven and mechanistic) models. This review will therefore support 
researchers intending to establish a chromatography modeling workflow in their 
laboratory.

Copyright © 2022 Bernau, Knödler, Emonts, Jäpel and Buyel.

DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2022.1009102
PMCID: PMC9605695
PMID: 36312533

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.