1. Patient Prefer Adherence. 2022 Oct 31;16:2963-2975. doi: 10.2147/PPA.S369326. 
eCollection 2022.

Psychological Factors Affecting the Willingness to Accept a Possible Tyrosine 
Kinase Inhibitor (TKI) Discontinuation in Chronic Myeloid Leukaemia (CML) 
Patients.

Cutica I(#)(1), Riva S(#)(2), Orlandi EM(3), Iurlo A(4), Vener C(1), Elena C(3), 
Bucelli C(4), Cattaneo D(1)(4), Tomezzoli E(5), Pravettoni G(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology and Hemato-Oncology, University of Milan, Milan, 
Italy.
(2)Department of Psychology and Pedagogic Science, St Mary's University, London, 
UK.
(3)Hematology Unit, Foundation IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy.
(4)Hematology Division, Foundation IRCCS Cà Granda Ospedale Maggiore 
Policlinico, Milan, Italy.
(5)Applied Research Division for Cognitive and Psychological Science, European 
Institute of Oncology (IEO), IRCCS, Milan, Italy.
(#)Contributed equally

PURPOSE: Patients with chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) who present a sustained 
deep molecular response (DMR) for a stable period of time might benefit from 
discontinuing tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). A significant number of 
patients seem able to reach this stage due to the availability of TKIs. However, 
many patients remain reluctant about TKI discontinuation and may refuse 
treatment interruption. The purpose of this study was to explore the clinical 
and psycho-cognitive factors that may influence the decision to discontinue TKI 
therapy, thereby gaining a better understanding of patients' viewpoints on TKI 
discontinuation.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: One hundred and nineteen patients diagnosed with CML aged 
between 34 and 69 were enrolled (67 males and 52 females). Different clinical 
information and psycho-cognitive aspects such as attitude toward risk 
behaviours, risk preferences, need for cognitive closure, and tendency to resist 
to changes were assessed through the administration of a battery of 
questionnaires.
RESULTS: A higher tendency toward risk behaviours and the tendency to focus on 
possible gain in the short term rather than on losses might represent important 
predictors for the willingness to accept TKI discontinuation. Possible relapses 
following interruption of the therapy are the most common reason for concern. 
Furthermore, lower levels of resistance to change and having previously 
experienced the desire to interrupt the therapy might lead patients to accept a 
higher probability of relapse risk when facing such a decision.
CONCLUSION: TKI discontinuation appears appealing and challenging at the same 
time for many CML patients, and different factors may influence this decision. 
Psychology plays a crucial role in assisting physician-patient communication and 
informed decision-making.

© 2022 Cutica et al.

DOI: 10.2147/PPA.S369326
PMCID: PMC9635475
PMID: 36338243

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: Dr Chiara Elena reports 
advisory board from Gilead, advisory board from Blueprint, outside the submitted 
work. None of the authors has any other conflicts of interest related to this 
study.