1. Front Plant Sci. 2022 Oct 18;13:989847. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2022.989847. 
eCollection 2022.

Genome-wide association study for resistance to Pseudomonas syringae pv. garcae 
in Coffea arabica.

Ariyoshi C(1)(2), Sant'ana GC(3), Felicio MS(2)(4), Sera GH(2), Nogueira 
LM(1)(2), Rodrigues LMR(5), Ferreira RV(1)(2), da Silva BSR(1)(2), de Resende 
MLV(6), Destéfano SAL(7), Domingues DS(8), Pereira LFP(1)(2)(9).

Author information:
(1)Programa de pós-graduação em Genética e Biologia Molecular, Universidade 
Estadual de Londrina (UEL), Centro de Ciâncias Biológicas, Londrina, Brazil.
(2)Área de Melhoramento Genético e Propagação Vegetal, Instituto de 
Desenvolvimento Rural do Paraná (IDR-Paraná), Londrina, Brazil.
(3)Tropical Melhoramento & Genética (TMG), Londrina, Brazil.
(4)Programa de pós-graduação em Ciências Biológicas (Genética), Universidade 
Estadual Paulista "Júlio de Mesquita Filho" (UNESP), Instituto de Biociências, 
Campus de Botucatu, Botucatu, Brazil.
(5)Centro de Café Alcides Carvalho, Instituto Agronômico (IAC), Campinas, 
Brazil.
(6)Departamento de Fitopatologia, Universidade Federal de Lavras (UFLA), Lavras, 
Brazil.
(7)Instituto Biológico (IB), Campinas, Brazil.
(8)Departamento de Genética, Escola Superior de Agricultura Luiz de Queiroz, 
Universidade de São Paulo (USP), Piracicaba, Brazil.
(9)Empresa Brasileira de Pesquisa Agropecuária (EMBRAPA-Café), Brasília, Brazil.

Bacteria halo blight (BHB), a coffee plant disease caused by Pseudomonas 
syringae pv. garcae, has been gaining importance in producing mountain regions 
and mild temperatures areas as well as in coffee nurseries. Most Coffea arabica 
cultivars are susceptible to this disease. In contrast, a great source of 
genetic diversity and resistance to BHB are found in C. arabica Ethiopian 
accessions. Aiming to identify quantitative trait nucleotides (QTNs) associated 
with resistance to BHB and the influence of these genomic regions during the 
domestication of C. arabica, we conducted an analysis of population structure 
and a Genome-Wide Association Study (GWAS). For this, we used genotyping by 
sequencing (GBS) and phenotyping for resistance to BHB of a panel with 120 C. 
arabica Ethiopian accessions from a historical FAO collection, 11 C. arabica 
cultivars, and the BA-10 genotype. Population structure analysis based on 
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) markers showed that the 132 accessions 
are divided into 3 clusters: most wild Ethiopian accessions, domesticated 
Ethiopian accessions, and cultivars. GWAS, using the single-locus model MLM and 
the multi-locus models mrMLM, FASTmrMLM, FASTmrEMMA, and ISIS EM-BLASSO, 
identified 11 QTNs associated with resistance to BHB. Among these QTNs, the four 
with the highest values of association for resistance to BHB are linked to g000 
(Chr_0_434_435) and g010741 genes, which are predicted to encode a 
serine/threonine-kinase protein and a nucleotide binding site leucine-rich 
repeat (NBS-LRR), respectively. These genes displayed a similar transcriptional 
downregulation profile in a C. arabica susceptible cultivar and in a C. arabica 
cultivar with quantitative resistance, when infected with P. syringae pv. 
garcae. However, peaks of upregulation were observed in a C. arabica cultivar 
with qualitative resistance, for both genes. Our results provide SNPs that have 
potential for application in Marker Assisted Selection (MAS) and expand our 
understanding about the complex genetic control of the resistance to BHB in C. 
arabica. In addition, the findings contribute to increasing understanding of the 
C. arabica domestication history.

Copyright © 2022 Ariyoshi, Sant’ana, Felicio, Sera, Nogueira, Rodrigues, 
Ferreira, da Silva, Resende, Destéfano, Domingues and Pereira.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2022.989847
PMCID: PMC9624508
PMID: 36330243

Conflict of interest statement: GCS was employed by company Tropical 
Melhoramento & Genética (TMG). The remaining authors declare that the research 
was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that 
could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.