1. Biomolecules. 2022 Oct 26;12(11):1559. doi: 10.3390/biom12111559.

The Pharmacorank Search Tool for the Retrieval of Prioritized Protein Drug 
Targets and Drug Repositioning Candidates According to Selected Diseases.

Gnilopyat S(1), DePietro PJ(1), Parry TK(1), McLaughlin WA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Education, Geisinger Commonwealth School of Medicine, 
525 Pine Street, Scranton, PA 18509, USA.

We present the Pharmacorank search tool as an objective means to obtain 
prioritized protein drug targets and their associated medications according to 
user-selected diseases. This tool could be used to obtain prioritized protein 
targets for the creation of novel medications or to predict novel indications 
for medications that already exist. To prioritize the proteins associated with 
each disease, a gene similarity profiling method based on protein functions is 
implemented. The priority scores of the proteins are found to correlate well 
with the likelihoods that the associated medications are clinically relevant in 
the disease's treatment. When the protein priority scores are plotted against 
the percentage of protein targets that are known to bind medications currently 
indicated to treat the disease, which we termed the pertinency score, a strong 
correlation was observed. The correlation coefficient was found to be 0.9978 
when using a weighted second-order polynomial fit. As the highly predictive fit 
was made using a broad range of diseases, we were able to identify a general 
threshold for the pertinency score as a starting point for considering drug 
repositioning candidates. Several repositioning candidates are described for 
proteins that have high predicated pertinency scores, and these provide 
illustrative examples of the applications of the tool. We also describe focused 
reviews of repositioning candidates for Alzheimer's disease. Via the tool's URL, 
https://protein.som.geisinger.edu/Pharmacorank/, an open online interface is 
provided for interactive use; and there is a site for programmatic access.

DOI: 10.3390/biom12111559
PMCID: PMC9687941
PMID: 36358909 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.