1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Oct 27;23(21):13050. doi: 10.3390/ijms232113050.

Counteracting Immunosuppression in the Tumor Microenvironment by Oncolytic 
Newcastle Disease Virus and Cellular Immunotherapy.

Schirrmacher V(1), van Gool S(1), Stuecker W(1).

Author information:
(1)Immune-Oncological Center Cologne (IOZK), D-50674 Cologne, Germany.

An apparent paradox exists between the evidence for spontaneous systemic T cell- 
mediated anti-tumor immune responses in cancer patients, observed particularly 
in their bone marrow, and local tumor growth in the periphery. This phenomenon, 
known as "concomitant immunity" suggests that the local tumor and its tumor 
microenvironment (TME) prevent systemic antitumor immunity to become effective. 
Oncolytic Newcastle disease virus (NDV), an agent with inherent anti-neoplastic 
and immune stimulatory properties, is capable of breaking therapy resistance and 
immunosuppression. This review updates latest information about 
immunosuppression by the TME and discusses mechanisms of how oncolytic viruses, 
in particular NDV, and cellular immunotherapy can counteract the 
immunosuppressive effect of the TME. With regard to cellular immunotherapy, the 
review presents pre-clinical studies of post-operative active-specific 
immunotherapy and of adoptive T cell-mediated therapy in immunocompetent mice. 
Memory T cell (MTC) transfer in tumor challenged T cell-deficient nu/nu mice 
demonstrates longevity and functionality of these cells. Graft-versus-leukemia 
(GvL) studies in mice demonstrate complete remission of late-stage disease 
including metastases and cachexia. T cell based immunotherapy studies with human 
cells in human tumor xenotransplanted NOD/SCID mice demonstrate superiority of 
bone marrow-derived as compared to blood-derived MTCs. Results from clinical 
studies presented include vaccination studies using two different types of 
NDV-modified cancer vaccine and a pilot adoptive T-cell mediated therapy study 
using re-activated bone marrow-derived cancer-reactive MTCs. As an example for 
what can be expected from clinical immunotherapy against tumors with an 
immunosuppressive TME, results from vaccination studies are presented from the 
aggressive brain tumor glioblastoma multiforme. The last decades of basic 
research in virology, oncology and immunology can be considered as a success 
story. Based on discoveries of these research areas, translational research and 
clinical studies have changed the way of treatment of cancer by introducing and 
including immunotherapy.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms232113050
PMCID: PMC9655431
PMID: 36361831 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.