1. Microorganisms. 2022 Oct 28;10(11):2134. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms10112134.

Campylobacter jejuni in Poultry: Pathogenesis and Control Strategies.

Al Hakeem WG(1), Fathima S(1), Shanmugasundaram R(2), Selvaraj RK(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Poultry Science, The University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, 
USA.
(2)Toxicology and Mycotoxin Research Unit, US National Poultry Research Center, 
Agricultural Research Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Athens, GA 30605, 
USA.

C. jejuni is the leading cause of human foodborne illness associated with 
poultry, beef, and pork consumption. C. jejuni is highly prevalent in commercial 
poultry farms, where horizontal transmission from the environment is considered 
to be the primary source of C. jejuni. As an enteric pathogen, C. jejuni 
expresses virulence factors regulated by a two-component system that mediates C. 
jejuni's ability to survive in the host. C. jejuni survives and reproduces in 
the avian intestinal mucus. The avian intestinal mucus is highly sulfated and 
sialylated compared with the human mucus modulating C. jejuni pathogenicity into 
a near commensal bacteria in poultry. Birds are usually infected from two to 
four weeks of age and remain colonized until they reach market age. A small dose 
of C. jejuni (around 35 CFU/mL) is sufficient for successful bird colonization. 
In the U.S., where chickens are raised under antibiotic-free environments, 
additional strategies are required to reduce C. jejuni prevalence on broilers 
farms. Strict biosecurity measures can decrease C. jejuni prevalence by more 
than 50% in broilers at market age. Vaccination and probiotics, prebiotics, 
synbiotics, organic acids, bacteriophages, bacteriocins, and quorum sensing 
inhibitors supplementation can improve gut health and competitively exclude C. 
jejuni load in broilers. Most of the mentioned strategies showed promising 
results; however, they are not fully implemented in poultry production. Current 
knowledge on C. jejuni's morphology, source of transmission, pathogenesis in 
poultry, and available preharvest strategies to decrease C. jejuni colonization 
in broilers are addressed in this review.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms10112134
PMCID: PMC9697106
PMID: 36363726

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.