1. World J Pediatr Surg. 2021 Apr 29;4(2):e000196. doi: 10.1136/wjps-2020-000196.
 eCollection 2021.

Genetic and epigenetic mechanisms in the development of congenital heart 
diseases.

Wu Y(#)(1), Jin X(#)(2), Zhang Y(3), Zheng J(1), Yang R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetic and Metabolic Diseases, The Children's Hospital, 
Zhejiang University School of Medicine, National Clinical Research Center for 
Child Health, Hangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Obstetrics, Hangzhou Women's Hospital, Hangzhou First People's 
Hospital Qianjiang New City Campus, Hangzhou, China.
(3)Cardiovascular Key Lab of Zhejiang Province, Department of Cardiology, The 
Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, 
China.
(#)Contributed equally

Congenital heart disease (CHD) is the most common of congenital cardiovascular 
malformations associated with birth defects, and it results in significant 
morbidity and mortality worldwide. The classification of CHD is still elusive 
owing to the complex pathogenesis of CHD. Advances in molecular medicine have 
revealed the genetic basis of some heart anomalies. Genes associated with CHD 
might be modulated by various epigenetic factors. Thus, the genetic and 
epigenetic factors are gradually accepted as important triggers in the 
pathogenesis of CHD. However, few literatures have comprehensively elaborated 
the genetic and epigenetic mechanisms of CHD. This review focuses on the 
etiology of CHD from genetics and epigenetics to discuss the role of these 
factors in the development of CHD. The interactions between genetic and 
epigenetic in the pathogenesis of CHD are also elaborated. Chromosome 
abnormalities and gene mutations in genetics, and DNA methylations, histone 
modifications and on-coding RNAs in epigenetics are summarized in detail. We 
hope the summative knowledge of these etiologies may be useful for improved 
diagnosis and further elucidation of CHD so that morbidity and mortality of 
children with CHD can be reduced in the near future.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/wjps-2020-000196
PMCID: PMC9648586
PMID: 36474778

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest to report regarding the present study.