1. Sci Rep. 2022 Dec 5;12(1):20990. doi: 10.1038/s41598-022-25144-y.

Linking single nucleotide polymorphisms to signaling blueprints in abdominal 
aortic aneurysms.

Lim C(#)(1)(2), Pratama MY(#)(1)(2)(3), Rivera C(1)(3), Silvestro M(1)(3), Tsao 
PS(4)(5), Maegdefessel L(6)(7)(8), Gallagher KA(9), Maldonado T(1), Ramkhelawon 
B(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Division of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery, Department of Surgery, New 
York University Langone Medical Center, New York, USA.
(2)Department of Biomedicine, Indonesia International Institute for 
Life-Sciences (i3L), Jakarta, Indonesia.
(3)Department of Cell Biology, New York University Langone Medical Center, New 
York, USA.
(4)VA Palo Alto Health Care System, Palo Alto, CA, USA.
(5)Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, 
USA.
(6)Department of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery, Technical University Munich, 
Munich, Germany.
(7)German Center for Cardiovascular Research (DZHK), Partner Site Munich Heart 
Alliance, Berlin, Germany.
(8)Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.
(9)Department of Surgery, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(10)Division of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery, Department of Surgery, New 
York University Langone Medical Center, New York, USA. 
bhama.ramkhelawon@nyulangone.org.
(11)Department of Cell Biology, New York University Langone Medical Center, New 
York, USA. bhama.ramkhelawon@nyulangone.org.
(#)Contributed equally

Abdominal aortic aneurysms (AAA) is a multifactorial complex disease with 
life-threatening consequences. While Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have 
revealed several single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) located in the genome of 
individuals with AAA, the link between SNPs with the associated pathological 
signals, the influence of risk factors on their distribution and their combined 
analysis is not fully understood. We integrated 86 AAA SNPs from GWAS and 
clinical cohorts from the literature to determine their phenotypical 
vulnerabilities and association with AAA risk factors. The SNPs were annotated 
using snpXplorer AnnotateMe tool to identify their chromosomal position, minor 
allele frequency, CADD (Combined Annotation Dependent Depletion), 
annotation-based pathogenicity score, variant consequence, and their associated 
gene. Gene enrichment analysis was performed using Gene Ontology and clustered 
using REVIGO. The plug-in GeneMANIA in Cytoscape was applied to identify network 
integration with associated genes and functions. 15 SNPs affecting 20 genes with 
a CADD score above ten were identified. AAA SNPs were predominantly located on 
chromosome 3 and 9. Stop-gained rs5516 SNP obtained high frequency in AAA and 
associated with proinflammatory and vascular remodeling phenotypes. SNPs 
presence positively correlated with hypertension, dyslipidemia and smoking 
history. GO showed that AAA SNPs and their associated genes could regulate lipid 
metabolism, extracellular matrix organization, smooth muscle cell proliferation, 
and oxidative stress, suggesting that part of these AAA traits could stem from 
genetic abnormalities. We show a library of inborn SNPs and associated genes 
that manifest in AAA. We uncover their pathological signaling trajectories that 
likely fuel AAA development.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-022-25144-y
PMCID: PMC9722707
PMID: 36470918 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.