1. J Biol Chem. 2023 Jan;299(1):102788. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2022.102788. Epub 2022
 Dec 9.

Phosphorylation of the novel mTOR substrate Unkempt regulates cellular 
morphogenesis.

Baskaran P(1), Mihaylov SR(2), Vinsland E(3), Shah K(4), Granat L(1), Ultanir 
SK(5), Tee AR(6), Murn J(7), Bateman JM(8).

Author information:
(1)Maurice Wohl Clinical Neuroscience Institute, King's College London, London, 
UK.
(2)Maurice Wohl Clinical Neuroscience Institute, King's College London, London, 
UK; Kinases and Brain Development Lab, The Francis Crick Institute, London, UK.
(3)Maurice Wohl Clinical Neuroscience Institute, King's College London, London, 
UK; Division of Molecular Neurobiology, Department of Medical Biochemistry and 
Biophysics, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, University of California, Riverside, California, 
USA.
(5)Kinases and Brain Development Lab, The Francis Crick Institute, London, UK.
(6)Cancer and Genetics Building, Division of Cancer and Genetics, School of 
Medicine, Cardiff University, Heath Park Way, Cardiff, UK.
(7)Department of Biochemistry, University of California, Riverside, California, 
USA. Electronic address: murnj@ucr.edu.
(8)Maurice Wohl Clinical Neuroscience Institute, King's College London, London, 
UK. Electronic address: joseph_matthew.bateman@kcl.ac.uk.

Mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) is a protein kinase that integrates 
multiple inputs to regulate anabolic cellular processes. For example, mTOR 
complex 1 (mTORC1) has key functions in growth control, autophagy, and 
metabolism. However, much less is known about the signaling components that act 
downstream of mTORC1 to regulate cellular morphogenesis. Here, we show that the 
RNA-binding protein Unkempt, a key regulator of cellular morphogenesis, is a 
novel substrate of mTORC1. We show that Unkempt phosphorylation is regulated by 
nutrient levels and growth factors via mTORC1. To analyze Unkempt 
phosphorylation, we immunoprecipitated Unkempt from cells in the presence or the 
absence of the mTORC1 inhibitor rapamycin and used mass spectrometry to identify 
mTORC1-dependent phosphorylated residues. This analysis showed that 
mTORC1-dependent phosphorylation is concentrated in a serine-rich intrinsically 
disordered region in the C-terminal half of Unkempt. We also found that Unkempt 
physically interacts with and is directly phosphorylated by mTORC1 through 
binding to the regulatory-associated protein of mTOR, Raptor. Furthermore, 
analysis in the developing brain of mice lacking TSC1 expression showed that 
phosphorylation of Unkempt is mTORC1 dependent in vivo. Finally, mutation 
analysis of key serine/threonine residues in the serine-rich region indicates 
that phosphorylation inhibits the ability of Unkempt to induce a bipolar 
morphology. Phosphorylation within this serine-rich region thus profoundly 
affects the ability of Unkempt to regulate cellular morphogenesis. Taken 
together, our findings reveal a novel molecular link between mTORC1 signaling 
and cellular morphogenesis.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2022.102788
PMCID: PMC9852543
PMID: 36509146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.