1. Plant Direct. 2022 Dec 10;6(12):e469. doi: 10.1002/pld3.469. eCollection 2022 
Dec.

Identifying genes associated with abiotic stress tolerance suitable for 
CRISPR/Cas9 editing in upland rice cultivars adapted to acid soils.

Barrero LS(1)(2), Willmann MR(3)(4), Craft EJ(4), Akther KM(2), Harrington 
SE(2), Garzon-Martinez GA(1), Glahn RP(4), Piñeros MA(4), McCouch SR(2).

Author information:
(1)Corporacion Colombiana de Investigacion Agropecuaria AGROSAVIA Mosquera 
Colombia.
(2)Plant Breeding & Genetics Section, School of Integrative Plant Science 
Cornell University Ithaca New York USA.
(3)Plant Transformation Facility, School of Integrative Plant Science Cornell 
University Ithaca New York USA.
(4)Present address: USDA-ARS, Robert W. Holley Center Ithaca New York USA.

Five genes of large phenotypic effect known to confer abiotic stress tolerance 
in rice were selected to characterize allelic variation in commercial Colombian 
tropical japonica upland rice cultivars adapted to drought-prone acid soil 
environments (cv. Llanura11 and Porvenir12). Allelic variants of the genes ART1, 
DRO1, SUB1A, PSTOL1, and SPDT were characterized by PCR and/or Sanger sequencing 
in the two upland cultivars and compared with the Nipponbare and other reference 
genomes. Two genes were identified as possible targets for gene editing: SUB1A 
(Submergence 1A), to improve tolerance to flooding, and SPDT (SULTR3;4) 
(SULTR-like Phosphorus Distribution Transporter), to improve phosphorus 
utilization efficiency and grain quality. Based on technical and regulatory 
considerations, SPDT was targeted for editing. The two upland cultivars were 
shown to carry the SPDT wild-type (nondesirable) allele based on sequencing, RNA 
expression, and phenotypic evaluations under hydroponic and greenhouse 
conditions. A gene deletion was designed using the CRISPR/Cas9 system, and 
specialized reagents were developed for SPDT editing, including vectors 
targeting the gene and a protoplast transfection transient assay. The desired 
edits were confirmed in protoplasts and serve as the basis for ongoing plant 
transformation experiments aiming to improve the P-use efficiency of upland rice 
grown in acidic soils.

© 2022 The Authors. Plant Direct published by American Society of Plant 
Biologists and the Society for Experimental Biology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/pld3.469
PMCID: PMC9737570
PMID: 36514785

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interests.