1. Front Mol Neurosci. 2022 Dec 15;15:1044022. doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2022.1044022. 
eCollection 2022.

Transcriptome-wide association study reveals cholesterol metabolism gene Lpl is 
a key regulator of cognitive dysfunction.

Hu W(1)(2), Liu J(3)(4), Hu Y(2), Xu Q(5), Deng T(2), Wei M(2), Lu L(6), Mi 
J(2), Bergquist J(2)(7), Xu F(2), Tian G(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin, 
China.
(2)Shandong Technology Innovation Center of Molecular Targeting and Intelligent 
Diagnosis and Treatment, School of Pharmacy, Binzhou Medical University, Yantai, 
Shandong, China.
(3)Department of Plastic Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Shandong 
First Medical University, Shandong Provincial Qianfoshan Hospital, Jinan, 
Shandong, China.
(4)Jinan Clinical Research Center for Tissue Engineering Skin Regeneration and 
Wound Repair, Jinan, Shandong, China.
(5)Department of Ultrasound, Yantai Affiliated Hospital, Binzhou Medical 
University, Yantai, Shandong, China.
(6)Department of Genetics, Genomics, and Informatics, The University of 
Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, TN, United States.
(7)Department of Chemistry - BMC, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

Cholesterol metabolism in the brain plays a crucial role in normal physiological 
function, and its aberrations are associated with cognitive dysfunction. The 
present study aimed to determine which cholesterol-related genes play a vital 
role in cognitive dysfunction and to dissect its underlying molecular mechanisms 
using a systems genetics approach in the BXD mice family. We first 
systematically analyzed the association of expression of 280 hippocampal genes 
related to cholesterol metabolism with cognition-related traits and identified 
lipoprotein lipase (Lpl) as a critical regulator. This was further confirmed by 
phenome-wide association studies that indicate Lpl associated with hippocampus 
volume residuals and anxiety-related traits. By performing expression 
quantitative trait locus mapping, we demonstrate that Lpl is strongly 
cis-regulated in the BXD hippocampus. We also identified ∼3,300 genes 
significantly (p < 0.05) correlated with the Lpl expression. Those genes are 
mainly involved in the regulation of neuron-related traits through the MAPK 
signaling pathway, axon guidance, synaptic vesicle cycle, and NF-kappa B 
signaling pathway. Furthermore, a protein-protein interaction network analysis 
identified several direct interactors of Lpl, including Rab3a, Akt1, Igf1, Crp, 
and Lrp1, which indicates that Lpl involves in the regulation of cognitive 
dysfunction through Rab3a-mediated synaptic vesicle cycle and 
Akt1/Igf1/Crp/Lrp1-mediated MAPK signaling pathway. Our findings demonstrate the 
importance of the Lpl, among the cholesterol-related genes, in regulating 
cognitive dysfunction and highlighting the potential signaling pathways, which 
may serve as novel therapeutic targets for the treatment of cognitive 
dysfunction.

Copyright © 2022 Hu, Liu, Hu, Xu, Deng, Wei, Lu, Mi, Bergquist, Xu and Tian.

DOI: 10.3389/fnmol.2022.1044022
PMCID: PMC9798092
PMID: 36590920

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.