1. Theranostics. 2023 Jan 1;13(1):403-416. doi: 10.7150/thno.76879. eCollection 
2023.

A labeling strategy for the three-dimensional recognition and analysis of 
microvascular obstruction in ischemic stroke.

Li Y(1)(2), Xu J(1)(2), Yu T(1)(2), Zhu J(1)(2), Xuan A(1)(2), Liu X(1)(2), Wang 
P(1)(2), Li D(1)(2), Zhu D(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Britton Chance Center for Biomedical Photonics - MoE Key Laboratory for 
Biomedical Photonics, Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics - Advanced 
Biomedical Imaging Facility, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 
Wuhan, Hubei 430074, China.
(2)Optics Valley Laboratory, Hubei 430074, China.

Rationale: Large vessel recanalization in ischemic stroke does not always go 
along with tissue reperfusion, a phenomenon called "no-reflow". However, 
knowledge of the mechanism of no-reflow is limited because identifying 
microvascular obstruction across the cortex and subcortex both in clinical and 
experimental models is challenging. In this study, we developed a smart 
three-dimensional recognition pipeline for microvascular obstruction during 
post-ischemia reperfusion to examine the underlying mechanism of no-reflow. 
Methods: Transient (60 min) occlusion of the middle cerebral artery (tMCAo) in 
mice was induced using a filament. Two different fluorophore-conjugated tomato 
lectins were injected into mice via the tail vein before and after 
ischemia/reperfusion (I/R), respectively, one to label all blood vessels and the 
other to label functional blood vessels. Post-I/R microvascular obstruction was 
visualized using combined iDISCO+-based tissue clearing and optical imaging. 
Arterioles and capillaries were distinguished using whole-mount immunolabeling 
with an anti-αSMA antibody. Circulating neutrophils were depleted utilizing an 
anti-Ly6G antibody. Brain slices were immunostained with the anti-Ly6G antibody 
to identify co-localized blockage points and neutrophils. MATLAB software was 
used to quantify the capillary diameters in the ipsilateral brain from the 
normal and tMCAo mice. Results: Microcirculatory reperfusion deficit worsened 
over time after I/R. Microvascular obstruction occurred not only in arterioles 
but also in capillaries, with capillary obstruction associated with local 
capillary lumen narrowing. In addition, the depletion of circulating neutrophils 
mitigated reperfusion deficit to a large extent after I/R. The co-localization 
of blockage points and neutrophils revealed that some neutrophils plugged 
capillaries with coexisting capillary lumen narrowing and that no neutrophil was 
trapped in heaps of blockage points. Quantification of the capillary diameter 
showed that capillary lumen shrunk after I/R but returned to typical 
measurements when intravascular neutrophils were depleted. Conclusions: 
According to our findings, both vascular lumen narrowing and neutrophil trapping 
in cerebral microcirculation are the key causes of microvascular obstruction 
after I/R. Also, the primary contribution by neutrophils to microvascular 
obstruction does not occur through microemboli plugging but rather via the 
exacerbation of capillary lumen narrowing. Our proposed method will help monitor 
microcirculatory reperfusion deficit, explore the mechanism of no-reflow, and 
evaluate the curative effect of drugs targeting no-reflow.

© The author(s).

DOI: 10.7150/thno.76879
PMCID: PMC9800741
PMID: 36593967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interest exists.