1. Neurol Sci. 2023 May;44(5):1555-1561. doi: 10.1007/s10072-022-06587-7. Epub
2023  Jan 5.

Inflammatory brain lesions preceding primary central nervous system lymphoma: a 
case report and genetic analysis.

XiaoHong Z(1), Shuo Y(1), GeHong D(2), AnChao Y(3), Ce W(1), YunYun D(4), Can 
W(1), SiJie H(1), Feng C(5), WenBin L(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuro-Oncology, Cancer Center, Beijing Tiantan Hospital, 
Capital Medical University, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Pathology, Beijing Tiantan Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, Beijing Tiantan Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, China.
(4)Department of Radiology, Beijing Tiantan Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, China.
(5)Department of Neuro-Oncology, Cancer Center, Beijing Tiantan Hospital, 
Capital Medical University, Beijing, China. chenfeng@bjtth.org.
(6)Department of Neuro-Oncology, Cancer Center, Beijing Tiantan Hospital, 
Capital Medical University, Beijing, China. liwenbin@ccmu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Primary central nervous system lymphoma (PCNSL) is an aggressive 
extranodal lymphoma exclusively occurring within the central nervous system. 
Inflammatory brain lesions as "sentinel lesions" of PCNSL are very rare. We 
present a rare case of PCNSL with preceding inflammatory lesions in an 
immunocompetent patient who underwent two biopsies, one craniotomy and two 
genetic testing.
CASE REPORT: A 66-year-old male patient presented with left limb weakness and 
ataxia. Brain magnetic resonance imaging showed a contrast-enhancing lesion with 
perifocal brain edema in the near midline of right frontal lobe. Histological 
examination of a brain biopsy specimen revealed inflammatory lesion 
characteristics with infiltration of T-cell dominant lymphocytes and few B-cell. 
Given that the patient developed cerebral hematoma after biopsy, lesion 
resection by craniotomy was performed. An excised sample demonstrated mixed 
T-cell and B-cell infiltrating inflammatory lesions. Four months after total 
resection of the right frontal lobe lesion, another lesion appeared in the left 
frontal parietal lobe, which was diagnosed as diffuse large B-cell lymphoma by 
biopsy. In addition, genetic testing of the lesions at two different locations 
was performed, and the results showed that the inflammatory lesions had the same 
three gene (RELN, PCLO, and CREBBP) mutations as PCNSL. Interestingly, the three 
mutated genes are associated with tumor.
CONCLUSION: Our present case is the first to demonstrate inflammatory brain 
lesions heralding PCNSL from genetic and pathological perspectives. This may 
help clinicians to select new auxiliary diagnostic methods for timely diagnosis 
of patients with suspected PCNSL.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10072-022-06587-7
PMCID: PMC10102048
PMID: 36599976 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.