1. Elife. 2023 Jan 10;12:e83628. doi: 10.7554/eLife.83628.

Hierarchical sequence-affinity landscapes shape the evolution of breadth in an 
anti-influenza receptor binding site antibody.

Phillips AM(#)(1)(2), Maurer DP(#)(3)(4), Brooks C(5), Dupic T(1), Schmidt 
AG(3)(4), Desai MM(1)(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University, 
Cambridge, United States.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of California, San 
Francisco, San Francisco, United States.
(3)Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT, and Harvard, Cambridge, United States.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, United States.
(5)Department of Physics, Harvard University, Cambridge, United States.
(6)NSF-Simons Center for Mathematical and Statistical Analysis of Biology, 
Harvard University, Cambridge, United States.
(7)Quantitative Biology Initiative, Harvard University, Cambridge, United 
States.
(#)Contributed equally

Update of
    doi: 10.1101/2022.09.21.508900.

Broadly neutralizing antibodies (bnAbs) that neutralize diverse variants of a 
particular virus are of considerable therapeutic interest. Recent advances have 
enabled us to isolate and engineer these antibodies as therapeutics, but 
eliciting them through vaccination remains challenging, in part due to our 
limited understanding of how antibodies evolve breadth. Here, we analyze the 
landscape by which an anti-influenza receptor binding site (RBS) bnAb, CH65, 
evolved broad affinity to diverse H1 influenza strains. We do this by generating 
an antibody library of all possible evolutionary intermediates between the 
unmutated common ancestor (UCA) and the affinity-matured CH65 antibody and 
measure the affinity of each intermediate to three distinct H1 antigens. We find 
that affinity to each antigen requires a specific set of mutations - distributed 
across the variable light and heavy chains - that interact non-additively (i.e., 
epistatically). These sets of mutations form a hierarchical pattern across the 
antigens, with increasingly divergent antigens requiring additional epistatic 
mutations beyond those required to bind less divergent antigens. We investigate 
the underlying biochemical and structural basis for these hierarchical sets of 
epistatic mutations and find that epistasis between heavy chain mutations and a 
mutation in the light chain at the VH-VL interface is essential for binding a 
divergent H1. Collectively, this is the first work to comprehensively 
characterize epistasis between heavy and light chain mutations and shows that 
such interactions are both strong and widespread. Together with our previous 
study analyzing a different class of anti-influenza antibodies, our results 
implicate epistasis as a general feature of antibody sequence-affinity 
landscapes that can potentiate and constrain the evolution of breadth.

© 2023, Phillips, Maurer et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.83628
PMCID: PMC9995116
PMID: 36625542 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: AP has recently consulted for Leyden Labs, DM, 
CB, TD, AS No competing interests declared, MD recently consulted for Leyden 
Labs