1. J Biol Chem. 2023 Feb;299(2):102892. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2023.102892. Epub 2023
 Jan 13.

Structural analysis of the interaction between human cytokine BMP-2 and the 
antagonist Noggin reveals molecular details of cell chondrogenesis inhibition.

Robert C(1), Kerff F(2), Bouillenne F(3), Gavage M(4), Vandevenne M(1), Filée 
P(5), Matagne A(6).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Enzymology and Protein Folding, University of Liège, Liège, 
Belgium; Centre for Protein Engineering, InBioS Research Unit, University of 
Liège, Liège, Belgium.
(2)Centre for Protein Engineering, InBioS Research Unit, University of Liège, 
Liège, Belgium; Biological Macromolecule Crystallography, University of Liège, 
Liège, Belgium.
(3)Centre for Protein Engineering, InBioS Research Unit, University of Liège, 
Liège, Belgium.
(4)Analytical Laboratory, CER Groupe, rue du Point du Jour, Marloie, Belgium.
(5)Laboratory of immuno-biology, CER Groupe, Novalis Science Park, Aye, Belgium.
(6)Laboratory of Enzymology and Protein Folding, University of Liège, Liège, 
Belgium; Centre for Protein Engineering, InBioS Research Unit, University of 
Liège, Liège, Belgium. Electronic address: amatagne@uliege.be.

Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are secreted cytokines belonging to the 
transforming growth factor-β superfamily. New therapeutic approaches based on 
BMP activity, particularly for cartilage and bone repair, have sparked 
considerable interest; however, a lack of understanding of their interaction 
pathways and the side effects associated with their use as biopharmaceuticals 
have dampened initial enthusiasm. Here, we used BMP-2 as a model system to gain 
further insight into both the relationship between structure and function in 
BMPs and the principles that govern affinity for their cognate antagonist 
Noggin. We produced BMP-2 and Noggin as inclusion bodies in Escherichia coli and 
developed simple and efficient protocols for preparing pure and homogeneous (in 
terms of size distribution) solutions of the native dimeric forms of the two 
proteins. The identity and integrity of the proteins were confirmed using mass 
spectrometry. Additionally, several in vitro cell-based assays, including 
enzymatic measurements, RT-qPCR, and matrix staining, demonstrated their 
biological activity during cell chondrogenic and hypertrophic differentiation. 
Furthermore, we characterized the simple 1:1 noncovalent interaction between the 
two ligands (KDca. 0.4 nM) using bio-layer interferometry and solved the crystal 
structure of the complex using X-ray diffraction methods. We identified the 
residues and binding forces involved in the interaction between the two 
proteins. Finally, results obtained with the BMP-2 N102D mutant suggest that 
Noggin is remarkably flexible and able to accommodate major structural changes 
at the BMP-2 level. Altogether, our findings provide insights into BMP-2 
activity and reveal the molecular details of its interaction with Noggin.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2023.102892
PMCID: PMC9929448
PMID: 36642181 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest F. K. is research associate 
of the FRS-FNRS (Brussels, Belgium). The authors declare that they have no 
conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.