1. Nanomaterials (Basel). 2023 Jan 9;13(2):278. doi: 10.3390/nano13020278.

Experimental Exploration of Hybrid Nanofluids as Energy-Efficient Fluids in 
Solar and Thermal Energy Storage Applications.

Yasmin H(1), Giwa SO(2), Noor S(1), Sharifpur M(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Basic Sciences, Preparatory Year Deanship, King Faisal 
University, Al-Ahsa 31982, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Department of Mechanical Engineering, Olabisi Onabanjo University, Ago-Iwoye 
P.M.B. 2002, Nigeria.
(3)Department of Mechanical and Aeronautical Engineering, University of 
Pretoria, Pretoria 0002, South Africa.
(4)Department of Medical Research, China Medical University Hospital, China 
Medical University, Taichung 404, Taiwan.

In response to the issues of environment, climate, and human health coupled with 
the growing demand for energy due to increasing population and technological 
advancement, the concept of sustainable and renewable energy is presently 
receiving unprecedented attention. To achieve these feats, energy savings and 
efficiency are crucial in terms of the development of energy-efficient devices 
and thermal fluids. Limitations associated with the use of conventional thermal 
fluids led to the discovery of energy-efficient fluids called "nanofluids, which 
are established to be better than conventional thermal fluids. The current 
research progress on nanofluids has led to the development of the advanced 
nanofluids coined "hybrid nanofluids" (HNFs) found to possess superior 
thermal-optical properties than conventional thermal fluids and nanofluids. This 
paper experimentally explored the published works on the application of HNFs as 
thermal transport media in solar energy collectors and thermal energy storage. 
The performance of hybrid nano-coolants and nano-thermal energy storage 
materials has been critically reviewed based on the stability, types of hybrid 
nanoparticles (HNPs) and mixing ratios, types of base fluids, nano-size of HNPs, 
thermal and optical properties, flow, photothermal property, functionalization 
of HNPs, magnetic field intensity, and orientation, and φ, subject to solar and 
thermal energy storage applications. Various HNFs engaged in different 
applications were observed to save energy and increase efficiency. The HNF-based 
media performed better than the mono nanofluid counterparts with complementary 
performance when the mixing ratios were optimized. In line with these 
applications, further experimental studies coupled with the influence of 
magnetic and electric fields on their performances were research gaps to be 
filled in the future. Green HNPs and base fluids are future biomaterials for HNF 
formulation to provide sustainable, low-cost, and efficient thermal transport 
and energy storage media.

DOI: 10.3390/nano13020278
PMCID: PMC9861191
PMID: 36678031

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.