1. Nanomaterials (Basel). 2023 Jan 6;13(2):248. doi: 10.3390/nano13020248.

A Fusion of Molecular Imprinting Technology and Siloxane Chemistry: A Way to 
Advanced Hybrid Nanomaterials.

Woźnica M(1), Sobiech M(1), Luliński P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Organic Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, Medical University of 
Warsaw, Banacha 1, 02-097 Warsaw, Poland.

Molecular imprinting technology is a well-known strategy to synthesize materials 
with a predetermined specificity. For fifty years, the "classical" approach 
assumed the creation of "memory sites" in the organic polymer matrix by a 
template molecule that interacts with the functional monomer prior to the 
polymerization and template removal. However, the phenomenon of a material's 
"memory" provided by the "footprint" of the chemical entity was first observed 
on silica-based materials nearly a century ago. Through the years, molecular 
imprinting technology has attracted the attention of many scientists. Different 
forms of molecularly imprinted materials, even on the nanoscale, were 
elaborated, predominantly using organic polymers to induce the "memory". This 
field has expanded quickly in recent years, providing versatile tools for the 
separation or detection of numerous chemical compounds or even macromolecules. 
In this review, we would like to emphasize the role of the molecular imprinting 
process in the formation of highly specific siloxane-based nanomaterials. The 
distinct chemistry of siloxanes provides an opportunity for the facile 
functionalization of the surfaces of nanomaterials, enabling us to introduce 
additional properties and providing a way for vast applications such as 
detectors or separators. It also allows for catalyzing chemical reactions 
providing microreactors to facilitate organic synthesis. Finally, it determines 
the properties of siloxanes such as biocompatibility, which opens the way to 
applications in drug delivery and nanomedicine. Thus, a brief outlook on the 
chemistry of siloxanes prior to the discussion of the current state of the art 
of siloxane-based imprinted nanomaterials will be provided. Those aspects will 
be presented in the context of practical applications in various areas of 
chemistry and medicine. Finally, a brief outlook of future perspectives for the 
field will be pointed out.

DOI: 10.3390/nano13020248
PMCID: PMC9863567
PMID: 36677999

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.