1. Micromachines (Basel). 2022 Dec 25;14(1):47. doi: 10.3390/mi14010047.

Fundamentals and Applications of ZnO-Nanowire-Based Piezotronics and 
Piezo-Phototronics.

Wang Y(1)(2), Xie W(1)(2), Peng W(1)(2), Li F(3), He Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Microelectronics, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710049, China.
(2)The Key Lab of Micro-Nano Electronics and System Integration of Xi'an City, 
Xi'an 710049, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Solidification Processing, Key Laboratory of 
Radiation Detection Materials and Devices, School of Materials Science and 
Engineering, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi'an 710072, China.

The piezotronic effect is a coupling effect of semiconductor and piezoelectric 
properties. The piezoelectric potential is used to adjust the p-n junction 
barrier width and Schottky barrier height to control carrier transportation. At 
present, it has been applied in the fields of sensors, human-machine 
interaction, and active flexible electronic devices. The piezo-phototronic 
effect is a three-field coupling effect of semiconductor, photoexcitation, and 
piezoelectric properties. The piezoelectric potential generated by the applied 
strain in the piezoelectric semiconductor controls the generation, transport, 
separation, and recombination of carriers at the metal-semiconductor contact or 
p-n junction interface, thereby improving optoelectronic devices performance, 
such as photodetectors, solar cells, and light-emitting diodes (LED). Since 
then, the piezotronics and piezo-phototronic effects have attracted vast 
research interest due to their ability to remarkably enhance the performance of 
electronic and optoelectronic devices. Meanwhile, ZnO has become an ideal 
material for studying the piezotronic and piezo-phototronic effects due to its 
simple preparation process and better biocompatibility. In this review, first, 
the preparation methods and structural characteristics of ZnO nanowires (NWs) 
with different doping types were summarized. Then, the theoretical basis of the 
piezotronic effect and its application in the fields of sensors, biochemistry, 
energy harvesting, and logic operations (based on piezoelectric transistors) 
were reviewed. Next, the piezo-phototronic effect in the performance of 
photodetectors, solar cells, and LEDs was also summarized and analyzed. In 
addition, modulation of the piezotronic and piezo-phototronic effects was 
compared and summarized for different materials, structural designs, performance 
characteristics, and working mechanisms' analysis. This comprehensive review 
provides fundamental theoretical and applied guidance for future research 
directions in piezotronics and piezo-phototronics for optoelectronic devices and 
energy harvesting.

DOI: 10.3390/mi14010047
PMCID: PMC9860666
PMID: 36677109

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.