1. mSystems. 2023 Feb 23;8(1):e0092222. doi: 10.1128/msystems.00922-22. Epub 2023
 Feb 1.

The Molecular Effect of Wearing Silver-Threaded Clothing on the Human Skin.

Melnik AV(#)(1)(2)(3), Callewaert C(#)(4)(5), Dorrestein K(#)(1), Broadhead 
R(5), Minich JJ(6), Ernst M(1)(7), Humphrey G(4), Ackermann G(4), Gathercole 
R(8), Aksenov AA(1)(2)(3), Knight R(4)(9)(10)(11), Dorrestein PC(1)(4)(10)(12).

Author information:
(1)Collaborative Mass Spectrometry Innovation Center, Skaggs School of Pharmacy 
and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, 
California, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Connecticut, Storrs, Connecticut, USA.
(3)Arome Science Inc., Farmington, Connecticut, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, 
California, USA.
(5)Center for Microbial Ecology and Technology, Ghent University, Ghent, 
Belgium.
(6)Plant Molecular and Cellular Biology Laboratory, The Salk Institute for 
Biological Studies, La Jolla, California, USA.
(7)Section for Clinical Mass Spectrometry, Danish Center for Neonatal Screening, 
Department of Congenital Disorders, Statens Serum Institut, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(8)Product Innovation team, Lululemon, Vancouver, Canada.
(9)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of California, San 
Diego, La Jolla, California, USA.
(10)Center for Microbiome Innovation, University of California, San Diego, La 
Jolla, California, USA.
(11)Department of Bioengineering, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, 
California, USA.
(12)Department of Pharmacology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
California, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

With growing awareness that what we put in and on our bodies affects our health 
and wellbeing, little is still known about the impact of textiles on the human 
skin. Athletic wear often uses silver threading to improve hygiene, but little 
is known about its effect on the body's largest organ. In this study, we 
investigated the impact of such clothing on the skin's chemistry and microbiome. 
Samples were collected from different body sites of a dozen volunteers over the 
course of 12 weeks. The changes induced by the antibacterial clothing were 
specific for individuals, but more so defined by gender and body site. 
Unexpectedly, the microbial biomass on skin increased in the majority of the 
volunteers when wearing silver-threaded T-shirts. Although the most abundant 
taxa remained unaffected, silver caused an increase in diversity and richness of 
low-abundant bacteria and a decrease in chemical diversity. Both effects were 
mainly observed for women. The hallmark of the induced changes was an increase 
in the abundance of various monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFAs), especially in 
the upper back. Several microbe-metabolite associations were uncovered, 
including Cutibacterium, detected in the upper back area, which was correlated 
with the distribution of MUFAs, and Anaerococcus spp. found in the underarms, 
which were associated with a series of different bile acids. Overall, these 
findings point to a notable impact of the silver-threaded material on the skin 
microbiome and chemistry. We observed that relatively subtle changes in the 
microbiome result in pronounced shifts in molecular composition. IMPORTANCE The 
impact of silver-threaded material on human skin chemistry and microbiome is 
largely unknown. Although the most abundant taxa remained unaffected, silver 
caused an increase in diversity and richness of low-abundant bacteria and a 
decrease in chemical diversity. The major change was an increase in the 
abundance of various monounsaturated fatty acids that were also correlated with 
Cutibacterium. Additionally, Anaerococcus spp., found in the underarms, were 
associated with different bile acids in the armpit samples. Overall, the impact 
of the silver-threaded clothing was gender and body site specific.

DOI: 10.1128/msystems.00922-22
PMCID: PMC9948701
PMID: 36722970 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare a conflict of interest. R.G. 
is a part of the company Lululemon, which provided the material for the study 
and partially sponsored the research. P.C.D. is a scientific advisor for 
Sirenas, Cybele, and Galileo and a scientific advisor and founder of Enveda and 
OMETA with approval by University of California, San Diego. A.A.A. and A.V.M. 
are co-founders of Arome Science Inc.