1. Cancer Rep (Hoboken). 2023 Apr;6(4):e1782. doi: 10.1002/cnr2.1782. Epub 2023
Feb  6.

The association of blood ctDNA levels to mutations of marker genes in colorectal 
cancer.

Bai F(1), Du Q(2), Zou Q(3), Xu L(4), Dong W(5), Lv X(6), Han X(6), Zhou H(1), 
Zhang C(2), Lu T(3).

Author information:
(1)Hunan Cancer Hospital and The Affiliated cancer Hospital of Xiangya School of 
Medicine, Central South University, Changsha, China.
(2)School of Biological Sciences, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, Nebraska, 
USA.
(3)Chengdu Medical College, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.
(4)Sichuan Cancer Hospital and Institute, Sichuan Cancer Center, School of 
Medicine, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, 
Sichuan, China.
(5)Department of oncology, Chengdu Ping-An Hospital, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.
(6)Chengdu Women and Children's Center Hospital, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.

BACKGROUND: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is a deadly and commonly diagnosed cancer. 
Cell-free circulating tumor DNAs (ctDNA) have been used in the diagnosis and 
treatment of CRC, but there are open questions about the relationship between 
ctDNAs and CRC. Although mutations of genes detected by ctDNA in CRC have been 
studied, the quantitative relationship between ctDNA mutations and ctDNA 
concentration has not been addressed.
AIMS: We hypothesized that there was an association between mutations of genes 
identified in ctDNAs and ctDNA concentration. His study examined this 
association in a population of CRC patients.
METHODS: In 85 CRC patients, we sampled 282 mutations in 36 genes and conducted 
an association study based on a Random forest model between mutations and ctDNA 
concentrations in all patients.
RESULTS: This association study showed that mutations on five genes, ALK, PMS2, 
KDR, MAP2K1, and MSH2, were associated with the ctDNA concentrations in CRC 
patients' blood samples. Because ctDNA mutations correlate with ctDNA level, we 
can infer the tumor burden or tumor size from ctDNA mutations, as well as the 
survival time for prognosis.
CONCLUSION: Our findings shed light on the associations between mutations of 
genes identified in ctDNAs and ctDNA concentration in the blood of CRC patients. 
This discovery provides information regarding the tumor burden or tumor size 
based on ctDNA mutations.

© 2023 The Authors. Cancer Reports published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/cnr2.1782
PMCID: PMC10075297
PMID: 36746394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.