1. J Psychiatry Neurosci. 2023 Feb 7;48(1):E34-E49. doi: 10.1503/jpn.220086.
Print  2023 Jan-Feb.

Hippocampal subfield alterations in schizophrenia and major depressive disorder: 
a systematic review and network meta-analysis of anatomic MRI studies.

Sun Y(#)(1), Hu N(#)(1), Wang M(1), Lu L(1), Luo C(1), Tang B(1), Yao C(1), 
Sweeney JA(1), Gong Q(1), Qiu C(2), Lui S(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Huaxi MR Research Center, Department of Radiology and National 
Clinical Research Center for Geriatrics, West China Hospital of Sichuan 
University, Chengdu, Sichuan, China (Sun, Lu, Tang, Yao, Sweeney, Gong, Lui); 
the Department of Radiology, West China Hospital of Sichuan University, Chengdu, 
Sichuan, China (Hu, Luo); the Chinese Evidence-Based Medicine Center and 
Cochrane China Center, West China Hospital of Sichuan University, Chengdu, 
Sichuan, China (Wang); the Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Neuroscience, 
University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio, United States (Sweeney); the Mental 
Health Center, West China Hospital of Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, 
China (Qiu); the Research Unit of Psychoradiology, Chinese Academy of Medical 
Sciences, Chengdu, Sichuan, China (Lui); the Functional and Molecular Imaging 
Key Laboratory of Sichuan Province, West China Hospital of Sichuan University, 
Chengdu, Sichuan, China (Lui).
(2)From the Huaxi MR Research Center, Department of Radiology and National 
Clinical Research Center for Geriatrics, West China Hospital of Sichuan 
University, Chengdu, Sichuan, China (Sun, Lu, Tang, Yao, Sweeney, Gong, Lui); 
the Department of Radiology, West China Hospital of Sichuan University, Chengdu, 
Sichuan, China (Hu, Luo); the Chinese Evidence-Based Medicine Center and 
Cochrane China Center, West China Hospital of Sichuan University, Chengdu, 
Sichuan, China (Wang); the Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Neuroscience, 
University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio, United States (Sweeney); the Mental 
Health Center, West China Hospital of Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, 
China (Qiu); the Research Unit of Psychoradiology, Chinese Academy of Medical 
Sciences, Chengdu, Sichuan, China (Lui); the Functional and Molecular Imaging 
Key Laboratory of Sichuan Province, West China Hospital of Sichuan University, 
Chengdu, Sichuan, China (Lui) qiuchangjian@wchscu.cn lusuwcums@hotmail.com.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Hippocampal disturbances are important in the pathophysiology of 
both schizophrenia and major depressive disorder (MDD). Imaging studies have 
shown selective volume deficits across hippocampal subfields in both disorders. 
We aimed to investigate whether these volumetric alterations in hippocampal 
subfields are shared or divergent across disorders.
METHODS: We searched PubMed and Embase from database inception to May 8, 2021. 
We identified MRI studies in patients with schizophrenia, MDD or both, in which 
hippocampal subfield volumes were measured. We excluded nonoriginal, animal or 
postmortem studies, and studies that used other imaging modalities or 
overlapping data. We conducted a network meta-analysis to estimate and contrast 
alterations in subfield volumes in the 2 disorders.
RESULTS: We identified 45 studies that met the initial criteria for systematic 
review, of which 15 were eligible for network metaanalysis. Compared to healthy 
controls, patients with schizophrenia had reduced volumes in the bilateral cornu 
ammonis (CA) 1, granule cell layer of the dentate gyrus, subiculum, 
parasubiculum, molecular layer, hippocampal tail and hippocampus-amygdala 
transition area (HATA); in the left CA4 and presubiculum; and in the right 
fimbria. Patients with MDD had decreased volumes in the left CA3 and CA4 and 
increased volumes in the right HATA compared to healthy controls. The bilateral 
parasubiculum and right HATA were smaller in patients with schizophrenia than in 
patients with MDD.
LIMITATIONS: We did not investigate medication effects because of limited 
information. Study heterogeneity was noteworthy in direct comparisons between 
patients with MDD and healthy controls.
CONCLUSION: The volumes of multiple hippocampal subfields are selectively 
altered in patients with schizophrenia and MDD, with overlap and differentiation 
in subfield alterations across disorders. Rigorous head-to-head studies are 
needed to validate our findings.

© 2023 CMA Impact Inc. or its licensors.

DOI: 10.1503/jpn.220086
PMCID: PMC9911126
PMID: 36750240 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: J. Sweeney consults with 
VeraSci. No other competing interests were declared.