1. ESMO Open. 2023 Feb;8(1):100790. doi: 10.1016/j.esmoop.2023.100790. Epub 2023 
Feb 8.

Targeting HER3 for cancer treatment: a new horizon for an old target.

Uliano J(1), Corvaja C(2), Curigliano G(3), Tarantino P(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of New Drugs and Early Drug Development, European Institute of 
Oncology IRCCS, Milan; Department of Oncology and Hemato-Oncology, University of 
Milan, Milan. Electronic address: https://twitter.com/jacopo_uli.
(2)Division of New Drugs and Early Drug Development, European Institute of 
Oncology IRCCS, Milan; Department of Oncology and Hemato-Oncology, University of 
Milan, Milan; Department of Medicine, University of Udine, Udine, Italy. 
Electronic address: https://twitter.com/carlacorvaja.
(3)Division of New Drugs and Early Drug Development, European Institute of 
Oncology IRCCS, Milan; Department of Oncology and Hemato-Oncology, University of 
Milan, Milan. Electronic address: https://twitter.com/curijoey.
(4)Division of New Drugs and Early Drug Development, European Institute of 
Oncology IRCCS, Milan; Department of Oncology and Hemato-Oncology, University of 
Milan, Milan; Breast Oncology Program, Dana-Farber Brigham Cancer Center, 
Boston; Harvard Medical School, Boston, USA. Electronic address: 
paolo.tarantino@unimi.it.

Human epidermal growth factor receptor 3 (HER3) is a member of the human 
epidermal growth factor receptors family, having as its main ligands neuregulins 
1 and 2. Although its poor tyrosine kinase activity entails a weak oncogenic 
power on its own, HER3 can heterodimerize with HER2 and/or epidermal growth 
factor receptor (EGFR), leading to a drastic enhancement of transphosphorylation 
and activation of downstream signaling pathways, ultimately promoting 
oncogenesis, metastatic dissemination, and drug resistance. Given its ubiquitous 
expression across solid tumors, multiple efforts have been done to 
therapeutically target HER3 by blocking either the ligand binding domain or its 
dimerization with other receptors. Treatment with anti-HER3 monoclonal 
antibodies or bispecific antibodies, both as single agents and in combination 
with other compounds, unfortunately led to unsatisfactory results across several 
tumor types. The HER3-directed delivery of cytotoxic payloads through 
antibody-drug conjugates has recently demonstrated encouraging activity in 
several tumor types, however, suggesting a potential role for the therapeutic 
targeting of HER3 in cancer treatment.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.esmoop.2023.100790
PMCID: PMC9929675
PMID: 36764093 [Indexed for MEDLINE]