1. BMC Pulm Med. 2023 Feb 11;23(1):64. doi: 10.1186/s12890-023-02333-7.

Investigating significant health trends in progressive fibrosing interstitial 
lung disease (INSIGHTS-ILD): rationale, aims and design of a nationwide 
prospective registry.

Behr J(1), Bonella F(2), Günther A(3), Koschel D(4), Prasse A(5), Pittrow D(6), 
Klotsche J(7), Kreuter M(8)(9); INSIGHTS-ILD Study Group.

Collaborators: Andreica I, Behr J, Biller H, Claussen M, Budweiser S, Eisenmann 
S, Ewert R, Gesierich W, Gläser S, Grohé C, Grund D, Grünewaldt A, Hagmeyer L, 
Held M, Kabitz HJ, Kirschner J, Markart P, Neff U, Neurohr C, Reichenberger F, 
Schramm P, Schwaiblmair M, Seese B, Skowasch D, Wälscher J, Weber M, Westhoff M, 
Wilkens H, Wirtz H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine V, Comprehensive Pneumology Center, Member of the 
German Center for Lung Research (DZL), University Hospital, LMU Munich, Munich, 
Germany. juergen.behr@med.uni-muenchen.de.
(2)Center for Interstitial and Rare Lung Diseases, Pneumology Department, 
Ruhrlandklinik University Hospital, Duisburg-Essen University, Essen, Germany.
(3)Universities of Giessen and Marburg Lung Center (UGMLC), Member of the German 
Center for Lung Research (DZL), Giessen, Germany.
(4)Medical Department I, Division of Pneumology, University Hospital Carl Gustav 
Carus, and Department of Pulmonology, Fachkrankenhaus Coswig GmbH, Lung Center, 
Coswig, Germany.
(5)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, 
Germany.
(6)Institute for Clinical Pharmacology, Medical Faculty, Technical University, 
Dresden, Germany.
(7)German Rheuma Research Center (DRFZ), Epidemiology, Berlin, Germany.
(8)Center for Interstitial and Rare Lung Diseases, and Interdisciplinary Center 
for Sarcoidosis, Pneumology, Thoraxklinik, University Hospital Heidelberg, 
German Center for Lung Research, Heidelberg, Germany.
(9)Department of Pneumology, RKH Clinics Ludwigsburg, Ludwigsburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The progressive course of pulmonary fibrosis (PPF) is observed with 
variable prevalence in different entities of fibrosing interstitial lung disease 
(fILD). PPF is characterised by worsening respiratory symptoms, declining lung 
function and increasing extent of fibrosis on high-resolution computer 
tomography. In Germany, data are limited on the characteristics and management 
of such patients.
METHODS/DESIGN: INSIGHTS-ILD is a prospective observational longitudinal 
registry designed to describe characteristics, management and course of newly 
diagnosed (incident) and prevalent patients with fILD on the long term. The 
registry uses a non-probability sampling approach to collect data on 
characteristics, therapeutic interventions, health-related quality of life and 
health economic parameters. It is planned to include 900 patients in ambulatory 
care in about 30 expert sites over three years. The study has been initiated in 
December 2021, and currently (January 2023) follows 360 patients.
DISCUSSION: The registry is expected to provide much-needed data on the 
characteristics, management, and trajectories of patients fILD in Germany. The 
start of the study comes at a time when new treatment options are available for 
PPF. We hypothesize that PPF represents a broad clinical phenotype that is 
differentially influenced by inflammatory and fibrotic pathomechanisms that need 
to be treated with anti-inflammatory and/or anti-fibrotic treatment strategies. 
This registry will allow comparisons with other countries. Gap analyses based on 
current guidelines for management of these patients will be possible. Trial 
registration DRKS00027389 (registered on 7.12.2021), BfArM NIS 7562.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12890-023-02333-7
PMCID: PMC9922453
PMID: 36774483 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: JB: Jürgen Behr received honoraria for 
consulting and lectures from Actelion, Astra-Zeneca, Biogen, BMS, 
Boehringer-Ingelheim, Ferrer, Galapagos, Novartis, Roche, Sanofi-Genzyme. The 
INSIGHTS-ILD study is funded by Boehringer Ingelheim, Germany. FB: grants to his 
institution by Boehringer Ingelheim and Roche, fees for consulting by Savara, 
Roche, Sanofi and Boehringer Ingelheim. DP: received consultancy fees from 
Amgen, Aspen, Biogen, Daiichi Sankyo, Sanofi-Genzyme, Sandoz/Novartis and MSD. 
AP: none. JK: none. DK: fees for consulting by Roche and Boehringer Ingelheim. 
MK: grants to his institution by Boehringer Ingelheim and Roche, fees for 
consulting by Roche, Galapagos and Boehringer Ingelheim.