1. Alzheimers Dement (Amst). 2023 Feb 16;15(1):e12402. doi: 10.1002/dad2.12402. 
eCollection 2023 Jan-Mar.

Endo-lysosomal protein concentrations in CSF from patients with frontotemporal 
dementia caused by CHMP2B mutation.

Toft A(1), Sjödin S(2), Simonsen AH(1), Ejlerskov P(1), Roos P(1), Musaeus 
CS(1), Henriksen EE(1), Nielsen TT(1), Brinkmalm A(3), Blennow K(3)(4), 
Zetterberg H(3)(4)(5)(6)(7), Nielsen JE(1).

Author information:
(1)Neurogenetics Clinic & Research Lab Danish Dementia Research Centre 
Rigshospitalet Copenhagen Denmark.
(2)Laboratory of Clinical Chemistry Sahlgrenska University Hospital Gothenburg 
Sweden.
(3)Clinical Neurochemistry Laboratory Sahlgrenska University Hospital Mölndal 
Sweden.
(4)Department of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry Institute of Neuroscience and 
Physiology the Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of Gothenburg Mölndal 
Sweden.
(5)Department of Neurodegenerative Disease UCL Institute of Neurology Queen 
Square London UK.
(6)UK Dementia Research Institute at UCL London UK.
(7)Hong Kong Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases Clear Water Bay Hong Kong 
China.

INTRODUCTION: Increasing evidence implicates proteostatic dysfunction as an 
early event in the development of frontotemporal dementia (FTD). This study 
aimed to explore potential cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers associated with 
the proteolytic systems in genetic FTD caused by CHMP2B mutation.
METHODS: Combining solid-phase extraction and parallel reaction monitoring mass 
spectrometry, a panel of 47 peptides derived from 20 proteins was analyzed in 
CSF from 31 members of the Danish CHMP2B-FTD family.
RESULTS: Compared with family controls, mutation carriers had significantly 
higher levels of complement C9, lysozyme and transcobalamin II, and lower levels 
of ubiquitin, cathepsin B, and amyloid precursor protein.
DISCUSSION: Lower CSF ubiquitin concentrations in CHMP2B mutation carriers 
indicate that ubiquitin levels relate to the specific disease pathology, rather 
than all-cause neurodegeneration. Increased lysozyme and complement proteins may 
indicate innate immune activation. Altered levels of amyloid precursor protein 
and cathepsins have previously been associated with impaired lysosomal 
proteolysis in FTD.
HIGHLIGHTS: CSF markers of proteostasis were explored in CHMP2B-mediated 
frontotemporal dementia (FTD).31 members of the Danish CHMP2B-FTD family were 
included.We used solid-phase extraction and parallel reaction monitoring mass 
spectrometry.Six protein levels were significantly altered in CHMP2B-FTD 
compared with controls.Lower CSF ubiquitin levels in patients suggest 
association with disease mechanisms.

© 2023 The Authors. Alzheimer's & Dementia: Diagnosis, Assessment & Disease 
Monitoring published by Wiley Periodicals, LLC on behalf of Alzheimer's 
Association.

DOI: 10.1002/dad2.12402
PMCID: PMC9936136
PMID: 36815874

Conflict of interest statement: K.B. has served as a consultant, at advisory 
boards, or at data monitoring committees for Abcam, Axon, BioArctic, Biogen, and 
JOMDD/Shimadzu. Julius Clinical, Lilly, MagQu, Novartis, Ono Pharma, 
Pharmatrophix, Prothena, Roche Diagnostics, and Siemens Healthineers, and is a 
co‐founder of Brain Biomarker Solutions in Gothenburg AB (BBS), which is a part 
of the GU Ventures Incubator Program, outside the work presented in this paper. 
H.Z. has served at scientific advisory boards and/or as a consultant for Abbvie, 
Alector, ALZPath, Annexon, Apellis, Artery Therapeutics, AZTherapies, CogRx, 
Denali, Eisai, Nervgen, Novo Nordisk, Passage Bio, Pinteon Therapeutics, Red 
Abbey Labs, reMYND, Roche, Samumed, Siemens Healthineers, Triplet Therapeutics, 
and Wave, has given lectures in symposia sponsored by Cellectricon, Fujirebio, 
Alzecure, Biogen, and Roche, and is a co‐founder of Brain Biomarker Solutions in 
Gothenburg AB (BBS), which is a part of the GU Ventures Incubator Program 
(outside submitted work). The remaining authors (A.T., S.S., A.H.S., P.E., P.R., 
C.S.M., E.E.H., T.T.N., A.B., and J.E.N.) have no conflicts of interest to 
declare. Author disclosures are available in the supporting information.