1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2023 Feb 3;13:943390. doi: 
10.3389/fcimb.2023.943390. eCollection 2023.

Why is manganese so valuable to bacterial pathogens?

Čapek J(1), Večerek B(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of post-transcriptional control of gene expression, Institute of 
Microbiology of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Prague, Czechia.

Apart from oxygenic photosynthesis, the extent of manganese utilization in 
bacteria varies from species to species and also appears to depend on external 
conditions. This observation is in striking contrast to iron, which is similar 
to manganese but essential for the vast majority of bacteria. To adequately 
explain the role of manganese in pathogens, we first present in this review that 
the accumulation of molecular oxygen in the Earth's atmosphere was a key event 
that linked manganese utilization to iron utilization and put pressure on the 
use of manganese in general. We devote a large part of our contribution to 
explanation of how molecular oxygen interferes with iron so that it enhances 
oxidative stress in cells, and how bacteria have learned to control the 
concentration of free iron in the cytosol. The functioning of iron in the 
presence of molecular oxygen serves as a springboard for a fundamental 
understanding of why manganese is so valued by bacterial pathogens. The bulk of 
this review addresses how manganese can replace iron in enzymes. Redox-active 
enzymes must cope with the higher redox potential of manganese compared to iron. 
Therefore, specific manganese-dependent isoenzymes have evolved that either 
lower the redox potential of the bound metal or use a stronger oxidant. In 
contrast, redox-inactive enzymes can exchange the metal directly within the 
individual active site, so no isoenzymes are required. It appears that in the 
physiological context, only redox-inactive mononuclear or dinuclear enzymes are 
capable of replacing iron with manganese within the same active site. In both 
cases, cytosolic conditions play an important role in the selection of the metal 
used. In conclusion, we summarize both well-characterized and less-studied 
mechanisms of the tug-of-war for manganese between host and pathogen.

Copyright © 2023 Čapek and Večerek.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2023.943390
PMCID: PMC9936198
PMID: 36816586 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.