1. Front Vet Sci. 2023 Feb 2;10:1043656. doi: 10.3389/fvets.2023.1043656. 
eCollection 2023.

Acute phase proteins levels in horses, after a single carbohydrate overload, 
associated with cecal alkalinization.

Peixoto Rabelo I(1), Barroco de Paula V(1), Carvalho Bustamante C(1), Santana 
AM(2), Gomes da Silva D(1), Baldassi AC(3), Canola PA(1), Araújo Valadão CA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Internal Medicine and Surgery, School of 
Agricultural and Veterinarian Sciences, São Paulo State University (Unesp), 
Jaboticabal, São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Department of Veterinary Medicine, Maringá State University, Umuarama, 
Paraná, Brazil.
(3)Department of Agricultural, Livestock and Environmental Biotechnology, School 
of Agricultural and Veterinarian Sciences, São Paulo State University (Unesp), 
Jaboticabal, São Paulo, Brazil.

INTRODUCTION: Horses submitted to carbohydrate overload can develop laminitis 
due to changes in cecal pH and microbiota, followed by an increase in transmural 
absorption of luminal content, including bacterial toxins. In response to acute 
injury there is hepatic overproduction of several proteins known as acute phase 
proteins (APP). Few studies have evaluated protein fractionation to characterize 
the inflammatory response in acute laminitis. The aim of this study was to test 
the viability of an experimental model to induce acute laminitis, using a single 
carbohydrate overload, and the influence of a buffering solution on the 
development of the disease; also, study the kinetics of APP during acute 
laminitis, as well as the correlation between these proteins and clinical signs 
associated to this syndrome.
METHODS: Ten healthy horses were divided in a factorial and randomized way into 
four groups (n = 5): control group (CG), starch group (SG), buffer group (BG), 
and starch C buffer group (SBG). They were evaluated at seven times (T0h, T4h, 
T8h, T12h, T24h, T48h, and T72h), which included clinical evaluation and blood 
sample collection. Total serum protein and albumin concentrations were 
determined by colorimetry and the other APP by polyacrylamide gel 
electrophoresis containing sodium dodecyl sulfate and commercial ELISA kits. 
Data were analyzed by two-way ANOVA, followed by Tukey's test (p < 0.05). The 
correlation between clinical signs and APP were verified using the Pearson's 
correlation coefficient.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: 40% of the animals from SG and 60% from SBG developed 
clinical laminitis. A single administration of buffer solution was not able to 
prevent clinical signs of laminitis. There was no difference between groups on 
total serum protein, albumin, serum amyloid A and C-reactive protein 
concentrations (p > 0.05). Transferrin, considered a negative APP, showed a 
positive response pattern in SG and SBG. Ceruloplasmin had a positive 
correlation with Obel grade, heart rate on animals from SGB and number of steps 
on horses submitted to starch overload (SG and SBG). Ceruloplasmin, 
α-1-antitrypsin and haptoglobin concentrations increased in SBG, suggesting an 
inflammatory response in animals of this group. Changes in clinical parameters 
were also more evident in the SBG, corroborating the protein fractionation 
findings.

Copyright © 2023 Peixoto Rabelo, Barroco de Paula, Carvalho Bustamante, Santana, 
Gomes da Silva, Baldassi, Canola and Araújo Valadão.

DOI: 10.3389/fvets.2023.1043656
PMCID: PMC9932335
PMID: 36816195

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.