1. J Biomed Phys Eng. 2023 Feb 1;13(1):3-16. doi: 10.31661/jbpe.v0i0.2109-1398. 
eCollection 2023 Feb.

Exposure to Low Levels of Radiofrequency Electromagnetic Fields Emitted from 
Cell-phones as a Promising Treatment of Alzheimer's Disease: A Scoping Review 
Study.

Shirbandi K(1), Khalafi M(2), J Bevelacqua J(3), Sadeghian N(4), Adiban S(5), 
Bahaeddini Zarandi F(6), Mortazavi SA(7), Mortazavi SH(7), Mortazavi SMJ(8), S 
Welsh J(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of International Affairs (IAD), Ahvaz Jundishapur University of 
Medical Sciences, Ahvaz, Iran.
(2)Allied Health Science, School of Medicine, Tabriz University of Medical 
Sciences, Tabriz, Iran.
(3)Bevelacqua Resources, Richland, Washington 99352, United States.
(4)Student Research Committee, Mazandaran University of Medical Sciences, Sari, 
Iran.
(5)Biotechnology Student, Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Iran.
(6)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Shiraz University of Medical 
Sciencs, Shiraz, Iran.
(7)School of Medicine, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.
(8)Department of Medical Physics and Engineering, School of Medicine, Shiraz 
University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.
(9)Department of Radiation Oncology, Stritch School of Medicine, Loyola 
University, Chicago, IL, USA.
(10)Department of Radiation Oncology, Edward Hines Jr VA Hospital Hines, 
Illinois, USA.

BACKGROUND: Alzheimer's disease (AD) is one of the most significant public 
health concerns and tremendous economic challenges. Studies conducted over the 
past decades show that exposure to radiofrequency electromagnetic fields 
(RF-EMFs) may relieve AD symptoms.
OBJECTIVE: To determine if exposure to RF-EMFs emitted by cellphones affect the 
risk of AD.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: In this review, all relevant published articles reporting 
an association of cell phone use with AD were studied. We systematically 
searched international datasets to identify relevant studies. Finally, 33 
studies were included in the review. Our review discusses the effects of RF-EMFs 
on the amyloid β (Aβ), oxidative stress, apoptosis, reactive oxygen species 
(ROS), neuronal death, and astrocyte responses. Moreover, the role of exposure 
parameters, including the type of exposure, its duration, and specific 
absorption rate (SAR), are discussed.
RESULTS: Progressive factors of AD such as Aβ, myelin basic protein (MBP), 
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) oxidase, and neurofilament 
light polypeptide (NFL) were decreased. While tau protein showed no change, 
factors affecting brain activity such as glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), 
mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs), cerebral blood flow (CBF), brain 
temperature, and neuronal activity were increased.
CONCLUSION: Exposure to low levels of RF-EMFs can reduce the risk of AD by 
increasing MAPK and GFAP and decreasing MBP. Considering the role of apoptosis 
in AD and the effect of RF-EMF on the progression of the process, this review 
indicates the positive effect of these exposures.

Copyright: © Journal of Biomedical Physics and Engineering.

DOI: 10.31661/jbpe.v0i0.2109-1398
PMCID: PMC9923247
PMID: 36818013

Conflict of interest statement: None