1. Skin Res Technol. 2023 Feb;29(2):e13277. doi: 10.1111/srt.13277.

Efficiency of cutaneous heat diffusion after local hyperthermia for the 
treatment of itch.

Wohlrab J(1)(2), Mentel T(3), Eichner A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Martin Luther University 
Halle-Wittenberg, Halle (Saale), Germany.
(2)Institute of applied Dermatopharmacy, Martin Luther University 
Halle-Wittenberg, Halle (Saale), Germany.
(3)Mibetec GmbH, Sandersdorf-Brehna, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Today, itching is understood as an independent sensory perception, 
which is based on a complex etiology of a disturbed neuronal activity and leads 
to clinical symptoms. The primary afferents (pruriceptors) have functional 
overlaps with afferents of thermoregulation (thermoceptors). Thus, an 
antipruritic effect can be caused by antagonizing heat-sensitive receptors of 
the skin. The ion channel TRP-subfamily V member 1 (TRPV1) is of particular 
importance in this context. Repeated heat application can induce irreversible 
inactivation by unfolding of the protein, causing a persistent functional 
deficit and thus clinically and therapeutically reducing itch sensation.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: To demonstrate relevant heat diffusion after local 
application of heat (45°C to 52°C for 3 and 5 seconds) by a technical medical 
device, the temperature profile for the relevant skin layer was recorded 
synchronously on ex vivo human skin using an infrared microscope.
RESULTS: The results showed that the necessary activation temperature for TRPV1 
of (≥43°C) in the upper relevant skin layers was safely reached after 3 and 5 
seconds of application time. There were no indications of undesirable thermal 
effects.
CONCLUSION: The test results show that the objectified performance of the 
investigated medical device can be expected to provide the necessary temperature 
input for the activation of heat-sensitive receptors in the skin. Clinical 
studies are necessary to prove therapeutic efficacy in the indication pruritus.

© 2023 The Authors. Skin Research and Technology published by John Wiley & Sons 
Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/srt.13277
PMCID: PMC10155804
PMID: 36823504 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Johannes Wohlrab has received fees for lecturing 
and/or consulting, and/or received funding for scientific projects and/or 
clinical studies from Abbvie, ACA, Actelion, Allergika, Almirall, Agfa, Aristo, 
Astellas, BayPharma, Baxalta, Beiersdorf, BMS, Biogen, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Bombastus, Celgene, Dermapharm, Ei, Evolva, Evonik, Galderma, Grünenthal, GSK, 
Hexal, Infectopharm, Janssen‐Cilag, Jenapharm, Johnson & Johnson, Klinge, 
Klosterfrau, Leo, Lilly, L‘Oréal, Mavena, Medac, Medice, Mibe, MSD, Mylan, 
Novaliq, Novartis, Pfizer, Pohl‐Boskamp, Riemser, Sanofi, Skinomics, Wolff. Tim 
Mentel is an employee of Mibetec GmbH. Adina Eichner declares no conflict of 
interest. The investigations have been fully funded by Mibetec GmbH 
(Sandersdorf‐Brehna, Germany).