1. Front Immunol. 2023 Feb 8;14:1055429. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1055429. 
eCollection 2023.

Wild-type SARS-CoV-2 neutralizing immunity decreases across variants and over 
time but correlates well with diagnostic testing.

O'Shea KM(1)(2), Schuler CF 4th(1)(2), Chen J(1)(3), Troost JP(4), Wong 
PT(1)(2)(3), Chen K(2), O'Shea DR(2), Peng W(2), Gherasim C(5), Manthei DM(5), 
Valdez R(5), Baldwin JL(1)(2), Baker JR Jr(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Department of Internal Medicine, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States.
(2)Mary H. Weiser Food Allergy Center, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 
United States.
(3)Michigan Nanotechnology Institute for Medicine and Biological Sciences, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States.
(4)Michigan Institute for Clinical and Health Research, University of Michigan, 
Ann Arbor, MI, United States.
(5)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United 
States.

IMPORTANCE: The degree of immune protection against severe acute respiratory 
syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) variants provided by infection versus 
vaccination with wild-type virus remains unresolved, which could influence 
future vaccine strategies. The gold-standard for assessing immune protection is 
viral neutralization; however, few studies involve a large-scale analysis of 
viral neutralization against the Omicron variant by sera from individuals 
infected with wild-type virus.
OBJECTIVES: 1) To define the degree to which infection versus vaccination with 
wild-type SARS-CoV-2 induced neutralizing antibodies against Delta and Omicron 
variants.2) To determine whether clinically available data, such as 
infection/vaccination timing or antibody status, can predict variant 
neutralization.
METHODS: We examined a longitudinal cohort of 653 subjects with sera collected 
three times at 3-to-6-month intervals from April 2020 to June 2021. Individuals 
were categorized according to SARS-CoV-2 infection and vaccination status. Spike 
and nucleocapsid antibodies were detected via ADVIA Centaur® (Siemens) and 
Elecsys® (Roche) assays, respectively. The Healgen Scientific® lateral flow 
assay was used to detect IgG and IgM spike antibody responses. Pseudoviral 
neutralization assays were performed on all samples using human ACE2 
receptor-expressing HEK-293T cells infected with SARS-CoV-2 spike protein 
pseudotyped lentiviral particles for wild-type (WT), B.1.617.2 (Delta), and 
B.1.1.529 (Omicron) variants.
RESULTS: Vaccination after infection led to the highest neutralization titers at 
all timepoints for all variants. Neutralization was also more durable in the 
setting of prior infection versus vaccination alone. Spike antibody clinical 
testing effectively predicted neutralization for wild-type and Delta. However, 
nucleocapsid antibody presence was the best independent predictor of Omicron 
neutralization. Neutralization of Omicron was lower than neutralization of 
either wild-type or Delta virus across all groups and timepoints, with 
significant activity only present in patients that were first infected and later 
immunized.
CONCLUSIONS: Participants having both infection and vaccination with wild-type 
virus had the highest neutralizing antibody levels against all variants and had 
persistence of activity. Neutralization of WT and Delta virus correlated with 
spike antibody levels against wild-type and Delta variants, but Omicron 
neutralization was better correlated with evidence of prior infection. These 
data help explain why 'breakthrough' Omicron infections occurred in previously 
vaccinated individuals and suggest better protection is observed in those with 
both vaccination and previous infection. This study also supports the concept of 
future SARS-CoV-2 Omicron-specific vaccine boosters.

Copyright © 2023 O’Shea, Schuler, Chen, Troost, Wong, Chen, O’Shea, Peng, 
Gherasim, Manthei, Valdez, Baldwin and Baker.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1055429
PMCID: PMC9945103
PMID: 36845123 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.