1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2023 Feb 10;13:987842. doi: 
10.3389/fcimb.2023.987842. eCollection 2023.

Detection of immunoreactive proteins of Escherichia coli, Streptococcus uberis, 
and Streptococcus agalactiae isolated from cows with diagnosed mastitis.

Dobrut A(1), Wójcik-Grzybek D(2), Młodzińska A(3), Pietras-Ożga D(4), Michalak 
K(4), Tabacki A(5), Mroczkowska U(6), Brzychczy-Włoch M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medical Microbiology, Chair of Microbiology, 
Jagiellonian University Medical College, Krakow, Poland.
(2)Department of Experimental Physiology, Chair of Physiology, Jagiellonian 
University Medical College, Krakow, Poland.
(3)Bioidea Company, Warsaw, Poland.
(4)Department of Epizootiology and Clinic of Infectious Diseases, University of 
Life Sciences, Lublin, Poland.
(5)Omniwet Veterinary Clinic, Orzesze, Poland.
(6)Egida Veterinary Clinic, Wizna, Poland.

INTRODUCTION: Mastitis is a widespread mammary gland disease of dairy cows that 
causes severe economic losses to dairy farms. Mastitis can be caused by 
bacteria, fungi, and algae. The most common species isolated from infected milk 
are, among others, Streptococcus spp., and Escherichia coli. The aim of our 
study was protein detection based on both in silico and in vitro methods, which 
allowed the identification of immunoreactive proteins representative of the 
following species: Streptococcus uberis, Streptococcus agalactiae, and 
Escherichia coli.
METHODS: The study group included 22 milk samples and 13 serum samples obtained 
from cows with diagnosed mastitis, whereas the control group constituted 12 milk 
samples and 12 serum samples isolated from healthy animals. Detection of 
immunoreactive proteins was done by immunoblotting, while amino acid sequences 
from investigated proteins were determined by MALDI-TOF. Then, bioinformatic 
analyses were performed on detected species specific proteins in order to 
investigate their immunoreactivity.
RESULTS: As a result, we identified 13 proteins: 3 (molybdenum cofactor 
biosynthesis protein B, aldehyde reductase YahK, outer membrane protein A) for 
E. coli, 4 (elongation factor Tu, tRNA uridine 5-carboxymethylaminomethyl 
modification enzyme MnmG, GTPase Obg, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase) 
for S. uberis, and 6 (aspartate carbamoyltransferase, elongation factor Tu, 60 
kDa chaperonin, elongation factor G, galactose-6-phosphate isomerase subunit 
LacA, adenosine deaminase) for S. agalactiae, which demonstrated 
immunoreactivity to antibodies present in serum from cows with diagnosed 
mastitis.
DISCUSSION: Due to the confirmed immunoreactivity, specificity and localization 
in the bacterial cell, these proteins can be considered considered potential 
targets in innovative rapid immunodiagnostic assays for bovine mastitis, however 
due to the limited number of examined samples, further examination is needed.

Copyright © 2023 Dobrut, Wójcik-Grzybek, Młodzińska, Pietras-Ożga, Michalak, 
Tabacki, Mroczkowska and Brzychczy-Włoch.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2023.987842
PMCID: PMC9950269
PMID: 36844415 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.