1. Front Pharmacol. 2023 Feb 23;14:1120508. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2023.1120508. 
eCollection 2023.

4-Methylesculetin ameliorates LPS-induced depression-like behavior through the 
inhibition of NLRP3 inflammasome.

Choudhary K(1), Prasad SR(2), Lokhande KB(3), Murti K(4), Singh S(1), 
Ravichandiran V(1)(2)(4), Kumar N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, National Institute of 
Pharmaceutical Education and Research-Hajipur, Hajipur, India.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education 
and Research-Hajipur, Hajipur, India.
(3)Translational Bioinformatics and Computational Genomics Research Lab, 
Department of Life Sciences, Shiv Nadar University, GBNagar, Uttar Pradesh, 
India.
(4)Department of Pharmacy Practice, National Institute of Pharmaceutical 
Education and Research-Hajipur, Hajipur, India.

The pathophysiology of depression is heavily dependent on inflammation. Evidence 
suggests that the etiology of depression is linked with NLRP3 
inflammasome-induced inflammation. Therefore, blocking the activated NLRP3 
inflammasome may be beneficial for treating depression. Due to the limitations 
of currently available antidepressants, it is necessary to develop novel, safe, 
and affordable drugs for the treatment of depression. A natural coumarin 
derivative named 4-methylesculetin (4-MESC) possesses anti-inflammatory 
properties. However, the role of 4-MESC as an antidepressant has not been 
elucidated. Therefore, in this study, we explored the antidepressant-like 
effects of 4-MESC and its underlying molecular mechanism through the modulation 
of the NLRP3 inflammasome. The docking and molecular dynamic simulation studies 
revealed that 4-MESC has a higher affinity for the NLRP3 PYD. Blood-brain 
barrier permeability was confirmed using the SwissADME pharmacokinetic tool. 
High doses (50 mg/kg) of 4-MESC significantly reduced the immobility duration in 
the tail-suspension test (TST) and forced swim test (FST) without changing the 
overall locomotor activity in the female Swiss albino mice that were subjected 
to lipopolysaccharide (LPS). LPS-induced pro-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-6 
and TNF-α were reduced in serum and brain tissues using 4-MESC. 4-MESC's 
neuroprotective effects are mediated by increased brain-derived neurotrophic 
factor (BDNF) and decreased cortisol levels. 4-MESC markedly reduced LPS-induced 
elevated levels of ROS and lipid peroxidation (malondialdehyde levels) and 
enhanced the superoxide dismutase (SOD) activity and glutathione levels, which 
revealed its anti-oxidant potential against oxidative stress. 4-MESC diminished 
the expression levels of NF-κBp65, IL-6, NLRP3, caspase-1, gasdermin D, and 
IL-1β in the hippocampus. These findings demonstrated that 4-MESC exhibited 
antidepressant-like effects by inhibiting the NLRP3 inflammasome. However, other 
antidepressant mechanisms might also be involved which require further studies.

Copyright © 2023 Choudhary, Prasad, Lokhande, Murti, Singh, Ravichandiran and 
Kumar.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2023.1120508
PMCID: PMC9995395
PMID: 36909194

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.