1. BMJ Open. 2023 Mar 13;13(3):e058847. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-058847.

Ramadan fasting and type 1 diabetes: a scoping review protocol.

Tootee A(1), Bandarian F(2), Namazi N(3), Atlasi R(4), Larijani B(5).

Author information:
(1)Cell Therapy and Regenerative Medicine Research Center, Endocrinology and 
Metabolism Molecular Cellular Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran (the Islamic Republic of).
(2)Metabolomics and Genomics Research Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism 
Molecular- Cellular Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, 
Tehran, Iran (the Islamic Republic of).
(3)Diabetes Research Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism Clinical Sciences 
Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Endocrinology and Metabolism Research Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism 
Clinical Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences School of 
Medicine, Tehran, Iran (the Islamic Republic of).
(5)Endocrinology and Metabolism Research Center, Endocrinology and Metabolism 
Clinical Sciences Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran 
emrc@tums.ac.ir.

INTRODUCTION: Ramadan fasting is globally observed and a great majority of the 
residents of Islamic countries and elsewhere fast during Ramadan all across the 
world every year. Many patients with type 1 diabetes fast during Ramadan 
according to (or against) medical and jurisprudence advice. Nonetheless, there 
is a paucity of scientific evidence regarding the risks patients with diabetes 
who fast may be confronted with. The current scoping review protocol aims at 
systematic analysis and mapping of existing literature in the field and 
highlighting scientific gaps.
METHODS AND ANALYSES: This scoping review will be conducted based on the Arksey 
and O'Malley's methodological framework with consideration of later 
modifications and amendments. Three major scientific databases, namely PubMed, 
Scopus and Embase up to February 2022 will be systematically searched by expert 
researchers in collaboration with a medical librarian. Considering the fact that 
Ramadan Fasting is a cultural-dependent subject, which may be studied in the 
Middle Eastern and Islamic Countries in languages other than English, local 
Persian and Arabic Databases will also be included. Grey literature will be 
sought too, and unpublished works such as conference proceedings and academic 
degree dissertation will be considered. Subsequently, one author will screen and 
record all abstracts, and two reviewers will independently screen and retrieve 
eligible full texts. A third reviewer will then be designated to resolve 
potential discrepancies. Standardised data charts and forms will be used for 
information extraction and reporting of the outcomes.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: No ethical considerations apply to this research. 
Results will be published and presented in academic journals and scientific 
events.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2023. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-058847
PMCID: PMC10016270
PMID: 36914196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.