1. Neural Regen Res. 2023 Sep;18(9):1890-1902. doi: 10.4103/1673-5374.367832.

Emerging roles of astrocytes in blood-brain barrier disruption upon amyloid-beta 
insults in Alzheimer's disease.

Yue Q(1), Hoi MPM(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Quality Research in Chinese Medicine, Institute of 
Chinese Medical Sciences; Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Faculty of 
Health Sciences, University of Macau, Macao Special Administrative Region, 
China.

Blood-brain barrier disruption occurs in the early stages of Alzheimer's 
disease. Recent studies indicate a link between blood-brain barrier dysfunction 
and cognitive decline and might accelerate Alzheimer's disease progression. 
Astrocytes are the most abundant glial cells in the central nervous system with 
important roles in the structural and functional maintenance of the blood-brain 
barrier. For example, astrocytic coverage around endothelial cells with 
perivascular endfeet and secretion of homeostatic soluble factors are two major 
underlying mechanisms of astrocytic physiological functions. Astrocyte 
activation is often observed in Alzheimer's disease patients, with astrocytes 
expressing a high level of glial fibrillary acid protein detected around 
amyloid-beta plaque with the elevated phagocytic ability for amyloid-beta. 
Structural alterations in Alzheimer's disease astrocytes including swollen 
endfeet, somata shrinkage and possess loss contribute to disruption in vascular 
integrity at capillary and arterioles levels. In addition, Alzheimer's disease 
astrocytes are skewed into proinflammatory and oxidative profiles with increased 
secretions of vasoactive mediators inducing endothelial junction disruption and 
immune cell infiltration. In this review, we summarize the findings of existing 
literature on the relevance of astrocyte alteration in response to amyloid 
pathology in the context of blood-brain barrier dysfunction. First, we briefly 
describe the physiological roles of astrocytes in blood-brain barrier 
maintenance. Then, we review the clinical evidence of astrocyte pathology in 
Alzheimer's disease patients and the preclinical evidence in animal and cellular 
models. We further discuss the structural changes of blood-brain barrier that 
correlates with Alzheimer's disease astrocyte. Finally, we evaluate the roles of 
soluble factors secreted by Alzheimer's disease astrocytes, providing potential 
molecular mechanisms underlying blood-brain barrier modulation. We conclude with 
a perspective on investigating the therapeutic potential of targeting astrocytes 
for blood-brain barrier protection in Alzheimer's disease.

DOI: 10.4103/1673-5374.367832
PMCID: PMC10233760
PMID: 36926705

Conflict of interest statement: None