1. Diabetol Metab Syndr. 2023 Mar 22;15(1):54. doi: 10.1186/s13098-023-01028-7.

PHQ-9, CES-D, health insurance data-who is identified with depression? A 
Population-based study in persons with diabetes.

Linnenkamp U(1)(2)(3), Gontscharuk V(4)(5)(6), Ogurtsova K(4)(5), Brüne 
M(4)(5)(6), Chernyak N(4)(5)(6), Kvitkina T(4)(5), Arend W(6), Schmitz-Losem 
I(7), Kruse J(8), Hermanns N(9)(10), Kulzer B(9)(10), Evers SMAA(11)(12), 
Hiligsmann M(11), Hoffmann B(13), Icks A(4)(5)(6), Andrich S(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Health Services Research and Health Economics, German Diabetes 
Center, Leibniz Center for Diabetes Research at Heinrich-Heine-University 
Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany. Ute.Linnenkamp@ddz.de.
(2)German Center for Diabetes Research, Partner Düsseldorf, München-Neuherberg, 
Germany. Ute.Linnenkamp@ddz.de.
(3)Department of Health Services Research, CAPHRI Care and Public Health 
Research Institute, Maastricht University, Maastricht, the Netherlands. 
Ute.Linnenkamp@ddz.de.
(4)Institute for Health Services Research and Health Economics, German Diabetes 
Center, Leibniz Center for Diabetes Research at Heinrich-Heine-University 
Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(5)German Center for Diabetes Research, Partner Düsseldorf, München-Neuherberg, 
Germany.
(6)Institute for Health Services Research and Health Economics, Centre for 
Health and Society, Medical Faculty and University Hospital Düsseldorf, 
Heinrich-Heine-University Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(7)pronova BKK, statutory health insurance, Ludwigshafen, 67058, Germany.
(8)Clinic for Psychosomatic and Psychotherapy, University Clinic Gießen, Gießen, 
Germany.
(9)Research Institute Diabetes Academy Mergentheim (FIDAM), Bad Mergentheim, 
Germany.
(10)Department of Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, University of Bamberg, 
Bamberg, Germany.
(11)Department of Health Services Research, CAPHRI Care and Public Health 
Research Institute, Maastricht University, Maastricht, the Netherlands.
(12)Trimbos Institute, Netherlands Institute of Mental Health and Addiction, 
Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(13)Institute for Occupational, Social and Environmental Medicine, Centre for 
Health and Society, Faculty of Medicine, Heinrich-Heine University Düsseldorf, 
Düsseldorf, Germany.

AIMS: Several instruments are used to identify depression among patients with 
diabetes and have been compared for their test criteria, but, not for the 
overlaps and differences, for example, in the sociodemographic and clinical 
characteristics of the individuals identified with different instruments.
METHODS: We conducted a cross-sectional survey among a random sample of a 
statutory health insurance (SHI) (n = 1,579) with diabetes and linked it with 
longitudinal SHI data. Depression symptoms were identified using either the 
Centre for Epidemiological Studies Depression (CES-D) scale or the Patient 
Health Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9), and a depressive disorder was identified with a 
diagnosis in SHI data, resulting in 8 possible groups. Groups were compared 
using a multinomial logistic model.
RESULTS: In total 33·0% of our analysis sample were identified with depression 
by at least one method. 5·0% were identified with depression by all methods. 
Multinomial logistic analysis showed that identification through SHI data only 
compared to the group with no depression was associated with gender (women). 
Identification through at least SHI data was associated with taking 
antidepressants and previous depression. Health related quality of life, 
especially the mental summary score was associated with depression but not when 
identified through SHI data only.
CONCLUSION: The methods overlapped less than expected. We did not find a clear 
pattern between methods used and characteristics of individuals identified. 
However, we found first indications that the choice of method is related to 
specific underlying characteristics in the identified population. These findings 
need to be confirmed by further studies with larger study samples.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13098-023-01028-7
PMCID: PMC10031874
PMID: 36945050

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.