1. Physiol Behav. 2023 Jun 1;265:114176. doi: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2023.114176. Epub
 2023 Mar 23.

Proopiomelanocortin projections to the nucleus accumbens modulate acquisition 
and maintenance of operant palatable pellet administration in mice.

Eliason NL(1), Sharpe AL(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, The University of 
Oklahoma Health Science Center, Oklahoma City, OK, 73117, United States of 
America.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, The University of 
Oklahoma Health Science Center, Oklahoma City, OK, 73117, United States of 
America; Harold Hamm Diabetes Center, The University of Oklahoma Health Science 
Center, Oklahoma City, OK, 73117, United States of America. Electronic address: 
Amanda-Sharpe@OUSHC.edu.

Obesity is a crisis in the United States, producing many co-morbid diseases that 
can drastically decrease quality of life. While diet is a major focus for 
therapeutic intervention, the need to understand underlying appetitive 
neurocircuitry persists. Proopiomelanocortin (POMC) peptides are well-known for 
their anorexigenic activity, but also mediate reward and learning. The nucleus 
accumbens (NAcc) is best known for its role in reward-based learning, but the 
contribution of POMC projections to NAcc on feeding are controversial since the 
two major POMC-derived peptides (β-endorphin and α-MSH) have opposite effects on 
food intake. Our objective was to determine the effect of stimulating POMC 
projections in the NAcc on acquisition and maintenance of operant 
self-administration of a palatable food. Adult POMCCre mice were microinjected 
into the NAcc with a Cre-dependent retrograde adeno-associated viral vector 
expressing Gq Designer Receptors Exclusively Activated by Designer Drugs 
(DREADDs). Mice were trained to self-administer palatable 20-mg pellets in daily 
operant sessions. Acquisition of self-administration (fixed ratio 30) and 
baseline self-administration were measured in daily sessions, with mice 
receiving injections of either JHU37152 (DREADD agonist) or saline (i.p.) 15 min 
prior to the sessions. POMC neuron stimulation (JHU injection) before training 
sessions produced a significant increase in rate of acquisition and accuracy 
compared to the saline treated group, with no significant effect on rewards 
earned. Removal of POMC neuron stimulation before sessions initially reduced 
consumption with a gradual increase in responding for reinforcer over 3 days of 
saline injections. Reinstatement of POMC neuron stimulation (JHU) before the 
session resulted in a significant decrease in responding and rewards earned. 
These results suggest a complex role of POMC peptides within the NAcc that 
increase reward learning for a novel palatable food while decreasing consumption 
of the reinforcer following experience with it.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2023.114176
PMCID: PMC10241194
PMID: 36965574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations of Competing Interest None