1. Life (Basel). 2023 Mar 8;13(3):723. doi: 10.3390/life13030723.

Applications of Infrared Thermography in Ophthalmology.

Gulias-Cañizo R(1), Rodríguez-Malagón ME(2), Botello-González L(2), Belden-Reyes 
V(2), Amparo F(2), Garza-Leon M(2).

Author information:
(1)Centro de Investigación en Ciencias de la Salud, Universidad Anahuac México, 
Naucalpan de Juárez 52786, Mexico.
(2)Division of Health Sciences, Department of Clinical Sciences, University of 
Monterrey, San Pedro Gaza García 66238, Mexico.

Body temperature is one of the key vital signs for determining a disease's 
severity, as it reflects the thermal energy generated by an individual's 
metabolism. Since the first study on the relationship between body temperature 
and diseases by Carl Reinhold August Wunderlich at the end of the 19th century, 
various forms of thermometers have been developed to measure body temperature. 
Traditionally, methods for measuring temperature can be invasive, semi-invasive, 
and non-invasive. In recent years, great technological advances have reduced the 
cost of thermographic cameras, which allowed extending their use. Thermal 
cameras capture the infrared radiation of the electromagnetic spectrum and 
process the images to represent the temperature of the object under study 
through a range of colors, where each color and its hue indicate a previously 
established temperature. Currently, cameras have a sensitivity that allows them 
to detect changes in temperature as small as 0.01 °C. Along with its use in 
other areas of medicine, thermography has been used at the ocular level for more 
than 50 years. In healthy subjects, the literature reports that the average 
corneal temperature ranges from 32.9 to 36 °C. One of the possible sources of 
variability in normal values is age, and other possible sources of variation are 
gender and external temperature. In addition to the evaluation of healthy 
subjects, thermography has been used to evaluate its usefulness in various eye 
diseases, such as Graves' orbitopathy, and tear duct obstruction for orbital 
diseases. The ocular surface is the most studied area. Ocular surface 
temperature is influenced by multiple conditions, one of the most studied being 
dry eye; other diseases studied include allergic conjunctivitis and pterygium as 
well as systemic diseases such as carotid artery stenosis. Among the corneal 
diseases studied are keratoconus, infectious keratitis, corneal graft rejection, 
the use of scleral or soft contact lenses, and the response to refractive or 
cataract surgery. Other diseases where thermographic features have been reported 
are glaucoma, diabetic retinopathy, age-related macular degeneration, retinal 
vascular occlusions, intraocular tumors as well as scleritis, and other 
inflammatory eye diseases.

DOI: 10.3390/life13030723
PMCID: PMC10053626
PMID: 36983878

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.