1. Nat Commun. 2023 Apr 6;14(1):1920. doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-36795-4.

Distributed processing for value-based choice by prelimbic circuits targeting 
anterior-posterior dorsal striatal subregions in male mice.

Choi K(#)(1), Piasini E(#)(2)(3), Díaz-Hernández E(1), Cifuentes LV(1)(4), 
Henderson NT(1), Holly EN(1), Subramaniyan M(1), Gerfen CR(5), Fuccillo MV(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)Computational Neuroscience Initiative, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(3)Neural Computation Lab, International School for Advanced Studies (SISSA), 
Trieste, Italy.
(4)Neuroscience Graduate Group, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(5)Laboratory of Systems Neuroscience, National Institute of Mental Health 
(NIMH), Bethesda, MD, USA.
(6)Department of Neuroscience, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. fuccillo@pennmedicine.upenn.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Fronto-striatal circuits have been implicated in cognitive control of behavioral 
output for social and appetitive rewards. The functional diversity of prefrontal 
cortical populations is strongly dependent on their synaptic targets, with 
control of motor output mediated by connectivity to dorsal striatum. Despite 
evidence for functional diversity along the anterior-posterior striatal axis, it 
is unclear how distinct fronto-striatal sub-circuits support value-based choice. 
Here we found segregated prefrontal populations defined by anterior/posterior 
dorsomedial striatal target. During a feedback-based 2-alternative choice task, 
single-photon imaging revealed circuit-specific representations of task-relevant 
information with prelimbic neurons targeting anterior DMS (PL::A-DMS) robustly 
modulated during choices and negative outcomes, while prelimbic neurons 
targeting posterior DMS (PL::P-DMS) encoded internal representations of value 
and positive outcomes contingent on prior choice. Consistent with this 
distributed coding, optogenetic inhibition of PL::A-DMS circuits strongly 
impacted choice monitoring and responses to negative outcomes while inhibition 
of PL::P-DMS impaired task engagement and strategies following positive 
outcomes. Together our data uncover PL populations engaged in distributed 
processing for value-based choice.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-023-36795-4
PMCID: PMC10079960
PMID: 37024449 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.