1. Microbiol Spectr. 2023 Jun 15;11(3):e0450822. doi: 10.1128/spectrum.04508-22. 
Epub 2023 Apr 10.

ISG15 Is Required for the Dissemination of Vaccinia Virus Extracellular Virions.

Bécares M(#)(1), Albert M(#)(1), Tárrega C(1), Coloma R(1), Falqui M(1), Luhmann 
EK(2), Radoshevich L(2), Guerra S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Public Health and Microbiology, 
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Iowa Carver College 
of Medicine, Iowa City, Iowa, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Viruses have developed many different strategies to counteract immune responses, 
and Vaccinia virus (VACV) is one of a kind in this aspect. To ensure an 
efficient infection, VACV undergoes a complex morphogenetic process resulting in 
the production of two types of infective virions: intracellular mature virus 
(MV) and extracellular enveloped virus (EV), whose spread depends on different 
dissemination mechanisms. MVs disseminate after cell lysis, whereas EVs are 
released or propelled in actin tails from living cells. Here, we show that ISG15 
participates in the control of VACV dissemination. Infection of Isg15-/- mouse 
embryonic fibroblasts with VACV International Health Department-J (IHD-J) strain 
resulted in decreased EV production, concomitant with reduced induction of actin 
tails and the abolition of comet-shaped plaque formation, compared to Isg15+/+ 
cells. Transmission electron microscopy revealed the accumulation of 
intracellular virus particles and a decrease in extracellular virus particles in 
the absence of interferon-stimulated gene 15 (ISG15), a finding consistent with 
altered virus egress. Immunoblot and quantitative proteomic analysis of sucrose 
gradient-purified virions from both genotypes reported differences in protein 
levels and composition of viral proteins present on virions, suggesting an 
ISG15-mediated control of viral proteome. Lastly, the generation of a 
recombinant IHD-J expressing V5-tagged ISG15 (IHD-J-ISG15) allowed us to 
identify several viral proteins as potential ISG15 targets, highlighting the 
proteins A34 and A36, which are essential for EV formation. Altogether, our 
results indicate that ISG15 is an important host factor in the regulation of 
VACV dissemination. IMPORTANCE Viral infections are a constant battle between 
the virus and the host. While the host's only goal is victory, the main purpose 
of the virus is to spread and conquer new territories at the expense of the 
host's resources. Along millions of years of incessant encounters, poxviruses 
have developed a unique strategy consisting in the production two specialized 
"troops": intracellular mature virions (MVs) and extracellular virions (EVs). 
MVs mediate transmission between hosts, and EVs ensure advance on the 
battlefield mediating the long-range dissemination. The mechanism by which the 
virus "decides" to shed from the primary site of infection and its significant 
impact in viral transmission is not yet fully established. Here, we demonstrate 
that this process is finely regulated by ISG15/ISGylation, an interferon-induced 
ubiquitin-like protein with broad antiviral activity. Studying the mechanism 
that viruses use during infection could result in new ways of understanding our 
perpetual war against disease and how we might win the next great battle.

DOI: 10.1128/spectrum.04508-22
PMCID: PMC10269806
PMID: 37036376 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.