1. J Clin Invest. 2023 Jun 1;133(11):e165028. doi: 10.1172/JCI165028.

Circulating succinate-modifying metabolites accurately classify and reflect the 
status of fumarate hydratase-deficient renal cell carcinoma.

Zheng L(1)(2)(3)(4), Zhu ZR(1), Sneh T(5), Zhang WT(6), Wang ZY(7), Wu GY(8), He 
W(7), Qi HG(9), Wang H(10), Wu XY(1), Fernández-García J(5), Abramovich I(5), Xu 
YZ(2), Zhang J(2), Gottlieb E(5)(11).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Ministry of Health, 
Pediatric Translational Medicine Institute, Shanghai Children's Medical Center, 
School of Medicine, and.
(2)Department of Urology, Renji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiaotong 
University, Shanghai, China.
(3)Fujian Branch of Shanghai Children's Medical Center, Shanghai Jiaotong 
University School of Medicine, Fujian Children's Hospital, Fuzhou, Fujian, 
China.
(4)Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(5)Ruth and Bruce Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion - Israel Institute of 
Technology, Haifa, Israel.
(6)Hongqiao International Institute of Medicine, Shanghai Tong Ren Hospital and 
Clinical Research Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(7)Department of Pathology, and.
(8)Department of Radiology, Renji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai 
Jiaotong University, Shanghai, China.
(9)Department of Urology, the First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, 
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.
(10)Department of Urology, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, 
China.
(11)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, Texas, USA.

Comment in
    Reporting on FH-deficient renal cell carcinoma using circulating 
succinylated metabolites.

Germline or somatic loss-of-function mutations of fumarate hydratase (FH) 
predispose patients to an aggressive form of renal cell carcinoma (RCC). Since 
other than tumor resection there is no effective therapy for metastatic 
FH-deficient RCC, an accurate method for early diagnosis is needed. Although MRI 
or CT scans are offered, they cannot differentiate FH-deficient tumors from 
other RCCs. Therefore, finding noninvasive plasma biomarkers suitable for rapid 
diagnosis, screening, and surveillance would improve clinical outcomes. Taking 
advantage of the robust metabolic rewiring that occurs in FH-deficient cells, we 
performed plasma metabolomics analysis and identified 2 tumor-derived 
metabolites, succinyl-adenosine and succinic-cysteine, as excellent plasma 
biomarkers for early diagnosis. These 2 molecules reliably reflected the FH 
mutation status and tumor mass. We further identified the enzymatic 
cooperativity by which these biomarkers are produced within the tumor 
microenvironment. Longitudinal monitoring of patients demonstrated that these 
circulating biomarkers can be used for reporting on treatment efficacy and 
identifying recurrent or metastatic tumors.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI165028
PMCID: PMC10232000
PMID: 37053010 [Indexed for MEDLINE]