1. J Neurol. 2023 Aug;270(8):3675-3687. doi: 10.1007/s00415-023-11703-4. Epub
2023  Apr 20.

Characterisation and differential diagnosis of neurological complications in 
adults with phenylketonuria: literature review and expert opinion.

Merkel M(1)(2), Berg D(3), Brüggemann N(4), Classen J(5), Mainka T(6)(7), Zittel 
S(8), Muntau AC(9).

Author information:
(1)Endokrinologikum Hamburg, Lornsenstraße 6, 22767, Hamburg, Germany. 
Martin.Merkel@amedes-group.com.
(2)Asklepios Campus Hamburg, Semmelweis University, Hamburg, Germany. 
Martin.Merkel@amedes-group.com.
(3)Department of Neurology, Christian-Albrechts University, Kiel, Germany.
(4)Department of Neurology, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany.
(5)Department of Neurology, Leipzig University Medical Center, Leipzig, Germany.
(6)Department of Neurology, Charité University Medicine Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(7)Berlin Institute of Health at Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, BIH 
Biomedical Innovation Academy, BIH Charité Clinician Scientist Program, Berlin, 
Germany.
(8)Department of Neurology, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, 
Hamburg, Germany.
(9)University Children's Hospital, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, 
Hamburg, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: Phenylketonuria (PKU) is a rare inherited metabolic disorder 
characterised by elevated phenylalanine (Phe) concentrations that can exert 
neurotoxic effects if untreated or upon treatment discontinuation. This 
systematic review supported by expert opinion aims to raise awareness among the 
neurological community on neurological complications experienced by adults with 
PKU (AwPKU).
METHODS: The PubMed database was searched for articles on neurological signs and 
symptoms in AwPKU published before March 2022. In addition, two virtual advisory 
boards were held with a panel of seven neurologists and two metabolic physicians 
from Germany and Austria. Findings are supported by three illustrative patient 
cases.
RESULTS: Thirty-nine articles were included. Despite early diagnosis and 
treatment, neurological signs and symptoms (e.g. ataxia, brisk tendon reflexes, 
tremor, visual impairment) can emerge in adulthood, especially if treatment has 
been discontinued after childhood. In PKU, late-onset neurological deficits 
often co-occur with cognitive impairment and psychiatric symptoms, all of which 
can be completely or partially reversed through resumption of treatment.
CONCLUSION: Ideally, neurologists should be part of the PKU multidisciplinary 
team, either to bring lost to follow-up patients back to clinic or to manage 
symptoms in referred patients, considering that symptoms are often reversible 
upon regaining metabolic control. The current findings have been combined in a 
leaflet that will be disseminated among neurologists in Germany and Austria to 
create awareness.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-023-11703-4
PMCID: PMC10345006
PMID: 37081197 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: MM received consulting payments and/or speaker 
fees from Sanofi, Amgen, Lilly, MSD, Berlin-Chemie, Novartis, Astra, BioMarin, 
Akcea, Daiichi-Sankyo, Gilead, Novo and Pfizer. DB had no relevant conflicts of 
interest to declare. NB received consulting payments from Abbott, Abbvie, 
Biogen, BioMarin, BridgeBio, Centogene and Zambon and participated as 
investigator in clinical trials for Bial and Biogen. JC received consulting 
payments from BioMarin. TM received consulting payments and speaker fees from 
BioMarin and STADApharm GmbH, participated as investigator in clinical trials 
for Abide Therapeutics and Roche and received royalties from Elsevier Urban & 
Fisher. SZ received consulting payments from BioMarin, participated as 
investigator in clinical trials for Centogene and received speaker fees from 
Merz Pharmaceutics. ACM received consulting fees, research grants and speaker 
fees from BioMarin and participated as investigator in clinical trials for 
BioMarin and PTC.