1. Stem Cell Res Ther. 2023 May 4;14(1):120. doi: 10.1186/s13287-023-03352-1.

Harmonised culture procedures minimise but do not eliminate mesenchymal stromal 
cell donor and tissue variability in a decentralised multicentre manufacturing 
approach.

Calcat-I-Cervera S(#)(1), Rendra E(#)(2), Scaccia E(#)(2), Amadeo F(#)(3)(4)(5), 
Hanson V(4), Wilm B(3)(5), Murray P(3)(5), O'Brien T(1)(6), Taylor A(#)(3)(5), 
Bieback K(#)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)College of Medicine, Nursing and Health Science, School of Medicine, 
Regenerative Medicine Institute (REMEDI), University of Galway, Galway, Ireland.
(2)Institute of Transfusion Medicine and Immunology, Medical Faculty Mannheim, 
Heidelberg University, German Red Cross Blood Service, Baden-Württemberg-Hessen, 
Friedrich-Ebert Str. 107, 68167, Mannheim, Germany.
(3)Department of Molecular Physiology and Cell Signalling, University of 
Liverpool, Liverpool, UK.
(4)Cellular Therapies Laboratory, NHS Blood and Transplant, Liverpool, UK.
(5)Centre for Preclinical Imaging, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK.
(6)CÚRAM, SFI Research Centre for Medical Devices, University of Galway, Galway, 
Ireland.
(7)Institute of Transfusion Medicine and Immunology, Medical Faculty Mannheim, 
Heidelberg University, German Red Cross Blood Service, Baden-Württemberg-Hessen, 
Friedrich-Ebert Str. 107, 68167, Mannheim, Germany. 
Karen.Bieback@medma.uni-heidelberg.de.
(8)Mannheim Institute of Innate Immunoscience, Medical Faculty Mannheim, 
Heidelberg University, Mannheim, Germany. Karen.Bieback@medma.uni-heidelberg.de.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs), commonly sourced from adipose 
tissue, bone marrow and umbilical cord, have been widely used in many medical 
conditions due to their therapeutic potential. Yet, the still limited 
understanding of the underlying mechanisms of action hampers clinical 
translation. Clinical potency can vary considerably depending on tissue source, 
donor attributes, but importantly, also culture conditions. Lack of standard 
procedures hinders inter-study comparability and delays the progression of the 
field. The aim of this study was A- to assess the impact on MSC characteristics 
when different laboratories, performed analysis on the same MSC material using 
harmonised culture conditions and B- to understand source-specific differences.
METHODS: Three independent institutions performed a head-to-head comparison of 
human-derived adipose (A-), bone marrow (BM-), and umbilical cord (UC-) MSCs 
using harmonised culture conditions. In each centre, cells from one specific 
tissue source were isolated and later distributed across the network to assess 
their biological properties, including cell expansion, immune phenotype, and 
tri-lineage differentiation (part A). To assess tissue-specific function, 
angiogenic and immunomodulatory properties and the in vivo biodistribution were 
compared in one expert lab (part B).
RESULTS: By implementing a harmonised manufacturing workflow, we obtained 
largely reproducible results across three independent laboratories in part A of 
our study. Unique growth patterns and differentiation potential were observed 
for each tissue source, with similar trends observed between centres. Immune 
phenotyping verified expression of typical MSC surface markers and absence of 
contaminating surface markers. Depending on the established protocols in the 
different laboratories, quantitative data varied slightly. Functional 
experiments in part B concluded that conditioned media from BM-MSCs 
significantly enhanced tubulogenesis and endothelial migration in vitro. In 
contrast, immunomodulatory studies reported superior immunosuppressive abilities 
for A-MSCs. Biodistribution studies in healthy mice showed lung entrapment after 
administration of all three types of MSCs, with a significantly faster clearance 
of BM-MSCs.
CONCLUSION: These results show the heterogeneous behaviour and regenerative 
properties of MSCs as a reflection of intrinsic tissue-origin properties while 
providing evidence that the use of harmonised culture procedures can reduce but 
do not eliminate inter-lab and operator differences.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13287-023-03352-1
PMCID: PMC10161493
PMID: 37143116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests. Timothy O’Brien, co-author of this manuscript and Editor-in-Chief of 
Stem Cell Research & Therapy, declares that he was not involved in the peer 
review or decision making of this article.