1. Cancer Rep (Hoboken). 2023 Sep;6 Suppl 1(Suppl 1):e1830. doi:
10.1002/cnr2.1830.  Epub 2023 May 7.

Clinical outcomes of chemotherapy in cancer patients with different ethnicities.

Pathak S(1), Zajac KK(2), Annaji M(1), Govindarajulu M(1), Nadar RM(1), Bowen 
D(1), Babu RJ(1), Dhanasekaran M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Drug Discovery and Development, Harrison College of Pharmacy, 
Auburn University, Auburn, Alabama, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, College of Pharmacy 
and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Toledo, Toledo, Ohio, USA.

BACKGROUND: Choosing the most effective chemotherapeutic agent with safest side 
effect profile is a common challenge in cancer treatment. Although there are 
standardized chemotherapy protocols in place, protocol changes made after 
extensive clinical trials demonstrate significant improvement in the efficacy 
and tolerability of certain drugs. The pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, and 
tolerance of anti-cancer medications are all highly individualized. A driving 
force behind these differences lies within a person's genetic makeup.
RECENT FINDINGS: Pharmacogenomics, the study of how an individual's genes impact 
the processing and action of a drug, can optimize drug responsiveness and reduce 
toxicities by creating a customized medication regimen. However, these 
differences are rarely considered in the initial determination of standardized 
chemotherapeutic protocols and treatment algorithms. Because pharmacoethnicity 
is influenced by both genetic and nongenetic variables, clinical data 
highlighting disparities in the frequency of polymorphisms between different 
ethnicities is steadily growing.  Recent data suggests that ethnic variations in 
the expression of allelic variants may result in different pharmacokinetic 
properties of the anti-cancer medication. In this article, the clinical outcomes 
of various chemotherapy classes in patients of different ethnicities were 
reviewed.
CONCLUSION: Genetic and nongenetic variables contribute to the interindividual 
variability in response to chemotherapeutic drugs. Considering pharmacoethnicity 
in the initial determination of standard chemotherapeutic protocols and 
treatment algorithms can lead to better clinical outcomes of patients of 
different ethnicities.

© 2023 The Authors. Cancer Reports published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/cnr2.1830
PMCID: PMC10440845
PMID: 37150853 [Indexed for MEDLINE]