1. Function (Oxf). 2023 Apr 5;4(3):zqad015. doi: 10.1093/function/zqad015. 
eCollection 2023.

Precision Medicine in Pancreatitis: The Future of Acute Pancreatitis Care.

Garami A(1), Hegyi P(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Thermophysiology, Institute for Translational Medicine, Medical 
School, University of Pecs, Pecs H7624, Hungary.
(2)Institute for Translational Medicine, Medical School, University of Pecs, 
Pecs H7624, Hungary.
(3)Center for Translational Medicine and Institute of Pancreatic Diseases, 
Semmelweis University, Budapest H1085, Hungary.
(4)Translational Pancreatology Research Group, Interdisciplinary Centre of 
Excellence for Research Development and Innovation, University of Szeged, Szeged 
H6725, Hungary.

Acute pancreatitis (AP) continues to present a substantial burden to patients 
and healthcare personnel. Despite its occasionally severe progression and high 
mortality rate, there is no specific therapy that could be routinely applied in 
patients with AP. Here, we review treatment possibilities in AP, describe how 
the treatment approaches have changed in pancreatic cancer as an analogy, and 
point out potential causes for the failure of clinical trials on AP. We 
highlight that instead of attempting to discover generalized treatment options 
that could be used in any AP patient, it is time for a paradigm shift in the 
treatment of AP, which would help to focus more on individual patients or 
specific patient subpopulations when designing clinical trials and therapeutic 
approaches (similarly as in pancreatic cancer). Since the recruitment of 
specific patient subpopulations with AP could take excessive time if clinical 
centers work separately, the development of precision medicine in AP would 
require to establish an expert committee, eg, Pancreatitis Precision Medicine 
Interest Group, which could organize and coordinate the activities of the joined 
centers. With the joined forces of expert clinicians and leading centers, a new 
era could start in the treatment of AP, in which personalized treatment options 
could be discovered and introduced to efficiently reduce the burden of the 
disease on patients and healthcare workers.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of American 
Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1093/function/zqad015
PMCID: PMC10165548
PMID: 37168493 [Indexed for MEDLINE]