1. An Bras Dermatol. 2023 Sep-Oct;98(5):580-586. doi: 10.1016/j.abd.2022.07.009. 
Epub 2023 May 12.

A novel homozygous nonsense mutation in NECTIN4 gene in a Pakistani family with 
ectodermal dysplasia syndactyly syndrome 1.

Hajra B(1), Abdullah(2), Bibi N(3), Syed F(4), Ullah A(5), Ahmad W(2), 
Umm-E-Kalsoom(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Biological and Health Sciences, Hazara 
University, Mansehra, KP, Pakistan.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Quaid-i-Azam 
University, Islamabad, Pakistan.
(3)Department of Bioinformatics, Shaheed Benazir Bhutto Women University, 
Peshawar, KP, Pakistan.
(4)Department of General Medicine, Shaheed Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto Medical 
University, PIMS, Islamabad, Pakistan.
(5)Department of General Medicine, Shaheed Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto Medical 
University, PIMS, Islamabad, Pakistan; Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic 
Metabolic Research, Section of Metabolic Genetics, Faculty of Health and Medical 
Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(6)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Biological and Health Sciences, Hazara 
University, Mansehra, KP, Pakistan. Electronic address: kalsoom.u@hu.edu.pk.

BACKGROUND: Ectodermal dysplasia syndactyly syndrome 1 (EDSS1) is a rare 
hereditary disorder characterized by defects in teeth, hair, and nails in 
association with a fusion of the digits. Genetically, the disease phenotypes are 
caused by homozygous and compound heterozygous variants in NECTIN4 gene.
OBJECTIVE: The main objective of the study was to identify the pathogenic 
sequence variant(s) for family screening and identification of carriers.
METHODS: In the present study, the authors have investigated a large 
consanguineous family of Pakistani origin segregating autosomal recessive EDSS1. 
All the coding exons of the NECTIN4 gene were directly sequenced using 
gene-specific primers.
RESULTS: The affected individuals presented the classical EDSS1 clinical 
features including sparse hair, hypoplastic nails with thick flat discolored 
nail plates, peg-shaped, conical, and widely spaced teeth with enamel 
hypoplasia, proximal cutaneous syndactyly of fingers and toes. Sequence analysis 
of the coding region of the NECTIN4 identified a novel nonsense variant 
[c.163C>T; p.(Arg55*)] in exon-2 of the gene. Computational analysis of protein 
structure revealed that the variant induced premature termination at Arg55 
located in Ig-like V-loop region leading to loss of Ig-C2 type domains and 
transmembrane region, and most likely Nectin-4 function will be lost.
STUDY LIMITATION: Gene expression studies are absent that would have 
strengthened the findings of computational analysis.
CONCLUSION: The present study expanded the phenotypic and mutation spectrum of 
the NECTIN4 gene. Further, the study would assist in carrier testing and 
prenatal diagnosis of the affected families.

Copyright © 2023 Sociedade Brasileira de Dermatologia. Published by Elsevier 
España, S.L.U. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.abd.2022.07.009
PMCID: PMC10404504
PMID: 37183149 [Indexed for MEDLINE]