1. Mol Metab. 2023 Jul;73:101744. doi: 10.1016/j.molmet.2023.101744. Epub 2023
May  26.

Inactivation of Minar2 in mice hyperactivates mTOR signaling and results in 
obesity.

Lotfollahzadeh S(1), Xia C(2), Amraei R(3), Hua N(4), Kandror KV(5), Farmer 
SR(5), Wei W(6), Costello CE(7), Chitalia V(8), Rahimi N(9).

Author information:
(1)Renal Section, Department of Medicine, Boston University Chobanian & 
Avedisian School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Center for Biomedical Mass Spectrometry, Boston University Chobanian & 
Avedisian School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Boston University Chobanian 
& Avedisian School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Biomed Research Center, Boston University Chobanian & Avedisian School of 
Medicine, Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, Boston University Chobanian & Avedisian School of 
Medicine, Boston, MA, USA.
(6)Department of Pathology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA, 02215, USA.
(7)Center for Biomedical Mass Spectrometry, Boston University Chobanian & 
Avedisian School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA; Department of Biochemistry, 
Boston University Chobanian & Avedisian School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA. 
Electronic address: cecmsms@bu.edu.
(8)Renal Section, Department of Medicine, Boston University Chobanian & 
Avedisian School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA; Veterans Affairs Boston 
Healthcare System, Boston, MA, USA; Institute of Medical Engineering and 
Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. Electronic 
address: vichital@bu.edu.
(9)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Boston University Chobanian 
& Avedisian School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA. Electronic address: 
nrahimi@bu.edu.

OBJECTIVE: Obesity is a complex disorder and is linked to chronic diseases such 
as type 2 diabetes. Major intrinsically disordered NOTCH2-associated receptor2 
(MINAR2) is an understudied protein with an unknown role in obesity and 
metabolism. The purpose of this study was to determine the impact of Minar2 on 
adipose tissues and obesity.
METHOD: We generated Minar2 knockout (KO) mice and used various molecular, 
proteomic, biochemical, histopathology, and cell culture studies to determine 
the pathophysiological role of Minar2 in adipocytes.
RESULTS: We demonstrated that the inactivation of Minar2 results in increased 
body fat with hypertrophic adipocytes. Minar2 KO mice on a high-fat diet develop 
obesity and impaired glucose tolerance and metabolism. Mechanistically, Minar2 
interacts with Raptor, a specific and essential component of mammalian TOR 
complex 1 (mTORC1) and inhibits mTOR activation. mTOR is hyperactivated in the 
adipocytes deficient for Minar2 and over-expression of Minar2 in HEK-293 cells 
inhibited mTOR activation and phosphorylation of mTORC1 substrates, including S6 
kinase, and 4E-BP1.
CONCLUSION: Our findings identified Minar2 as a novel physiological negative 
regulator of mTORC1 with a key role in obesity and metabolic disorders. Impaired 
expression or activation of MINAR2 could lead to obesity and obesity-associated 
diseases.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier GmbH.. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molmet.2023.101744
PMCID: PMC10267597
PMID: 37245847 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.