1. Virol J. 2023 May 31;20(1):108. doi: 10.1186/s12985-023-02082-3.

2-Deoxy-D-glucose inhibits lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus propagation by 
targeting glycoprotein N-glycosylation.

Baďurová L(1)(2), Polčicová K(1), Omasta B(1), Ovečková I(1), Kocianová E(1), 
Tomášková J(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Virology, Biomedical Research Center, Slovak Academy of 
Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia.
(2)Functional Genomics and Proteomics of Plants, Central European Institute of 
Technology and National Centre for Biomolecular Research, Masaryk University, 
Brno, Czech Republic.
(3)Institute of Virology, Biomedical Research Center, Slovak Academy of 
Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia. jana.tomaskova@savba.sk.

BACKGROUND: Increased glucose uptake and utilization via aerobic glycolysis are 
among the most prominent hallmarks of tumor cell metabolism. Accumulating 
evidence suggests that similar metabolic changes are also triggered in many 
virus-infected cells. Viral propagation, like highly proliferative tumor cells, 
increases the demand for energy and macromolecular synthesis, leading to high 
bioenergetic and biosynthetic requirements. Although significant progress has 
been made in understanding the metabolic changes induced by viruses, the 
interaction between host cell metabolism and arenavirus infection remains 
unclear. Our study sheds light on these processes during lymphocytic 
choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) infection, a model representative of the 
Arenaviridae family.
METHODS: The impact of LCMV on glucose metabolism in MRC-5 cells was studied 
using reverse transcription-quantitative PCR and biochemical assays. A 
focus-forming assay and western blot analysis were used to determine the effects 
of glucose deficiency and glycolysis inhibition on the production of infectious 
LCMV particles.
RESULTS: Despite changes in the expression of glucose transporters and 
glycolytic enzymes, LCMV infection did not result in increased glucose uptake or 
lactate excretion. Accordingly, depriving LCMV-infected cells of extracellular 
glucose or inhibiting lactate production had no impact on viral propagation. 
However, treatment with the commonly used glycolytic inhibitor 2-deoxy-D-glucose 
(2-DG) profoundly reduced the production of infectious LCMV particles. This 
effect of 2-DG was further shown to be the result of suppressed N-linked 
glycosylation of the viral glycoprotein.
CONCLUSIONS: Although our results showed that the LCMV life cycle is not 
dependent on glucose supply or utilization, they did confirm the importance of 
N-glycosylation of LCMV GP-C. 2-DG potently reduces LCMV propagation not by 
disrupting glycolytic flux but by inhibiting N-linked protein glycosylation. 
These findings highlight the potential for developing new, targeted antiviral 
therapies that could be relevant to a wider range of arenaviruses.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12985-023-02082-3
PMCID: PMC10231856
PMID: 37259080 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.