1. Neural Regen Res. 2023 Nov;18(11):2459-2465. doi: 10.4103/1673-5374.371369.

Activation of medial septum cholinergic neurons restores cognitive function in 
temporal lobe epilepsy.

Chen J(1), Wang Y(1), Chen C(2), Zhang Q(1), Wang S(2), Wang Y(3), Fang J(4), 
Wang Y(5).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Neuropharmacology and Translational Medicine of Zhejiang 
Province, School of Pharmaceutical Science, The First Affiliated Hospital, 
Zhejiang Chinese Medical University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province, China.
(2)Epilepsy Center, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University, 
Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Neuropharmacology and Translational Medicine of Zhejiang 
Province, School of Pharmaceutical Science, The First Affiliated Hospital, 
Zhejiang Chinese Medical University, Hangzhou; Department of Neurology, The 
Fourth Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University, Yiwu, Zhejiang Province, China.
(4)Department of Neurology, The Fourth Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University, 
Yiwu, Zhejiang Province, China.
(5)Key Laboratory of Neuropharmacology and Translational Medicine of Zhejiang 
Province, School of Pharmaceutical Science, The First Affiliated Hospital, 
Zhejiang Chinese Medical University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province; Institute of 
Neuropsychiatric Diseases, Qingdao University, Qingdao, Shandong Province, 
China.

Cognitive impairment is the most common complication in patients with temporal 
lobe epilepsy with hippocampal sclerosis. There is no effective treatment for 
cognitive impairment. Medial septum cholinergic neurons have been reported to be 
a potential target for controlling epileptic seizures in temporal lobe epilepsy. 
However, their role in the cognitive impairment of temporal lobe epilepsy 
remains unclear. In this study, we found that patients with temporal lobe 
epilepsy with hippocampal sclerosis had a low memory quotient and severe 
impairment in verbal memory, but had no impairment in nonverbal memory. The 
cognitive impairment was slightly correlated with reduced medial septum volume 
and medial septum-hippocampus tracts measured by diffusion tensor imaging. In a 
mouse model of chronic temporal lobe epilepsy induced by kainic acid, the number 
of medial septum cholinergic neurons was reduced and acetylcholine release was 
reduced in the hippocampus. Furthermore, selective apoptosis of medial septum 
cholinergic neurons mimicked the cognitive deficits in epileptic mice, and 
activation of medial septum cholinergic neurons enhanced hippocampal 
acetylcholine release and restored cognitive function in both kainic acid- and 
kindling-induced epilepsy models. These results suggest that activation of 
medial septum cholinergic neurons reduces cognitive deficits in temporal lobe 
epilepsy by increasing acetylcholine release via projections to the hippocampus.

DOI: 10.4103/1673-5374.371369
PMCID: PMC10360079
PMID: 37282477

Conflict of interest statement: None