1. Elife. 2023 Jun 19;12:e85006. doi: 10.7554/eLife.85006.

Brain structure and function link to variation in biobehavioral dimensions 
across the psychopathological continuum.

van Oort J(1)(2), Llera A(2)(3), Kohn N(2)(3), Mei T(2)(3), Collard RM(1), 
Duyser FA(1), Vrijsen JN(2)(4), Beckmann CF(2)(3)(5), Schene AH(1)(2), Fernández 
G(2)(3), Tendolkar I(1)(2), van Eijndhoven PFP(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, 
Nijmegen, Netherlands.
(2)Department of Cognitive Neuroscience, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical 
Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands.
(3)Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behavior, Radboud University 
Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Netherlands.
(4)Pro Persona Mental Health Care, Depression Expertise Center, Nijmegen, 
Netherlands.
(5)Oxford Centre for Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging of the Brain (FMRIB), 
University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.

In line with the Research Domain Criteria (RDoC) , we set out to investigate the 
brain basis of psychopathology within a transdiagnostic, dimensional framework. 
We performed an integrative structural-functional linked independent component 
analysis to study the relationship between brain measures and a broad set of 
biobehavioral measures in a sample (n = 295) with both mentally healthy 
participants and patients with diverse non-psychotic psychiatric disorders (i.e. 
mood, anxiety, addiction, and neurodevelopmental disorders). To get a more 
complete understanding of the underlying brain mechanisms, we used gray and 
white matter measures for brain structure and both resting-state and stress 
scans for brain function. The results emphasize the importance of the executive 
control network (ECN) during the functional scans for the understanding of 
transdiagnostic symptom dimensions. The connectivity between the ECN and the 
frontoparietal network in the aftermath of stress was correlated with symptom 
dimensions across both the cognitive and negative valence domains, and also with 
various other health-related biological and behavioral measures. Finally, we 
identified a multimodal component that was specifically associated with the 
diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder (ASD). The involvement of the default mode 
network, precentral gyrus, and thalamus across the different modalities of this 
component may reflect the broad functional domains that may be affected in ASD, 
like theory of mind, motor problems, and sensitivity to sensory stimuli, 
respectively. Taken together, the findings from our extensive, exploratory 
analyses emphasize the importance of a dimensional and more integrative approach 
for getting a better understanding of the brain basis of psychopathology.

© 2023, van Oort et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.85006
PMCID: PMC10519708
PMID: 37334965 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Jv, AL, NK, TM, RC, FD, JV, CB, AS, GF, IT, Pv 
No competing interests declared