1. Adv Lab Med. 2021 Jul 5;2(4):494-515. doi: 10.1515/almed-2021-0043.
eCollection  2021 Nov.

The laboratory in the multidisciplinary diagnosis of differences or disorders of 
sex development (DSD): III) Biochemical and genetic markers in the 46,XYIV) 
Proposals for the differential diagnosis of DSD.

Granada ML(1), Audí L(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Hospital Germans Trias i Pujol, 
Autonomous University of Barcelona, Badalona, Spain.
(2)Growth and Development Research Group, Vall d'Hebron Research Institute 
(VHIR), Center for Biomedical Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), Instituto de 
Salud Carlos III, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.

OBJECTIVES: 46,XY differences/disorders of sex development (DSD) involve an 
abnormal gonadal and/or genital (external and/or internal) development caused by 
lack or incomplete intrauterine virilization, with or without the presence of 
Müllerian ducts remnants.
CONTENT: Useful biochemical markers for differential diagnosis of 46,XY DSD 
include hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal hormones such as luteinizing and 
follicle-stimulating hormones (LH and FSH; in baseline or after LHRH stimulation 
conditions), the anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH), inhibin B, insulin-like 3 
(INSL3), adrenal and gonadal steroid hormones (including cortisol, aldosterone, 
testosterone and their precursors, dihydrotestosterone and estradiol) and the 
pituitary ACTH hormone. Steroid hormones are measured at baseline or after 
stimulation with ACTH (adrenal hormones) and/or with HCG (gonadal hormones).
SUMMARY: Different patterns of hormone profiles depend on the etiology and the 
severity of the underlying disorder and the age of the patient at diagnosis. 
Molecular diagnosis includes detection of gene dosage or copy number variations, 
analysis of candidate genes or high-throughput DNA sequencing of panels of 
candidate genes or the whole exome or genome.
OUTLOOK: Differential diagnosis of 46,XX or 46,XY DSD requires a 
multidisciplinary approach, including patient history and clinical, 
morphological, imaging, biochemical and genetic data. We propose a diagnostic 
algorithm suitable for a newborn with DSD that focuses mainly on biochemical and 
genetic data.

© 2021 Maria Luisa Granada and Laura Audí, published by De Gruyter, 
Berlin/Boston.

DOI: 10.1515/almed-2021-0043
PMCID: PMC10197773
PMID: 37360892

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: Authors state no conflict 
of interest.