1. Front Immunol. 2023 Jun 15;14:1179846. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1179846. 
eCollection 2023.

Chaperone function in antigen presentation by MHC class I molecules-tapasin in 
the PLC and TAPBPR beyond.

Margulies DH(1), Jiang J(1), Ahmad J(1), Boyd LF(1), Natarajan K(1).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Biology Section, Laboratory of Immune System Biology, National 
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD, United States.

Peptide loading of MHC-I molecules plays a critical role in the T cell response 
to infections and tumors as well as to interactions with inhibitory receptors on 
natural killer (NK) cells. To facilitate and optimize peptide acquisition, 
vertebrates have evolved specialized chaperones to stabilize MHC-I molecules 
during their biosynthesis and to catalyze peptide exchange favoring high 
affinity or optimal peptides to permit transport to the cell surface where 
stable peptide/MHC-I (pMHC-I) complexes are displayed and are available for 
interaction with T cell receptors and any of a host of inhibitory and activating 
receptors. Although components of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) resident 
peptide loading complex (PLC) were identified some 30 years ago, the detailed 
biophysical parameters that govern peptide selection, binding, and surface 
display have recently been understood better with advances in structural methods 
including X-ray crystallography, cryogenic electron microscopy (cryo-EM), and 
computational modeling. These approaches have provided refined mechanistic 
illustration of the molecular events involved in the folding of the MHC-I heavy 
chain, its coordinate glycosylation, assembly with its light chain, 
β2-microglobulin (β2m), its association with the PLC, and its binding of 
peptides. Our current view of this important cellular process as it relates to 
antigen presentation to CD8+ T cells is based on many different approaches: 
biochemical, genetic, structural, computational, cell biological, and 
immunological. In this review, taking advantage of recent X-ray and cryo-EM 
structural evidence and molecular dynamics simulations, examined in the context 
of past experiments, we attempt a dispassionate evaluation of the details of 
peptide loading in the MHC-I pathway. By critical evaluation of several decades 
of investigation, we outline aspects of the peptide loading process that are 
well-understood and indicate those that demand further detailed investigation. 
Further studies should contribute not only to basic understanding, but also to 
applications for immunization and therapy of tumors and infections.

Copyright © 2023 Margulies, Jiang, Ahmad, Boyd and Natarajan.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1179846
PMCID: PMC10308438
PMID: 37398669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.