1. Hered Cancer Clin Pract. 2023 Jul 3;21(1):11. doi: 10.1186/s13053-023-00256-2.

BRCA1/2 potential founder variants in the Jordanian population: an opportunity 
for a customized screening panel.

Ahmad O(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Sutter C(3), Hirsch S(1)(2)(3), Pfister SM(1)(2)(6), 
Schaaf CP(7).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Neurooncology, Hopp Children's Cancer Center (KiTZ), 
Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Division of Pediatric Neurooncology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), 
German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(5)King Hussein Cancer Center (KHCC), Amman, Jordan.
(6)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Heidelberg University 
Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany.
(7)Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany. 
Christian.Schaaf@med.uni-heidelberg.de.

A founder variant is a genetic alteration, that is inherited from a common 
ancestor together with a surrounding chromosomal segment, and is observed at a 
high frequency in a defined population. This founder effect occurs as a 
consequence of long-standing inbreeding of isolated populations. For high-risk 
cancer predisposition genes, such as BRCA1/2, the identification of founder 
variants in a certain population could help designing customized cost-effective 
cancer screening panels. This advantage has been best utilized in designing a 
customized breast cancer BRCA screening panel for the Ashkenazi Jews (AJ) 
population, composed of the three BRCA founder variants which account for 
approximately 90% of identified BRCA alterations. Indeed, the high prevalence of 
pathogenic BRCA1/2 variants among AJ (~ 2%) has additionally contributed to make 
population-based screening cost-effective in comparison to family-history-based 
screening. In Jordan there are multiple demographic characteristics supporting 
the proposal of a founder effect. A high consanguinity rate of ~ 57% in the 
nineties of the last century and ~ 30% more recently is a prominent factor, in 
addition to inbreeding which is often practiced by different sub-populations of 
the country.This review explains the concept of founder effect, then applies it 
to analyze published Jordanian BRCA variants, and concludes that nine pathogenic 
(P) and likely pathogenic (LP) BRCA2 variants together with one pathogenic BRCA1 
variant are potential founder variants. Together they make up 43% and 55% of all 
identified BRCA1/2 alterations in the two largest studied cohorts of young 
patients and high-risk patients respectively. These variants were identified 
based on being recurrent and either specific to ethnic groups or being novel. In 
addition, the report highlights the required testing methodologies to validate 
these findings, and proposes a health economic evaluation model to test 
cost-effectiveness of a population-based customized BRCA screening panel for the 
Jordanian population. The aim of this report is to highlight the potential 
utilization of founder variants in establishing customized cancer predisposition 
services, in order to encourage more population-based genomic studies in Jordan 
and similar populations.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13053-023-00256-2
PMCID: PMC10316545
PMID: 37400873

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.