1. Heliyon. 2023 Jun 16;9(6):e17379. doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e17379. 
eCollection 2023 Jun.

Ameliorative effect of ethanolic extract of Carica papaya leaves on 
hyper-cholesterolemic rats: The egg yolk induced model.

Ademuyiwa OH(1), Fasogbon BM(1), Bamidele OP(2), Ukpo GE(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Food Technology, Federal Institute of Industrial Research, 
Lagos, Nigeria.
(2)Department of Food Science and Technology, University of Venda, Limpopo 
Province, South Africa.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of 
Lagos, Nigeria.

Cardiovascular disease is one of the leading killers in the world today, and 
hyperlipidemia is one of the main risk factors. The prevalence of hyperlipidemia 
is rising dramatically worldwide and is mostly felt in poorer nations. The 
majority of communities and individuals in Africa are known to turn to 
ethnomedicine for their medical requirements. The tropical plant Carica papaya, 
which is grown for its edible, ripe fruit in Africa, was used in folk medicine 
for treatment of cardiovascular issues as well as a number of serious illnesses. 
This study assessed the anticholesterolemic property of the ethanolic extracts 
of Carica papaya leaves, adapting the egg yolk-induced hyperlipidaemia model in 
Wistar albino rats. This study prepared egg yolk to induce hyperlipidaemia in 
the Wistar rats, then treated some groups with the extract of Carica papaya 
leaves, and other groups with the standard drug Fenofibrate. The Wistar rats in 
the control group were given 2% acacia instead of egg yolk. The total 
cholesterol, triglycerides, as well as biological and haematological parameters, 
were determined. The Carica papaya leaves extracts significantly (p<0.05) 
decreased the total cholesterol and LDL cholesterol levels at all doses 
administered, but the extract and the standard drug had no significant effect on 
HDL cholesterol. An inverse relationship between the Carica papaya leaves 
extract doses and the cholesterol levels was observed placing the efficacy in 
the order of 100 mg/kg > 250 mg/kg > Fenofibrate (2.29 mg/kg) > 500 mg/kg. With 
the potential efficacy of Carica papaya leaves extract in the treatment of 
hypercholesterolemia and, as a result, cardiovascular diseases, more research on 
bioactive molecule isolation/characterisation for pharmaceutical use or 
incorporation into functional food products for CVD management is required.

© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e17379
PMCID: PMC10333609
PMID: 37441376

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.