1. Health Sci Rep. 2023 Jul 11;6(7):e1418. doi: 10.1002/hsr2.1418. eCollection
2023  Jul.

Collateral sensitivity: An evolutionary trade-off between antibiotic resistance 
mechanisms, attractive for dealing with drug-resistance crisis.

Yekani M(1)(2)(3), Azargun R(4), Sharifi S(5), Nabizadeh E(2), Nahand JS(2), 
Ansari NK(6), Memar MY(2), Soki J(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine Kashan University of Medical 
Sciences Kashan Iran.
(2)Infectious and Tropical Diseases Research Center Tabriz University of Medical 
Sciences Tabriz Iran.
(3)Student Research Committee Kashan University of Medical Sciences Kashan Iran.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine Maragheh University of 
Medical Science Maragheh Iran.
(5)Dental and Periodontal Research Center Tabriz University of Medical Sciences 
Tabriz Iran.
(6)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine Tabriz University of Medical 
Sciences Tabriz Iran.
(7)Institute of Medical Microbiology, Albert Szent-Györgyi Faculty of Medicine 
University of Szeged Szeged Hungary.

BACKGROUND: The discovery and development of antimicrobial drugs were one of the 
most significant advances in medicine, but the evolution of microbial resistance 
limited the efficiency of these drugs.
AIM: This paper reviews the collateral sensitivity in bacteria and its potential 
and limitation as a new target for treating infections.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: Knowledge mechanisms of resistance to antimicrobial 
agents are useful to trace a practical approach to treat and control of 
resistant pathogens. The effect of a resistance mechanism to certain antibiotics 
on the susceptibility or resistance to other drugs is a key point that may be 
helpful for applying a strategy to control resistance challenges. In an 
evolutionary trade-off known as collateral sensitivity, the resistance mechanism 
to a certain drug may be mediated by the hypersensitivity to other drugs. 
Collateral sensitivity has been described for different drugs in various 
bacteria, but the molecular mechanisms affecting susceptibility are not well 
demonstrated. Collateral sensitivity could be studied to detect its potential in 
the battle against resistance crisis as well as in the treatment of pathogens 
adapting to antibiotics. Collateral sensitivity-based antimicrobial therapy may 
have the potential to limit the emergence of antibiotic resistance.

© 2023 The Authors. Health Science Reports published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/hsr2.1418
PMCID: PMC10336338
PMID: 37448730

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.