1. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2024 Apr;66(4):445-455. doi: 10.1111/dmcn.15687. Epub
2023  Jul 19.

Bachmann-Bupp syndrome and treatment.

Bachmann AS(1)(2), VanSickle EA(2)(3), Michael J(2)(3), Vipond M(2)(3), Bupp 
CP(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Human Development, College of Human Medicine, 
Michigan State University, Grand Rapids, MI, USA.
(2)International Center for Polyamine Disorders, Grand Rapids, MI, USA.
(3)Corewell Health, Helen DeVos Children's Hospital, Grand Rapids, MI, USA.

Bachmann-Bupp syndrome (BABS) is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by 
developmental delay, hypotonia, and varying forms of non-congenital alopecia. 
The condition is caused by 3'-end mutations of the ornithine decarboxylase 1 
(ODC1) gene, which produce carboxy (C)-terminally truncated variants of ODC, a 
pyridoxal 5'-phosphate-dependent enzyme. C-terminal truncation of ODC prevents 
its ubiquitin-independent proteasomal degradation and leads to cellular 
accumulation of ODC enzyme that remains catalytically active. ODC is the first 
rate-limiting enzyme that converts ornithine to putrescine in the polyamine 
pathway. Polyamines (putrescine, spermidine, spermine) are aliphatic molecules 
found in all forms of life and are important during embryogenesis, 
organogenesis, and tumorigenesis. BABS is an ultra-rare condition with few 
reported cases, but it serves as a convincing example for drug repurposing 
therapy. α-Difluoromethylornithine (DFMO, also known as eflornithine) is an ODC 
inhibitor with a strong safety profile in pediatric use for neuroblastoma and 
other cancers as well as West African sleeping sickness (trypanosomiasis). 
Patients with BABS have been treated with DFMO and have shown improvement in 
hair growth, muscle tone, and development.

© 2023 The Authors. Developmental Medicine & Child Neurology published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Mac Keith Press.

DOI: 10.1111/dmcn.15687
PMCID: PMC10796844
PMID: 37469105 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT ASB and CPB are 
listed inventors of a US patent based on the method of treating or preventing 
developmental disorders associated with mutations in the ODC1 gene, and Michigan 
State University and Corewell Health have an exclusive licensing agreement with 
Orbus Therapeutics. CPB provides consulting services for Orbus Therapeutics. All 
other authors authors have stated that they had no interests that might be 
perceived as posing a conflict or bias.