1. Front Pharmacol. 2023 Jul 6;14:1200199. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2023.1200199. 
eCollection 2023.

Anaphylactoid reactions induced by Shuanghuanglian injection and Shenmai 
injection and metabolomics analysis.

Zhang C(1)(1), Ouyang L(1), Zhang X(1)(1), Wen W(1)(1), Xu Y(1), Li S(1), Li 
Y(1)(1), He F(1)(1), Liu W(1)(1), Liu H(1).

Author information:
(1)The First Hospital of Hunan University of Chinese Medicine, Changsha, China.

Introduction: Shuanghuanglian injection (lyophilized) (SHLI) is commonly used to 
treat respiratory tract infection. Shenmai injection (SMI) is mainly used to 
treat cardiovascular diseases. Despite their widespread clinical use, 
anaphylactoid reactions (ARs) induced by SHLI and SMI have been reported, which 
have attracted broad attention. However, the impact of ARs on metabolic changes 
and the underlying mechanisms are still unclear. Methods: ICR mice were used as 
model animals and were treated with normal saline, C48/80, SHLI and SMI, 
respectively. The behavior of mice, auricle blue staining and Evans Blue 
exudation were used as indexes to evaluate the sensitization of SHLI and SMI and 
determine the optimal sensitization dose. Anaphylactoid mice model was 
established based on the optimal dose and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
(ELISA) was used to model verification. Afterwards, plasma samples of 
administered mice were profiled by LC-MS metabolomics and analyzed to evaluate 
the changes in metabolites. Results: High doses of both SHLI and SMI can induce 
severe anaphylactoid reactions while the reaction induced by SMI was weaker. A 
Partial Least-Squares Discriminant Analysis (PLS-DA) score plot indicated that 
following administration, significant metabolic changes occurred in mice. 23 
distinct metabolites, including deoxycholic acid, histamine, and 
5-hydroxytryptophan, were identified in the SHLI groups. 11 distinct 
metabolites, including androsterone, 17α-hydroxypregnenolone, and 
5-hydroxyindoleacetate, were identified in the SMI groups. Meanwhile, different 
metabolic pathways of SHLI and SMI were predicted by different metabolites. The 
associated metabolic pathways include steroid hormone biosynthesis, tryptophan 
metabolism, histidine metabolism, arachidonic acid metabolism, nicotinate and 
nicotinamide metabolism, and primary bile acid biosynthesis. Conclusion: Study 
showed that both SHLI and SMI can induce varying degrees of anaphylactoid 
reactions, a positive correlation between response intensity and dose was 
observed. Metabolomics showed that SHLI and SMI may promote the simultaneous 
release of hormones and inflammatory factors by disturbing relevant metabolic 
pathways, while SMI may also inhibit the release of inflammatory factors in 
arachidonic acid metabolic pathway, indicating both pro-inflammatory and 
anti-inflammatory effects. This study will serve as a reference for developing a 
new approach to evaluate the safety of SHLI and SMI from perspective of 
susceptible drug varieties. However, ARs mechanism requires further 
verification.

Copyright © 2023 Zhang, Ouyang, Zhang, Wen, Xu, Li, Li, He, Liu and Liu.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2023.1200199
PMCID: PMC10358984
PMID: 37484014

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.