1. Pharmaceuticals (Basel). 2023 Jul 3;16(7):956. doi: 10.3390/ph16070956.

Affibody Molecules Intended for Receptor-Mediated Transcytosis via the 
Transferrin Receptor.

Hjelm LC(1), Lindberg H(1), Ståhl S(1), Löfblom J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Protein Science, School of Engineering Sciences in Chemistry, 
Biotechnology and Health, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, 106 91 Stockholm, 
Sweden.

The development of biologics for diseases affecting the central nervous system 
has been less successful compared to other disease areas, in part due to the 
challenge of delivering drugs to the brain. The most well-investigated and 
successful strategy for increasing brain uptake of biological drugs is using 
receptor-mediated transcytosis over the blood-brain barrier and, in particular, 
targeting the transferrin receptor-1 (TfR). Here, affibody molecules are 
selected for TfR using phage display technology. The two most interesting 
candidates demonstrated binding to human TfR, cross-reactivity to the murine 
orthologue, non-competitive binding with human transferrin, and binding to 
TfR-expressing brain endothelial cell lines. Single amino acid mutagenesis of 
the affibody molecules revealed the binding contribution of individual residues 
and was used to develop second-generation variants with improved properties. The 
second-generation variants were further analyzed and showed an ability for 
transcytosis in an in vitro transwell assay. The new TfR-specific affibody 
molecules have the potential for the development of small brain shuttles for 
increasing the uptake of various compounds to the central nervous system and 
thus warrant further investigations.

DOI: 10.3390/ph16070956
PMCID: PMC10383291
PMID: 37513868

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest, and 
the funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, 
or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision 
to publish the results.