1. Materials (Basel). 2023 Jul 25;16(15):5217. doi: 10.3390/ma16155217.

Study on Fatigue Cracking of Diaphragm's Arc Opening of OSD in Steel Bridges by 
Using Biaxial Stress Method.

Zeng Y(1)(2), Kang H(1)(2), Li X(1)(2), Li Z(1)(2), Xiao Y(1)(2), Zhou J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Mountain Bridge and Tunnel Engineering, Chongqing 
Jiaotong University, Chongqing 400074, China.
(2)Mountain Bridge and Materials Engineering Research Center of Ministry of 
Education, Chongqing Jiaotong University, Chongqing 400074, China.

Changes in loading position have a significant impact on the stress field of 
each vulnerable area of an orthotropic steel deck (OSD). The arc opening area of 
the diaphragm and the connecting area between the U-rib and the diaphragm under 
the moving load are prone to fatigue cracking. By comparing the stress responses 
under different methods, the hot spot stress (HSS) method is used as the main 
stress extraction method in fatigue performance evaluation. The control stress 
of fatigue cracking was analyzed by comparing the direction of the principal 
stress field with the crack direction in this experiment. According to the 
stress amplitude deviation under the biaxial stress state, a set of methods for 
evaluating the effects of in-plane biaxial fatigue was developed. An improved 
luffing fatigue assessment S-N curve was applied to analyze the fatigue life of 
the diaphragm's arc opening area. The results show that when the moving load is 
exactly above the connection of the deck and the web of the U-rib on one side, 
it is in the most unfavorable position in the transverse direction, and the 
diaphragm is mainly under the in-plane stress state. The longitudinal range of 
the stress influence line of the arc opening is approximately twice the 
diaphragm spacing. Two to three stress cycles are caused by one fatigue load. 
Fatigue crack control stress is the principal stress tangential to the arc 
opening's edge in this area. The normal direction of the principal stress in the 
model test is roughly consistent with the crack initiation direction. The 
variation in the stress amplitude deviation in this area is caused by changes in 
the action position of the moving load. When the moving load is at a certain 
distance from the involved diaphragm, it is reduced to zero, implying that the 
in-plane fatigue effect is the greatest in this area.

DOI: 10.3390/ma16155217
PMCID: PMC10419708
PMID: 37569931

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflicts 
of interest regarding the publication of this paper.