1. Mol Genet Genomic Med. 2023 Dec;11(12):e2256. doi: 10.1002/mgg3.2256. Epub
2023  Aug 18.

Expanding the allelic spectrum of ELOVL4-related autosomal recessive 
neuro-ichthyosis.

Alabdulrazzaq F(1)(2), Alanzi T(3), Al-Balool HH(4), Gardham A(5), Wakeling 
E(6), Leitch HG(5)(7)(8), AlSayed M(9)(10), Abdulrahim M(11), Aladwani A(4), 
Romito A(12), Kampe K(12), Ferdinandusse S(13)(14), Aboelanine AH(4), Abdullah 
A(1), Alwadani A(4), Bastaki L(4), Vaz FM(13)(14), Bertoli-Avella AM(12), Marafi 
D(1)(4)(15).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Adan Hospital, Ministry of Health, Hadiya, Kuwait.
(2)Kuwait Institute of Medical Specialization, Sulaibkikhat, Kuwait.
(3)Division Medical Genetics and Metabolic, Department of Pediatrics, Prince 
Sultan Military Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Kuwait Medical Genetics Centre, Ministry of Health, Sulaibikhat, Kuwait.
(5)North West Thames Regional Genetics Service, Northwick Park Hospital, Harrow, 
UK.
(6)North East Thames Regional Genetics Service, Great Ormond Street Hospital, 
London, UK.
(7)Medical Research Council, London Institute of Medical Sciences, London, UK.
(8)Institute of Clinical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, 
London, UK.
(9)Department of Medical Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research 
Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(10)Faculty of Medicine, Alfaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(11)King Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz University Hospital, Princess Nourah Bint 
Abdulrahman University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(12)CENTOGENE GmbH, Rostock, Germany.
(13)Amsterdam UMC Location University of Amsterdam, Department of Clinical 
Chemistry and Pediatrics, Laboratory Genetic Metabolic Diseases, Emma Children's 
Hospital, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(14)Amsterdam Gastroenterology Endocrinology Metabolism, Inborn Errors of 
Metabolism, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(15)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Kuwait University, Safat, 
Kuwait.

BACKGROUND: Very long-chain fatty acids (VLCFAs) composed of more than 20 carbon 
atoms are essential in the biosynthesis of cell membranes in the brain, skin, 
and retina. VLCFAs are elongated beyond 28 carbon atoms by ELOVL4 enzyme. 
Variants in ELOVL4 are associated with three Mendelian disorders: autosomal 
dominant (AD) Stargardt-like macular dystrophy type 3, AD spinocerebellar 
ataxia, and autosomal recessive disorder congenital ichthyosis, spastic 
quadriplegia and impaired intellectual development (ISQMR). Only seven subjects 
from five unrelated families with ISQMR have been described, all of which have 
biallelic single-nucleotide variants.
METHODS: We performed clinical exome sequencing on probands from four unrelated 
families with neuro-ichthyosis.
RESULTS: We identified three novel homozygous ELOVL4 variants. Two of the 
families originated from the same Saudi tribe and had the exact homozygous 
exonic deletion in ELOVL4, while the third and fourth probands had two different 
novel homozygous missense variants. Seven out of the eight affected subjects had 
profound developmental delay, epilepsy, axial hypotonia, peripheral hypertonia, 
and ichthyosis. Delayed myelination and corpus callosum hypoplasia were seen in 
two of five subjects with brain magnetic rosonance imaging and cerebral atrophy 
in three.
CONCLUSION: Our study expands the allelic spectrum of ELOVL4-related ISQMR. The 
detection of the same exonic deletion in two unrelated Saudi family from same 
tribe suggests a tribal founder mutation.

© 2023 The Authors. Molecular Genetics & Genomic Medicine published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/mgg3.2256
PMCID: PMC10724518
PMID: 37592902 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: AR, KK, and AMBA are employees of CENTOGENE 
GmbH. Other authors have no potential conflicts to report.