1. Thyroid. 2023 Sep;33(9):1013-1028. doi: 10.1089/thy.2023.0169. Epub 2023 Sep
1.

Thyroid Stimulating Hormone and Thyroid Hormones (Triiodothyronine and 
Thyroxine): An American Thyroid Association-Commissioned Review of Current 
Clinical and Laboratory Status.

Van Uytfanghe K(1), Ehrenkranz J(2), Halsall D(3), Hoff K(4), Loh TP(5), Spencer 
CA(6), Köhrle J(7).

Author information:
(1)Ref4U-Laboratory of Toxicology, Department of Bioanalysis, Faculty of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, California Institute of 
Technology, Pasadena, California, USA.
(3)Cambridge University Hospitals Trust, Addenbrookes Hospital, Cambridge, 
United Kingdom.
(4)American Thyroid Association, Headquarters, Alexandria, Virginia, USA.
(5)Department of Laboratory Medicine, National University Hospital, Singapore, 
Singapore.
(6)Department of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, 
California, USA.
(7)Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie Universität 
Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin Institute of Health, 
Institut für Experimentelle Endokrinologie, Berlin, Germany.

Background: Despite being the most performed laboratory endocrine investigation, 
the optimum use of thyroid tests (thyrotropin [TSH] and thyroid hormone [TH] 
measurement) is open to question and the interpretation of the results from 
these tests can be ambiguous. The American Thyroid Association (ATA) with its 
expertise support the endeavor of the U.S. Centers for Disease Control (CDC) and 
the International Federation of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine 
(IFCC) to improve and maintain standardization and harmonization of thyroid 
testing. ATA mandated an international interdisciplinary working group panel to 
survey the status of thyroid testing by reviewing the recent literature to 
revise or update the criteria as needed in mutual agreement and to inform 
clinical care. Summary: This review represents the conclusions on the clinical 
use of current routine TSH and TH (thyroxine [T4] and triiodothyronine [T3]) 
assays, taking into account geographic differences in disease prevalence and 
clinical and laboratory practice among writing members. The interaction between 
physiological, pathophysiological, and pharmacological factors and thyroid 
assays can affect their measurements and confound result interpretation. These 
factors need to be considered in the clinical context of the patient for 
appropriate test ordering and result interpretation. Despite significant 
advances in laboratory methods over the past 50 years, routine thyroid assays 
remain susceptible to idiosyncratic analytical interference that may produce 
spurious results. Improved standardization needs to be demonstrated through 
ongoing international efforts before results from different assays can be 
considered equivalent. Emerging technology (e.g., mass spectrometry) shows 
promise for improved analytical performance, but more evidence of its clinical 
utility and improved throughput is required before it can be considered for 
routine use. Close clinical-laboratory collaboration is encouraged to overcome 
and avoid the pitfalls in thyroid testing as well as resolve clinically 
discrepant results. The evidence base supporting the conclusions of this review 
is summarized in four detailed online technical supplements. Conclusions: Over 
the past five decades, testing for TSH, T4, and T3 has evolved from manual 
radioisotopic immunoassays to nonisotopic multiplexed immunometric assays using 
highly automated equipment. Despite these technical advances, physicians and 
laboratorians performing these analyses must understand limitations of these 
methods to properly order tests and interpret results.

DOI: 10.1089/thy.2023.0169
PMCID: PMC10517335
PMID: 37655789 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: K.V.U., J.E., D.H., T.P.L., C.A.S., and J.K. 
have nothing to declare. K.H. is employed by ATA. MANAGEMENT OF POTENTIAL 
COMPETING INTERESTS: In efforts to minimize to the very greatest extent possible 
any potential influences of conflicts of interest on the opinions herein 
expressed, no personal financial conflicts of interest were permitted of the 
Thyroid Function Test (TFT) Writing Group chair and of all TFT Writing Group 
members from the outset. At inception, competing interests of the authors were 
reviewed by the TFT Writing Group Chair as well as the ATA Guidelines and 
Statements Committee and the ATA Laboratory Services Committee. Authors were 
also approved by the ATA Laboratory Services Committee and the ATA Guidelines 
and Statements Committee. Potential competing interests acquired during the 
development of the TFT special article were revisited periodically and again 
upon completion of the article, striving to assure continued compliance. All 
later acquired identified potential financial competing interests are declared 
in the article (Supplementary Material), which was reviewed by the ATA 
Guidelines and Statements Committee and the Board of Directors. As a technical 
note, conflicts of authors' institutions of employment were deemed 
nonexclusionary. No external funding from industry was received by the ATA or by 
authors for TFT Writing Group special article. In efforts to minimize to the 
very greatest extent possible any potential influences of conflicts of interest 
on the opinions herein expressed, no personal financial conflicts of interest 
were permitted of the Thyroid Function Test (TFT) Writing Group chair and of all 
TFT Writing Group members from the outset. At inception, competing interests of 
the authors were reviewed by the TFT Writing Group Chair as well as the ATA 
Guidelines and Statements Committee and the ATA Laboratory Services Committee. 
Authors were also approved by the ATA Laboratory Services Committee and the ATA 
Guidelines and Statements Committee. Potential competing interests acquired 
during the development of the TFT special article were revisited periodically 
and again upon completion of the article, striving to assure continued 
compliance. All later acquired identified potential financial competing 
interests are declared in the article (Supplementary Material), which was 
reviewed by the ATA Guidelines and Statements Committee and the Board of 
Directors. As a technical note, conflicts of authors' institutions of employment 
were deemed nonexclusionary. No external funding from industry was received by 
the ATA or by authors for TFT Writing Group special article.