1. Front Genet. 2023 Aug 29;14:1225197. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1225197. 
eCollection 2023.

Transcriptional diversity of the oxytocin receptor in prairie voles: mechanistic 
implications for behavioral neuroscience and maternal physiology.

Danoff JS(#)(1)(2), Page EA(#)(1)(2), Perkeybile AM(1)(2), Kenkel WM(3), Yee 
JR(4), Ferris CF(5), Carter CS(1), Connelly JJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, United 
States.
(2)Program in Fundamental Neuroscience, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, 
VA, United States.
(3)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of Delaware, 
Newark, DE, United States.
(4)Institute of Animal Welfare Science, University of Veterinary Medicine, 
Vienna, WIE, Austria.
(5)Department of Psychology, Center for Translational Neuroimaging, Northeastern 
University, Boston, MA, United States.
(#)Contributed equally

The neurohormone oxytocin regulates many aspects of physiology primarily by 
binding to its receptor, the oxytocin receptor. The oxytocin receptor gene 
(Oxtr) has been shown to have alternative transcripts in the mouse brain which 
may each have different biological functions or be used in specific contexts. A 
popular animal model for studying oxytocin-dependent social behaviors is the 
prairie vole, a biparental and monogamous rodent. Alternative transcriptional 
capacity of Oxtr in prairie voles is unknown. We used 5' rapid amplification of 
cDNA ends to identify alternative Oxtr transcription start sites in prairie vole 
brain tissue and uterine tissue. We then validated expression of specific 
transcripts in fetal brains and assessed the impact of exogenous oxytocin 
administration in utero on offspring brain development. We identified seven 
distinct Oxtr transcripts, all of which are present in both brain and uterine 
tissue. We then demonstrated that maternal oxytocin administration alters 
expression of a specific subset of Oxtr transcripts and that these different 
transcripts are under unique epigenetic regulation, such that in the perinatal 
period only one of the alternative transcripts is associated with DNA 
methylation in the Oxtr promoter. These data establish the existence of multiple 
Oxtr transcripts in prairie vole brain and uterine tissue and implicate oxytocin 
in the regulation of alternative transcript expression. These data have 
significant implications for our understanding of null mutant models in both 
mice and voles and translation in human birth and behavior.

Copyright © 2023 Danoff, Page, Perkeybile, Kenkel, Yee, Ferris, Carter and 
Connelly.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1225197
PMCID: PMC10495980
PMID: 37705612

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.