1. Int Med Case Rep J. 2023 Sep 21;16:571-578. doi: 10.2147/IMCRJ.S432333. 
eCollection 2023.

Struma Ovarii with Papillary Thyroid Carcinoma and Metastasis to the Appendix: A 
Case Report and Literature Review.

Abera SA(1), Molla DK(1), Abera KA(1), Adisu GD(1), Worku MA(2), Molla YD(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomic Pathology, College of Medicine and Health Sciences, 
University of Gondar, Gondar, Ethiopia.
(2)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, College of Medicine and Health 
Sciences, University of Gondar, Gondar, Ethiopia.
(3)Department of Surgery, College of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of 
Gondar, Gondar, Ethiopia.

Struma ovarii is an infrequent type of teratoma arising from the ovary 
accounting for only 2% of all ovarian teratomas. These tumors have a benign 
biology with rare malignant transformation in about 3% of cases. The most common 
malignant transformation that arises from struma ovarii is papillary thyroid 
carcinoma. These neoplasms act in the same way as those arising from the thyroid 
gland, but due to the rarity of their occurrence there is still a debate over 
therapeutic options. We present a case of a 41-year-old Ethiopian Para IX woman 
presented with abdominal swelling for four years, accompanied by dull pain, 
satiety, and weight loss. Her vital signs were normal, and her abdominal 
examination revealed a large abdominopelvic mass. Her CA-125 was elevated, and 
her blood count, organ function tests, and serum electrolyte levels were normal. 
Abdominal ultrasound revealed a complex abdominopelvic mass with cystic and 
solid components, possibly ovarian teratoma. The patient underwent surgery, 
revealing a 14 by 10 cm right ovarian mass and a 3×3 cm appendiceal mass. 
Subsequently, total abdominal hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, 
total omentectomy, and appendectomy was done. Histopathologic evaluation 
revealed follicular proliferation of enlarged cells, with no papillary growth 
pattern. The case was diagnosed as malignant struma ovarii, a follicular variant 
of papillary thyroid carcinoma (FVPTC) with secondary deposits on the appendix. 
A complete thyroidectomy was done after the histopathology diagnosis. Malignant 
struma ovarii is rare making it challenging to treat since there are no 
established prognosticating histopathologic or clinical characteristics. The 
tumor size and metastasis determine the surgical treatment scope. Large-scale 
investigations are essential for prognostication and treatment options 
considering pathologic traits.

© 2023 Abera et al.

DOI: 10.2147/IMCRJ.S432333
PMCID: PMC10519172
PMID: 37753203

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.