1. Nat Cancer. 2024 Jan;5(1):30-46. doi: 10.1038/s43018-023-00650-8. Epub 2023
Oct  16.

An in vitro-transcribed circular RNA targets the mitochondrial inner membrane 
cardiolipin to ablate EIF4G2(+)/PTBP1(+) pan-adenocarcinoma.

Feng Z(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6), Zhang X(3)(4)(5)(6), Zhou J(7), Li Q(7), Chu L(2), Di 
G(1), Xu Z(7), Chen Q(1), Wang M(8), Jiang X(9), Xia H(10)(11), Chen 
X(12)(13)(14)(15).

Author information:
(1)The Translational Research Institute for Neurological Disorders & 
Interdisciplinary Research Center of Neuromedicine and Chemical Biology of 
Wannan Medical College, Department of Neurosurgery, Department of Intensive Care 
Medicine, the First Affiliated Hospital of Wannan Medical College (Yijishan 
Hospital of Wannan Medical College), Wuhu, China.
(2)Zhongda Hospital, School of Medicine & School of Biological Sciences and 
Medical Engineering, Advanced Institute for Life and Health & Interdisciplinary 
Innovation Institute for Medicine and Engineering, Southeast University, 
Nanjing, China.
(3)Departments of Diagnostic Radiology, Surgery, Chemical and Biomolecular 
Engineering, and Biomedical Engineering, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine and 
College of Design and Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore, 
Singapore.
(4)Clinical Imaging Research Centre, Centre for Translational Medicine, Yong Loo 
Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.
(5)Nanomedicine Translational Research Program, NUS Center for Nanomedicine, 
Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore, 
Singapore.
(6)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Agency for Science, Technology, and 
Research (A*STAR), Proteos, Singapore, Singapore.
(7)Department of Anatomy, School of Basic Medicine & School of Medical 
Imageology, Anhui Province Key laboratory of Active Biological Macro-molecules 
Research, Wannan Medical College, Wuhu, China.
(8)Department of Neurosurgery, The Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South 
University, Changsha, China.
(9)The Translational Research Institute for Neurological Disorders & 
Interdisciplinary Research Center of Neuromedicine and Chemical Biology of 
Wannan Medical College, Department of Neurosurgery, Department of Intensive Care 
Medicine, the First Affiliated Hospital of Wannan Medical College (Yijishan 
Hospital of Wannan Medical College), Wuhu, China. jiangxiaochun2019@hotmail.com.
(10)Zhongda Hospital, School of Medicine & School of Biological Sciences and 
Medical Engineering, Advanced Institute for Life and Health & Interdisciplinary 
Innovation Institute for Medicine and Engineering, Southeast University, 
Nanjing, China. 101013473@seu.edu.cn.
(11)Department of Pathology, Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital Clinical College & Key 
Laboratory of Antibody Technique of National Health Commission & Jiangsu 
Antibody Drug Engineering Research Center, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, 
China. 101013473@seu.edu.cn.
(12)Departments of Diagnostic Radiology, Surgery, Chemical and Biomolecular 
Engineering, and Biomedical Engineering, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine and 
College of Design and Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore, 
Singapore. chen.shawn@nus.edu.sg.
(13)Clinical Imaging Research Centre, Centre for Translational Medicine, Yong 
Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore, 
Singapore. chen.shawn@nus.edu.sg.
(14)Nanomedicine Translational Research Program, NUS Center for Nanomedicine, 
Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore, 
Singapore. chen.shawn@nus.edu.sg.
(15)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Agency for Science, Technology, and 
Research (A*STAR), Proteos, Singapore, Singapore. chen.shawn@nus.edu.sg.

In vitro-transcribed (IVT) mRNA has arisen as a rapid method for the production 
of nucleic acid drugs. Here, we have constructed an oncolytic IVT mRNA that 
utilizes human rhinovirus type 2 (HRV2) internal ribosomal entry sites (IRESs) 
to selectively trigger translation in cancer cells with high expression of 
EIF4G2 and PTBP1. The oncolytic effect was provided by a long hGSDMDc .825 
T>A/c.884 A>G-F1LCT mutant mRNA sequence with mitochondrial inner membrane 
cardiolipin targeting toxicity that triggers mitophagy. Utilizing the permuted 
intron-exon (PIE) splicing circularization strategy and lipid nanoparticle (LNP) 
encapsulation reduced immunogenicity of the mRNA and enabled delivery to 
eukaryotic cells in vivo. Engineered HRV2 IRESs-GSDMDp.D275E/E295G-F1LCT 
circRNA-LNPs (GSDMDENG circRNA) successfully inhibited EIF4G2+/PTBP1+ 
pan-adenocarcinoma xenografts growth. Importantly, in a spontaneous tumor model 
with abnormal EIF4G2 and PTBP1 caused by KRAS G12D mutation, GSDMDENG circRNA 
significantly prevented the occurrence of pancreatic, lung and colon 
adenocarcinoma, improved the survival rate and induced persistent KRAS G12D 
tumor antigen-specific cytotoxic T lymphocyte responses.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature America, Inc.

DOI: 10.1038/s43018-023-00650-8
PMID: 37845485 [Indexed for MEDLINE]