1. Cancer Cell. 2023 Nov 13;41(11):1963-1971.e3. doi:
10.1016/j.ccell.2023.10.003.  Epub 2023 Oct 26.

Tumor sequencing of African ancestry reveals differences in clinically relevant 
alterations across common cancers.

Jiagge E(1), Jin DX(2), Newberg JY(3), Perea-Chamblee T(4), Pekala KR(5), Fong 
C(4), Waters M(4), Ma D(4), Dei-Adomakoh Y(6), Erb G(7), Arora KS(8), Maund 
SL(9), Njiraini N(10), Ntekim A(11), Kim S(4), Bai X(4), Thomas M(7), van Eeden 
R(12), Hegde P(3), Jee J(13), Chakravarty D(14), Schultz N(4), Berger MF(14), 
Frampton GM(3), Sokol ES(3), Carrot-Zhang J(15).

Author information:
(1)Hematology/Oncology Division, Department of Medicine, Henry Ford Health 
System, Detroit, MI, USA. Electronic address: ejiagge1@hfhs.org.
(2)Computational Discovery, Foundation Medicine, Inc., Cambridge, MA, USA. 
Electronic address: djin@foundationmedicine.com.
(3)Computational Discovery, Foundation Medicine, Inc., Cambridge, MA, USA.
(4)Computational Oncology, Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA.
(5)Computational Oncology, Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA; Department of 
Surgery, Urology Service, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, 
USA.
(6)Department of Haematology, University of Ghana Medical School, Accra, Ghana.
(7)Global Product Development Medical Affairs - Oncology, F. Hoffmann-La Roche 
Ltd, Basel, Switzerland.
(8)Marie-Josée and Henry R. Kravis Center for Molecular Oncology, Memorial Sloan 
Kettering Cancer, New York, NY, USA.
(9)Computational Sciences, Genentech, Inc., South San Francisco, CA, USA.
(10)Department of Oncology, Kenyatta University Teaching Research and Referral 
Hospital, Nairobi, Kenya.
(11)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Ibadan, Ibadan, Nigeria.
(12)Department of Medical Oncology, Chris Hani Academic Baragwanath Hospital, 
Johannesburg, South Africa.
(13)Computational Oncology, Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA; Department of 
Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA.
(14)Marie-Josée and Henry R. Kravis Center for Molecular Oncology, Memorial 
Sloan Kettering Cancer, New York, NY, USA; Department of Pathology and 
Laboratory Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA.
(15)Computational Oncology, Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA; Clinial Genetics, 
Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, 
USA. Electronic address: carrotj@mskcc.org.

Cancer genomes from patients with African (AFR) ancestry have been poorly 
studied in clinical research. We leverage two large genomic cohorts to 
investigate the relationship between genomic alterations and AFR ancestry in six 
common cancers. Cross-cancer type associations, such as an enrichment of MYC 
amplification with AFR ancestry in lung, breast, and prostate cancers, and 
depletion of BRAF alterations are observed in colorectal and pancreatic cancers. 
There are differences in actionable alterations, such as depletion of KRAS G12C 
and EGFR L858R, and enrichment of ROS1 fusion with AFR ancestry in lung cancers. 
Interestingly, in lung cancer, KRAS mutations are less common in both smokers 
and non-smokers with AFR ancestry, whereas the association of TP53 mutations 
with AFR ancestry is only seen in smokers, suggesting an ancestry-environment 
interaction that modifies driver rates. Our study highlights the need to 
increase representation of patients with AFR ancestry in drug development and 
biomarker discovery.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccell.2023.10.003
PMCID: PMC11097212
PMID: 37890492 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests E.J. reports consulting 
fees for a Ghanaian breast cancer patient care pathway from Genentech, Inc. 
D.X.J., J.Y.N., G.M.F., and E.S.S. are employees of Foundation Medicine, Inc., a 
member of the Roche group, and hold stock in F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd. Y.D.-A. 
has received a grant from the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute in the 
USA, outside of the submitted work. G.E. and M.T. are employees of and hold 
stock in F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd. S.L.M. is an employee of Genentech, Inc., a 
member of the Roche group, and holds stock in F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd. N.N. has 
received honoraria for Breast Preceptorship training and the KESHO meeting, and 
is a member of a Global Advisory Board. A.N. has received honoraria for lectures 
and investigational products for clinical trials from F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd. 
R.v.E. has received honoraria for lectures and presentations from F. Hoffmann-La 
Roche Ltd, Takeda, MSD, Boehringer Ingelheim, and AstraZeneca, has received 
support for attending meetings and/or travel from F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd, 
Janssen, and MSD, and has participated in a data safety monitoring board or 
advisory board for Takeda and F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd. All authors received 
research funding in the form of third-party editorial support from F. 
Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd.