1. J Biol Chem. 2023 Dec;299(12):105441. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2023.105441. Epub
2023  Nov 8.

Interaction between the mitochondrial adaptor MIRO and the motor adaptor TRAK.

Baltrusaitis EE(1), Ravitch EE(2), Fenton AR(3), Perez TA(3), Holzbaur ELF(4), 
Dominguez R(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA; Biochemistry and Molecular 
Biophysics Graduate Group, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Department of Physiology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Department of Physiology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA; Cell and Molecular Biology 
Graduate Group, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, USA.
(4)Department of Physiology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA; Biochemistry and Molecular 
Biophysics Graduate Group, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA; Cell and Molecular Biology 
Graduate Group, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, USA.
(5)Department of Physiology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA; Biochemistry and Molecular 
Biophysics Graduate Group, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. Electronic address: 
droberto@pennmedicine.upenn.edu.

MIRO (mitochondrial Rho GTPase) consists of two GTPase domains flanking two 
Ca2+-binding EF-hand domains. A C-terminal transmembrane helix anchors MIRO to 
the outer mitochondrial membrane, where it functions as a general adaptor for 
the recruitment of cytoskeletal proteins that control mitochondrial dynamics. 
One protein recruited by MIRO is TRAK (trafficking kinesin-binding protein), 
which in turn recruits the microtubule-based motors kinesin-1 and 
dynein-dynactin. The mechanism by which MIRO interacts with TRAK is not well 
understood. Here, we map and quantitatively characterize the interaction of 
human MIRO1 and TRAK1 and test its potential regulation by Ca2+ and/or GTP 
binding. TRAK1 binds MIRO1 with low micromolar affinity. The interaction was 
mapped to a fragment comprising MIRO1's EF-hands and C-terminal GTPase domain 
and to a conserved sequence motif within TRAK1 residues 394 to 431, immediately 
C-terminal to the Spindly motif. This sequence is sufficient for MIRO1 binding 
in vitro and is necessary for MIRO1-dependent localization of TRAK1 to 
mitochondria in cells. MIRO1's EF-hands bind Ca2+ with dissociation constants 
(KD) of 3.9 μM and 300 nM. This suggests that under cellular conditions one 
EF-hand may be constitutively bound to Ca2+ whereas the other EF-hand binds Ca2+ 
in a regulated manner, depending on its local concentration. Yet, the 
MIRO1-TRAK1 interaction is independent of Ca2+ binding to the EF-hands and of 
the nucleotide state (GDP or GTP) of the C-terminal GTPase. The interaction is 
also independent of TRAK1 dimerization, such that a TRAK1 dimer can be expected 
to bind two MIRO1 molecules on the mitochondrial surface.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2023.105441
PMCID: PMC10746525
PMID: 37949220 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.