1. Redox Biol. 2023 Dec;68:102961. doi: 10.1016/j.redox.2023.102961. Epub 2023
Nov  16.

Estradiol-mediated small GTP-binding protein GDP dissociation stimulator 
induction contributes to sex differences in resilience to ferroptosis in 
takotsubo syndrome.

Wang T(1), Xiong T(2), Yang Y(3), Chen X(3), Ma Z(4), Zuo B(3), Ning D(5), Zhou 
B(3), Song R(6), Liu X(7), Wang D(8).

Author information:
(1)The Hospital Affiliated to Medical School of Yangzhou University (Taizhou 
People's Hospital), Taizhou, Jiangsu, China; Cardiology Division, Emory 
University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(2)Division of Cardiology, Nanjing First Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, 
Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.
(3)The Hospital Affiliated to Medical School of Yangzhou University (Taizhou 
People's Hospital), Taizhou, Jiangsu, China.
(4)Clinical Medical College, Dalian Medical University, Dalian, Liaoning, China.
(5)School of Medicine, National University of Ireland Galway, Galway, Ireland.
(6)College of Veterinary Medicine, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, Jiangsu, 
China.
(7)Department of Cardiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Kunming Medical 
University, Kunming, Yunnan, China. Electronic address: seanxsl712@163.com.
(8)The Hospital Affiliated to Medical School of Yangzhou University (Taizhou 
People's Hospital), Taizhou, Jiangsu, China. Electronic address: 
daxinw2002@sina.com.

BACKGROUND: Declining beneficial cardiovascular actions of estradiol (E2) have 
been associated with disproportionate susceptibility to takotsubo syndrome (TTS) 
in postmenopausal women. However, the underlying mechanisms between E2 and this 
marked disproportion remain unclear. SmgGDS (small GTP-binding protein GDP 
dissociation stimulator), as a key modulator of cardiovascular disease, plays 
protective roles in reducing oxidative stress and exerts pleiotropic effects of 
statins. Whether SmgGDS levels are influenced by E2 status and the effect of 
SmgGDS on sex differences in TTS are poorly understood.
METHODS: Clinical data were reviewed from TTS inpatients. Echocardiography, 
immunofluorescence, and immunohistochemistry were performed together with 
expression analysis to uncover phenotypic and mechanism changes in sex 
differences in TTS-like wild-type (WT) and SmgGDS± mice. HL-1 cardiomyocytes 
were used to further examine and validate molecular mechanisms.
RESULTS: In 14 TTS inpatients, TTS had a higher incidence in postmenopausal 
women as compared to premenopausal women and men. In murine TTS, female WT mice 
exhibited higher cardiac SmgGDS levels than male WT mice. Ovariectomy reduced 
SmgGDS expression in female WT mice similar to that observed in male mice, 
whereas E2 replacement in these ovariectomized (OVX) female mice reversed this 
effect. The physiological importance of this sex-specific E2-mediated SmgGDS 
response is underscored by the disparity in cardiac adaptation to isoproterenol 
(ISO) stimulation between both sexes of WT mice. E2-mediated SmgGDS induction 
conferred female protection against TTS-like acute cardiac injury involving 
ferritinophagy-mediated ferroptosis. No such cardioprotection was observed in 
male WT mice and OVX female. A causal role for SmgGDS in this sex-specific 
cardioprotective adaptation was indicated, inasmuch as SmgGDS deficiency 
abolished E2-modulated cardioprotection against ferritinophagy and aggravates 
TTS progression in both sexes. Consistently, knockdown of SmgGDS in HL-1 
cardiomyocytes exacerbated ferroptosis in a ferritinophagy-dependent manner and 
abrogated the protective role of E2 against ferritinophagy. Mechanistically, our 
findings revealed that SmgGDS regulated E2-dependent cardioprotective effects 
via AMPK/mTOR signaling pathway. SmgGDS deficiency abolished E2-conferred 
protection against ferritinophagy through activating AMPK/mTOR pathway, while 
treatment with recombinant SmgGDS in HL-1 cells significantly mitigated this 
pathway-associated ferritinophagy activity.
CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrate that SmgGDS is a central mediator of 
E2-conferred female cardioprotection against ferritinophagy-mediated ferroptosis 
in TTS.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.redox.2023.102961
PMCID: PMC10719533
PMID: 38007983 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.