1. J Bone Oncol. 2023 Nov 8;43:100513. doi: 10.1016/j.jbo.2023.100513.
eCollection  2023 Dec.

Targeting transforming growth factor beta signaling in metastatic osteosarcoma.

Ge R(1), Huang GM(2).

Author information:
(1)Hillman Cancer Center at Central Pennsylvania, University of Pittsburg 
Medical Center, Harrisburg, PA, 17109, USA.
(2)Harrisburg Academy School, 10 Erford Rd, Wormleysburg, PA, 17043, USA.

Osteosarcoma is a rare type of bone cancer, and half of the cases affect 
children and adolescents younger than 20 years of age. Despite intensive efforts 
to improve both chemotherapeutics and surgical management, the clinical outcome 
for metastatic osteosarcoma remains poor. Transforming growth factor β (TGF-β) 
is one of the most abundant growth factors in bones. The TGF-β signaling pathway 
has complex and contradictory roles in the pathogenesis of human cancers. TGF-β 
is primarily a tumor suppressor that inhibits proliferation and induces 
apoptosis of premalignant epithelial cells. In the later stages of cancer 
progression, however, TGF-β functions as a metastasis promoter by promoting 
tumor growth, inducing epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), blocking 
antitumor immune responses, increasing tumor-associated fibrosis, and enhancing 
angiogenesis. In contrast with the dual effects of TGF-β on carcinoma 
(epithelial origin) progression, TGF-β seems to mainly have a pro-tumoral effect 
on sarcomas including osteosarcoma (mesenchymal origin). Many drugs that target 
TGF-β signaling have been developed: neutralizing antibodies that prevent TGF-β 
binding to receptor complexes; ligand trap employing recombinant Fc-fusion 
proteins containing the soluble ectodomain of either type II (TβRII) or the type 
III receptor ((TβRIII), preventing TGF-β from binding to its receptors; 
antisense nucleotides that reduce TGF-β expression at the 
transcriptional/translational level; small molecule inhibitors of 
serine/threonine kinases of the type I receptor (TβRI) preventing downstream 
signaling; and vaccines that contain cell lines transfected with TβRII antisense 
genes, or target furin convertase, resulting in reduced TGF-β signaling. TGF-β 
antagonists have been shown to have effects on osteosarcoma in vitro and in 
vivo. One of the small molecule TβRI inhibitors, Vactosertib, is currently 
undergoing a phase 1/2 clinical trial to evaluate its effect on osteosarcoma. 
Several phase 1/2/3 clinical trials have shown TGF-β antagonists are safe and 
well tolerated. For instance, Luspatercept, a TGF-β ligand trap, has been 
approved by the FDA for the treatment of anemia associated with myeloid 
dysplastic syndrome (MDS) with ring sideroblasts/mutated SF3B1 with acceptable 
safety. Clinical trials evaluating the long-term safety of Luspatercept are in 
process.

© 2023 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbo.2023.100513
PMCID: PMC10666000
PMID: 38021074

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.