1. J Biol Chem. 1984 Mar 10;259(5):3070-6.

Human apolipoprotein A-I polymorphism. Identification of amino acid 
substitutions in three electrophoretic variants of the M端nster-3 type.

Menzel HJ, Assmann G, Rall SC Jr, Weisgraber KH, Mahley RW.

Variant forms of apolipoprotein A-I (apo-A-I) have been shown to exist in the 
human population. One mutant form, referred to as apo-A-I-M端nster-3, is one 
charge unit more basic than normal apo-A-I on isoelectric focusing gels. This 
variant has the same immunologic characteristics and molecular weight as normal 
apo-A-I. The apo-A-I-M端nster-3 from subjects in three unrelated families (in two 
of which the trait has been shown to be transmitted as an autosomal co-dominant) 
has been analyzed by partial amino acid sequencing to define the cause of the 
electrophoretic abnormality. In the apo-A-I of family A, the abnormality was 
shown to occur in the smallest cyanogen bromide fragment, CB-2 (residues 
87-112), and amino acid sequencing revealed asparagine instead of the usual 
aspartic acid at residue 103. Subjects with this mutant form have shown no signs 
of dyslipoproteinemia. The NH2-terminal cyanogen bromide fragment (CB-1, 
residues 1-86) from the apo-A-I of family B was shown to differ 
electrophoretically from normal CB-1, and amino acid sequencing revealed that a 
substitution of arginine for proline at residue 4 was responsible for this 
variant form. Analysis of the plasma lipids of one affected family B member 
demonstrated that the percentage of the total cholesterol that was esterified 
was somewhat lower than that normally observed. In a third family, family C, a 
variant having the same electrophoretic abnormality as the other two was 
determined to have an amino acid substitution at yet a different position. In 
this variant, histidine was found at residue 3 in the apo-A-I sequence, rather 
than the usual proline. In all three cases, the substitution could account for 
the electrophoretic abnormality. It is proposed that these three 
apo-A-I-M端nster-3 variants be designated apo-A-I(Asp103----Asn), 
apo-A-I(Pro4----Arg), and apo-A-I(Pro3----His), respectively, to indicate the 
substitution that accounts for the abnormality in isoelectric focusing gels.

PMID: 6421816 [Indexed for MEDLINE]