1. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1993 Jul;304(1):9-16. doi: 10.1006/abbi.1993.1315.

Products of the tyrosine-dependent oxidation of tetrahydrobiopterin by rat liver 
phenylalanine hydroxylase.

Davis MD(1), Kaufman S.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neurochemistry, National Institute of Mental Health, Bethesda, 
Maryland 20892.

Phenylalanine hydroxylase, a tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4)-dependent oxygenase, 
catalyzes the conversion of phenylalanine to tyrosine. During this physiological 
reaction, the oxidation of BH4 is tightly coupled to the hydroxylation of the 
amino acid substrate with a stoichiometry of 1 mol of BH4 oxidized for every 
mole of tyrosine formed. In the presence of an activator and certain analogues 
of either the amino acid or the pterin coenzyme, the enzyme also catalyzes a 
partially uncoupled reaction in which the amount of tetrahydropterin oxidized 
exceeds the amount of amino acid hydroxylated. With tyrosine as the amino acid 
analogue, the reaction is completely uncoupled, i.e., the enzyme functions as a 
tetrahydropterin oxidase with no net hydroxylation of the amino acid. We have 
investigated whether the normal pterin intermediate, a 
4a-hydroxytetrahydropterin, is formed during the completely uncoupled reaction 
and whether oxygen is reduced exclusively to the level of water, as in the 
tightly coupled reaction, or whether some reduction to hydrogen peroxide occurs. 
We present direct evidence that both the normal hydroxytetrahydropterin 
intermediate and hydrogen peroxide are formed. The amount of hydrogen peroxide 
formed, however, is not stoichiometric with the amount of oxygen reduced, an 
indication that there are at least two pathways for this reduction, one leading 
to the formation of water and one to hydrogen peroxide. We also postulate that 
hydrogen peroxide and the hydroxytetrahydropterin are both derived from 
alternate routes of breakdown of a common precursor, the corresponding 
4a-hydroperoxytetrahydropterin. By contrast, in the normal tightly coupled 
reaction, we suggest that this peroxy compound participates in the hydroxylation 
of the amino acid substrate.

DOI: 10.1006/abbi.1993.1315
PMID: 8323303 [Indexed for MEDLINE]