1. Oncogene. 1996 Mar 21;12(6):1369-74.

A cis-acting element in the BCL-2 gene controls expression through translational 
mechanisms.

Harigai M(1), Miyashita T, Hanada M, Reed JC.

Author information:
(1)La Jolla Cancer Research Foundation, Oncogene & Tumor Suppressor Gene 
Program, California 92037, USA.

The bcl-2 gene becomes activated in many types of human cancers and contributes 
to neoplastic cell expansion, as well as to resistance to radiation and 
chemotherapy, by blocking programmed cell death or apoptosis. The expression of 
this proto-oncogene is regulated at both the transcriptional and 
post-transcriptional levels. DNA sequence comparisons of human, mouse, rat and 
chicken bcl-2 cDNAs revealed the presence of an open reading frame (ORF) 
[correction of (OFR)] located upstream of the normal coding region. Because 
upstream ORFs (uORFs) have been associated with translational repression, we 
analysed the functional significance of the 11 amino-acid uORF in the human 
BCL-2 gene (-119 to -84 bp). Deletion of this uORF from chloramphenicol 
acetyltransferase (CAT) reporter gene constructs that contained the bcl-2 
promoter and entire 5'-untranslated region (5'-UTR), as well as introduction of 
an A-->T mutation at position -119 bp that destroyed the AUG-initiation codon, 
significantly increased CAT activity in HeLa, CEM, and other cell lines, without 
producing a corresponding elevation in CAT mRNA levels. Positioning this uORF, 
together with its accompanying Kozak sequences, between a heterologous promoter 
from SV40 and a CAT reporter gene resulted in marked inhibition of CAT protein 
production without a decrease in CAT mRNA. Mutation of the start codon 
(ATG-->TTG) of this uORF completely abolished its inhibitory activity, 
consistent with a translational mechanism. Taken together, these findings 
suggest that the uORF located within the 5'UTR of the bcl-2 gene is necessary 
and sufficient for translational regulation of bcl-2 gene expression.

PMID: 8649841 [Indexed for MEDLINE]