1. Acta Neurobiol Exp (Wars). 1996;56(3):743-51. doi: 10.55782/ane-1996-1179.

Polymorphism of gonadotropin action; molecular mechanisms and clinical 
implications.

Huhtaniemi IT(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Turku, Finland. 
ilpo.huhtaniemi@utu.fi.

Various structural alterations of gonadotropins and their receptors (R) 
contribute to the polymorphism of gonadotropin action. One reason is the 
microheterogeneity of gonadotropins due to variations in the degree of their 
glycosylation. This alters the intrinsic bioactivity of gonadotropins, as 
reflected by changes in their bioactivity to immunoreactivity ratios in various 
physiological and clinical conditions. We have reassesses this phenomenon by 
improved in vitro bioassay and immunoassay methods, and it appears that the 
intrinsic bioactivity of gonadotropins, in particular of LH, is more constant 
than previously demonstrated. The second part of this chapter deals with a 
common polymorphism that was recently discovered in the gene of the LH 
beta-subunit. The variant LH beta allele contains two point mutations, both 
altering the amino acid sequence (Trp8Arg and Ile 15Thr), the latter one in 
addition introduces a new glycosylation signal to the LH beta peptide. The 
variant seems to represent an evolutionary early form of LH, being structurally 
closer to hCG than wild-type LH. The LH variant is common world-wide, with the 
carrier frequency varying from 28% in Finland to 7.5% in North American 
Hispanics. The LH variant differs functionally from wild-type LH, and it seems 
to predispose the carriers to mild aberrations of reproductive function. The 
third section summarizes our findings on the first mutation of the FSHR gene. 
This inactivating missense mutation is located in the gene sequence encoding the 
extracellular domain of the FSHR (Ala 189Val). The mutated receptor protein is 
apparently incorrectly folded and devoid of biological activity. The mutation 
explains about 50% of the hereditary form of hypergonadotropic ovarian 
dysgenesis in the Finnish population.

DOI: 10.55782/ane-1996-1179
PMID: 8917902 [Indexed for MEDLINE]