1. Blood. 1997 Jul 15;90(2):839-49.

Wide variety of point mutations in the H gene of Bombay and para-Bombay 
individuals that inactivate H enzyme.

Kaneko M(1), Nishihara S, Shinya N, Kudo T, Iwasaki H, Seno T, Okubo Y, 
Narimatsu H.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cell Biology, Institute of Life Science, Soka University, 
Hachioji, Tokyo, Japan.

The H genes, encoding an alpha1,2fucosyltransferase, which defines blood groups 
with the H structure, of four Bombay and 13 para-Bombay Japanese individuals 
were analyzed for mutations. Four Bombay individuals were homologous for the 
same null H allele, which is inactivated by a single nonsense mutation at 
position 695 from G to A (G695A), resulting in termination of H gene 
translation. The allele inactivated by the G695A was designated h1. The other 13 
para-Bombay individuals possessed a trace amount of H antigens on erythrocytes 
regardless of their secretor status. Sequence analysis of their H genes showed 
four additional inactivated H gene alleles, h2, h3, h4, and h5. The h2 allele 
possesed a single base deletion at position 990 G (990-del). The h3 and h4 
alleles possessed a single missense mutation, T721C, which changes Tyr 241 to 
His, and G442T, which changes Asp148 to Tyr, respectively. The h5 allele 
possessed two missense mutations, T460C (Tyr154to His) and G1042A (Glu348to 
Lys). The h2, h3, h4, and h5 enzymes directed by these alleles were not fully 
inactivated by the deletion and the missense mutations expressing some residual 
enzyme activity resulting in synthesis of H antigen on erythrocytes. Thirteen 
para-Bombay individuals whose erythrocytes retained a trace amount of H antigen 
were determined to be heterozygous or homozygous for at least one of h2, h3, h4, 
or h5 alleles. This clarified that the levels (null to trace amount) of H 
antigen expression on erythrocytes of Bombay and para-Bombay individuals are 
determined solely by H enzyme activity. These mutations found in the Japanese H 
alleles differ from a nonsense mutation found in the Indonesian population. To 
determine the roles of the H, Se, and Le genes in the expression of H antigen in 
secretions and Lewis blood group antigen on erythrocytes, the Lewis and secretor 
genes were also examined in these Bombay and para-Bombay individuals. The Lewis 
blood group phenotype, Le(alpha- b+), was determined by the combinatorial 
activity of two fucosyltransferases, the Lewis enzyme and the secretor enzyme, 
and the secretor status was solely determined by the secretor enzyme activity, 
not by H enzyme activity. Bombay individuals were confirmed to be homozygous for 
the inactivated H and Se genes. As expected from the very low frequency of 
Bombay and para-Bombay individuals in the population, ie, approximately one in 
two or 300,000, the H gene mutations were found to be very variable, unlike the 
cases of the point mutations in the other glycosyltransferase genes; the ABO 
genes, the Lewis gene, and the secretor gene.

PMID: 9226185 [Indexed for MEDLINE]