1. J Cell Biol. 1997 Aug 11;138(3):575-88. doi: 10.1083/jcb.138.3.575.

Molecular characterization of abLIM, a novel actin-binding and double zinc 
finger protein.

Roof DJ(1), Hayes A, Adamian M, Chishti AH, Li T.

Author information:
(1)Berman-Gund Laboratory for the Study of Retinal Degenerations, Department of 
Ophthalmology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA.

Molecules that couple the actin-based cytoskeleton to intracellular signaling 
pathways are central to the processes of cellular morphogenesis and 
differentiation. We have characterized a novel protein, the actin-binding LIM 
(abLIM) protein, which could mediate such interactions between actin filaments 
and cytoplasmic targets. abLIM protein consists of a COOH-terminal cytoskeletal 
domain that is fused to an NH2-terminal domain consisting of four double zinc 
finger motifs. The cytoskeletal domain is approximately 50% identical to 
erythrocyte dematin, an actin-bundling protein of the red cell membrane 
skeleton, while the zinc finger domains conform to the LIM motif consensus 
sequence. In vitro expression studies demonstrate that abLIM protein can bind to 
F-actin through the dematin-like domain. Transcripts corresponding to three 
distinct isoforms have a widespread tissue distribution. However, a polypeptide 
corresponding to the full-length isoform is found exclusively in the retina and 
is enriched in biochemical extracts of retinal rod inner segments. abLIM protein 
also undergoes extensive phosphorylation in light-adapted retinas in vivo, and 
its developmental expression in the retina coincides with the elaboration of 
photoreceptor inner and outer segments. Based on the composite primary structure 
of abLIM protein, actin-binding capacity, potential regulation via 
phosphorylation, and isoform expression pattern, we speculate that abLIM may 
play a general role in bridging the actin-based cytoskeleton with an array of 
potential LIM protein-binding partners. The developmental time course of abLIM 
expression in the retina suggests that the retina-specific isoform may have a 
specialized role in the development or elaboration of photoreceptor inner and 
outer segments.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.138.3.575
PMCID: PMC2141644
PMID: 9245787 [Indexed for MEDLINE]