1. J Mol Evol. 1998 Apr;46(4):419-31. doi: 10.1007/pl00006321.

Mitochondrial DNA of the coral Sarcophyton glaucum contains a gene for a 
homologue of bacterial MutS: a possible case of gene transfer from the nucleus 
to the mitochondrion.

Pont-Kingdon G(1), Okada NA, Macfarlane JL, Beagley CT, Watkins-Sims CD, 
Cavalier-Smith T, Clark-Walker GD, Wolstenholme DR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University Utah, Salt Lake City 84112, USA.

The nucleotide sequences of two segments of 6,737 ntp and 258 nto of the 18.4-kb 
circular mitochondrial (mt) DNA molecule of the soft coral Sarcophyton glaucum 
(phylum Cnidaria, class Anthozoa, subclass Octocorallia, order Alcyonacea) have 
been determined. The larger segment contains the 3' 191 ntp of the gene for 
subunit 1 of the respiratory chain NADH dehydrogenase (ND1), complete genes for 
cytochrome b (Cyt b), ND6, ND3, ND4L, and a bacterial MutS homologue (MSH), and 
the 5' terminal 1,124 ntp of the gene for the large subunit rRNA (1-rRNA). These 
genes are arranged in the order given and all are transcribed from the same 
strand of the molecule. The smaller segment contains the 3' terminal 134 ntp of 
the ND4 gene and a complete tRNA(f-Met) gene, and these genes are transcribed in 
opposite directions. As in the hexacorallian anthozoan, Metridium senile, the 
mt-genetic code of S. glaucum is near standard: that is, in contrast to the 
situation in mt-genetic codes of other invertebrate phyla, AGA and AGG specify 
arginine, and ATA specifies isoleucine. However, as appears to be universal for 
metazoan mt-genetic codes, TGA specifies tryptophan rather than termination. 
Also, as in M. senile the mt-tRNA(f-Met) gene has primary and secondary 
structural features resembling those of Escherichia coli initiator tRNA, 
including standard dihydrouridine and T psi C loop sequences, and a mismatched 
nucleotide pair at the top of the amino-acyl stem. The presence of a mutS gene 
homologue, which has not been reported to occur in any other known mtDNA, 
suggests that there is mismatch repair activity in S. glaucum mitochondria. In 
support of this, phylogenetic analysis of MutS family protein sequences 
indicates that the S. glaucum mtMSH protein is more closely related to the 
nuclear DNA-encoded mitochondrial mismatch repair protein (MSH1) of the yeast 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae than to eukaryotic homologues involved in nuclear 
function, or to bacterial homologues. Regarding the possible origin of the S. 
glaucum mtMSH gene, the phylogenetic analysis results, together with comparative 
base composition considerations, and the absence of an MSH gene in any other 
known mtDNA best support the hypothesis that S. glaucum mtDNA acquired the mtMSH 
gene from nuclear DNA early in the evolution of octocorals. The presence of 
mismatch repair activity in S. glaucum mitochondria might be expected to 
influence the rate of evolution of this organism's mtDNA.

DOI: 10.1007/pl00006321
PMID: 9541536 [Indexed for MEDLINE]