1. Clin Cancer Res. 1996 Feb;2(2):411-8.

Detection of K-ras mutations in lung carcinomas: relationship to prognosis.

Keohavong P(1), DeMichele MA, Melacrinos AC, Landreneau RJ, Weyant RJ, Siegfried 
JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental and Occupational Health, University of 
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15238, USA.

The K-ras mutation is one of the most common genetic alterations found in human 
lung cancer. To evaluate the prognostic value of ras gene alterations in lung 
cancer in a U.S. population, we have screened 173 human lung tumors, which 
included 127 adenocarcinomas, 37 squamous carcinomas, and 9 adenosquamous 
carcinomas, for mutations in the K-ras gene using the combination of the PCR and 
denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis. Forty-three tumors contained K-ras 
mutations. Of these, 41 were identified among the adenocarcinomas (32%), 1 among 
the squamous carcinomas (2.7%), and 1 among the adenosquamous carcinomas (11%). 
Forty of these mutations were found in codon 12 and consisted of 24 G to T 
transversions, 12 G to A transitions, 2 G to C transversions, and 1 double GG to 
TT mutation. Two other G to T transversions were found in codon 13, and 1 A to C 
transversion was found in codon 61. The data showed that gender did not seem to 
affect the incidence and the types of the K-ras mutations or amino acid changes. 
Examination of the mutations in adenocarcinomas in relation to overall survival 
showed no difference in adenocarcinomas with K-ras mutations compared with 
K-ras-negative adenocarcinomas. However, the substitution of the wild-type GGT 
(glycine) at codon 12 with a GTT (valine) or a CGT (arginine) showed a strong 
trend (P = 0.07) toward a poorer prognosis compared with wild-type or other 
amino acid substitutions. Substitution of the wild-type glycine for aspartate 
(GAT) showed a strong trend (P = 0.06) for a better outcome than the valine or 
arginine substitution. Although these trends will require larger patient 
populations for verification, these data suggest that the prognostic 
significance of K-ras mutations may depend on the amino acid substitution in the 
p21(ras) protein.

PMID: 9816185 [Indexed for MEDLINE]