1. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1999 Feb;288(2):484-9.

Tetrazepinones are equally cytotoxic to Mer+ and Mer- human tumor cell lines.

Jean-Claude BJ(1), Mustafa A, Watson AJ, Damian Z, Vasilescu D, Chan TH, 
Leyland-Jones B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Human brain and colon tumor cell lines SF-188 (Mer+) and WiDR (Mer+), which 
express the DNA repair protein O6-methylguanine-DNA methyl transferase (MGMT), 
were 3- to 30-fold less sensitive to temozolomide, mitozolomide, and N, 
N'-bis(2-chloroethyl)-N-nitrosourea (BCNU) than the MGMT-deficient tumor cells 
SF-126 (Mer-) and BE (Mer-). This differential sensitivity was not observed when 
these cells were exposed to the novel tetrazepinones PYRZ, NIME, QUINCL, and 
PYRCL, which contain, like temozolomide and mitozolomide, a ureido-triazene 
moiety. Flow cytometric studies revealed that temozolomide induced G2-M arrest 
in the Mer- cells, but exerted a minor effect on the cycle of the Mer+ cells. 
Similarly, mitozolomide (25-100 microM) induced a stronger S-phase arrest in the 
SF-126 cells than in the SF-188 cells. In the same dose range (25-100) BCNU 
induced a significant cell cycle accumulation in G22-M in the SF-126 cells but 
little in the SF-188 cell line. In contrast, the cell cycle effects of the 
tetrazepinones were independent of the cell phenotypes. When O6-benzylguanine 
(O6-BG) was used to deplete MGMT activity in the SF brain tumor cell lines, 
significant potentiation of temozolomide (67-fold), mitozolomide (7-fold), and 
BCNU (3-fold) was observed in the SF-188 cell line. By contrast, O6-BG did not 
potentiate PYRZ, PYRCL, QUINCL, and NIME. Moreover, an MGMT inhibitory assay 
showed that all the tetrazepinones were capable of inactivating MGMT in the 
SF-188 cell line, the strongest inhibitor being PYRCL. The results suggest that, 
unlike temozolomide, mitozolomide, and BCNU, the cytotoxicity of the 
tetrazepinones does not correlate with the alkylation of the O6 position of 
guanine and that the mechanism of MGMT inactivation by tetrazepinones may differ 
from that of hitherto known inhibitors.

PMID: 9918549 [Indexed for MEDLINE]